========================================

The Faith of Men




Contents:

A Relic of the Pliocene
A Hyperborean Brew
The Faith of Men
Too Much Gold
The One Thousand Dozen
The Marriage of Lit-lit
Batard
The Story of Jees Uck




A RELIC OF THE PLIOCENE



I wash my hands of him at the start.  I cannot father his tales,
nor will I be responsible for them.  I make these preliminary
reservations, observe, as a guard upon my own integrity.  I possess
a certain definite position in a small way, also a wife; and for
the good name of the community that honours my existence with its
approval, and for the sake of her posterity and mine, I cannot take
the chances I once did, nor foster probabilities with the careless
improvidence of youth.  So, I repeat, I wash my hands of him, this
Nimrod, this mighty hunter, this homely, blue-eyed, freckle-faced
Thomas Stevens.

Having been honest to myself, and to whatever prospective olive
branches my wife may be pleased to tender me, I can now afford to
be generous.  I shall not criticize the tales told me by Thomas
Stevens, and, further, I shall withhold my judgment.  If it be
asked why, I can only add that judgment I have none.  Long have I
pondered, weighed, and balanced, but never have my conclusions been
twice the same--forsooth! because Thomas Stevens is a greater man
than I.  If he have told truths, well and good; if untruths, still
well and good.  For who can prove? or who disprove?  I eliminate
myself from the proposition, while those of little faith may do as
I have done--go find the same Thomas Stevens, and discuss to his
face the various matters which, if fortune serve, I shall relate.
As to where he may be found?  The directions are simple:  anywhere
between 53 north latitude and the Pole, on the one hand; and, on
the other, the likeliest hunting grounds that lie between the east
coast of Siberia and farthermost Labrador.  That he is there,
somewhere, within that clearly defined territory, I pledge the word
of an honourable man whose expectations entail straight speaking
and right living.

Thomas Stevens may have toyed prodigiously with truth, but when we
first met (it were well to mark this point), he wandered into my
camp when I thought myself a thousand miles beyond the outermost
post of civilization.  At the sight of his human face, the first in
weary months, I could have sprung forward and folded him in my arms
(and I am not by any means a demonstrative man); but to him his
visit seemed the most casual thing under the sun.  He just strolled
into the light of my camp, passed the time of day after the custom
of men on beaten trails, threw my snowshoes the one way and a
couple of dogs the other, and so made room for himself by the fire.
Said he'd just dropped in to borrow a pinch of soda and to see if I
had any decent tobacco.  He plucked forth an ancient pipe, loaded
it with painstaking care, and, without as much as by your leave,
whacked half the tobacco of my pouch into his.  Yes, the stuff was
fairly good.  He sighed with the contentment of the just, and
literally absorbed the smoke from the crisping yellow flakes, and
it did my smoker's heart good to behold him.

Hunter?  Trapper?  Prospector?  He shrugged his shoulders No; just
sort of knocking round a bit.  Had come up from the Great Slave
some time since, and was thinking of trapsing over into the Yukon
country.  The factor of Koshim had spoken about the discoveries on
the Klondike, and he was of a mind to run over for a peep.  I
noticed that he spoke of the Klondike in the archaic vernacular,
calling it the Reindeer River--a conceited custom that the Old
Timers employ against the CHECHAQUAS and all tenderfeet in general.
But he did it so naively and as such a matter of course, that there
was no sting, and I forgave him.  He also had it in view, he said,
before he crossed the divide into the Yukon, to make a little run
up Fort o' Good Hope way.

Now Fort o' Good Hope is a far journey to the north, over and
beyond the Circle, in a place where the feet of few men have trod;
and when a nondescript ragamuffin comes in out of the night, from
nowhere in particular, to sit by one's fire and discourse on such
in terms of "trapsing" and "a little run," it is fair time to rouse
up and shake off the dream.  Wherefore I looked about me; saw the
fly and, underneath, the pine boughs spread for the sleeping furs;
saw the grub sacks, the camera, the frosty breaths of the dogs
circling on the edge of the light; and, above, a great streamer of
the aurora, bridging the zenith from south-east to north-west.  I
shivered.  There is a magic in the Northland night, that steals in
on one like fevers from malarial marshes.  You are clutched and
downed before you are aware.  Then I looked to the snowshoes, lying
prone and crossed where he had flung them.  Also I had an eye to my
tobacco pouch.  Half, at least, of its goodly store had vamosed.
That settled it.  Fancy had not tricked me after all.

Crazed with suffering, I thought, looking steadfastly at the man--
one of those wild stampeders, strayed far from his bearings and
wandering like a lost soul through great vastnesses and unknown
deeps.  Oh, well, let his moods slip on, until, mayhap, he gathers
his tangled wits together.  Who knows?--the mere sound of a fellow-
creature's voice may bring all straight again.

So I led him on in talk, and soon I marvelled, for he talked of
game and the ways thereof.  He had killed the Siberian wolf of
westernmost Alaska, and the chamois in the secret Rockies.  He
averred he knew the haunts where the last buffalo still roamed;
that he had hung on the flanks of the caribou when they ran by the
hundred thousand, and slept in the Great Barrens on the musk-ox's
winter trail.

And I shifted my judgment accordingly (the first revision, but by
no account the last), and deemed him a monumental effigy of truth.
Why it was I know not, but the spirit moved me to repeat a tale
told to me by a man who had dwelt in the land too long to know
better.  It was of the great bear that hugs the steep slopes of St
Elias, never descending to the levels of the gentler inclines.  Now
God so constituted this creature for its hillside habitat that the
legs of one side are all of a foot longer than those of the other.
This is mighty convenient, as will be reality admitted.  So I
hunted this rare beast in my own name, told it in the first person,
present tense, painted the requisite locale, gave it the necessary
garnishings and touches of verisimilitude, and looked to see the
man stunned by the recital.

Not he.  Had he doubted, I could have forgiven him.  Had he
objected, denying the dangers of such a hunt by virtue of the
animal's inability to turn about and go the other way--had he done
this, I say, I could have taken him by the hand for the true
sportsman that he was.  Not he.  He sniffed, looked on me, and
sniffed again; then gave my tobacco due praise, thrust one foot
into my lap, and bade me examine the gear.  It was a MUCLUC of the
Innuit pattern, sewed together with sinew threads, and devoid of
beads or furbelows.  But it was the skin itself that was
remarkable.  In that it was all of half an inch thick, it reminded
me of walrus-hide; but there the resemblance ceased, for no walrus
ever bore so marvellous a growth of hair.  On the side and ankles
this hair was well-nigh worn away, what of friction with underbrush
and snow; but around the top and down the more sheltered back it
was coarse, dirty black, and very thick.  I parted it with
difficulty and looked beneath for the fine fur that is common with
northern animals, but found it in this case to be absent.  This,
however, was compensated for by the length.  Indeed, the tufts that
had survived wear and tear measured all of seven or eight inches.

I looked up into the man's face, and he pulled his foot down and
asked, "Find hide like that on your St Elias bear?"

I shook my head.  "Nor on any other creature of land or sea," I
answered candidly.  The thickness of it, and the length of the
hair, puzzled me.

"That," he said, and said without the slightest hint of
impressiveness, "that came from a mammoth."

"Nonsense!" I exclaimed, for I could not forbear the protest of my
unbelief.  "The mammoth, my dear sir, long ago vanished from the
earth.  We know it once existed by the fossil remains that we have
unearthed, and by a frozen carcase that the Siberian sun saw fit to
melt from out the bosom of a glacier; but we also know that no
living specimen exists.  Our explorers--"

At this word he broke in impatiently.  "Your explorers?  Pish!  A
weakly breed.  Let us hear no more of them.  But tell me, O man,
what you may know of the mammoth and his ways."

Beyond contradiction, this was leading to a yarn; so I baited my
hook by ransacking my memory for whatever data I possessed on the
subject in hand.  To begin with, I emphasized that the animal was
prehistoric, and marshalled all my facts in support of this.  I
mentioned the Siberian sand-bars that abounded with ancient mammoth
bones; spoke of the large quantities of fossil ivory purchased from
the Innuits by the Alaska Commercial Company; and acknowledged
having myself mined six- and eight-foot tusks from the pay gravel
of the Klondike creeks.  "All fossils," I concluded, "found in the
midst of debris deposited through countless ages."

"I remember when I was a kid," Thomas Stevens sniffed (he had a
most confounded way of sniffing), "that I saw a petrified water-
melon.  Hence, though mistaken persons sometimes delude themselves
into thinking that they are really raising or eating them, there
are no such things as extant water-melons?"

"But the question of food," I objected, ignoring his point, which
was puerile and without bearing.  "The soil must bring forth
vegetable life in lavish abundance to support so monstrous
creations.  Nowhere in the North is the soil so prolific.  Ergo,
the mammoth cannot exist."

"I pardon your ignorance concerning many matters of this Northland,
for you are a young man and have travelled little; but, at the same
time, I am inclined to agree with you on one thing.  The mammoth no
longer exists.  How do I know?  I killed the last one with my own
right arm."

Thus spake Nimrod, the mighty Hunter.  I threw a stick of firewood
at the dogs and bade them quit their unholy howling, and waited.
Undoubtedly this liar of singular felicity would open his mouth and
requite me for my St. Elias bear.

"It was this way," he at last began, after the appropriate silence
had intervened.  "I was in camp one day--"

"Where?" I interrupted.

He waved his hand vaguely in the direction of the north-east, where
stretched a TERRA INCOGNITA into which vastness few men have
strayed and fewer emerged.  "I was in camp one day with Klooch.
Klooch was as handsome a little KAMOOKS as ever whined betwixt the
traces or shoved nose into a camp kettle.  Her father was a full-
blood Malemute from Russian Pastilik on Bering Sea, and I bred her,
and with understanding, out of a clean-legged bitch of the Hudson
Bay stock.  I tell you, O man, she was a corker combination.  And
now, on this day I have in mind, she was brought to pup through a
pure wild wolf of the woods--grey, and long of limb, with big lungs
and no end of staying powers.  Say!  Was there ever the like?  It
was a new breed of dog I had started, and I could look forward to
big things.

"As I have said, she was brought neatly to pup, and safely
delivered.  I was squatting on my hams over the litter--seven
sturdy, blind little beggars--when from behind came a bray of
trumpets and crash of brass.  There was a rush, like the wind-
squall that kicks the heels of the rain, and I was midway to my
feet when knocked flat on my face.  At the same instant I heard
Klooch sigh, very much as a man does when you've planted your fist
in his belly.  You can stake your sack I lay quiet, but I twisted
my head around and saw a huge bulk swaying above me.  Then the blue
sky flashed into view and I got to my feet.  A hairy mountain of
flesh was just disappearing in the underbrush on the edge of the
open.  I caught a rear-end glimpse, with a stiff tail, as big in
girth as my body, standing out straight behind.  The next second
only a tremendous hole remained in the thicket, though I could
still hear the sounds as of a tornado dying quickly away,
underbrush ripping and tearing, and trees snapping and crashing.

"I cast about for my rifle.  It had been lying on the ground with
the muzzle against a log; but now the stock was smashed, the barrel
out of line, and the working-gear in a thousand bits.  Then I
looked for the slut, and--and what do you suppose?"

I shook my head.

"May my soul burn in a thousand hells if there was anything left of
her!  Klooch, the seven sturdy, blind little beggars--gone, all
gone.  Where she had stretched was a slimy, bloody depression in
the soft earth, all of a yard in diameter, and around the edges a
few scattered hairs."

I measured three feet on the snow, threw about it a circle, and
glanced at Nimrod.

"The beast was thirty long and twenty high," he answered, "and its
tusks scaled over six times three feet.  I couldn't believe,
myself, at the time, for all that it had just happened.  But if my
senses had played me, there was the broken gun and the hole in the
brush.  And there was--or, rather, there was not--Klooch and the
pups.  O man, it makes me hot all over now when I think of it
Klooch!  Another Eve!  The mother of a new race!  And a rampaging,
ranting, old bull mammoth, like a second flood, wiping them, root
and branch, off the face of the earth!  Do you wonder that the
blood-soaked earth cried out to high God?  Or that I grabbed the
hand-axe and took the trail?"

"The hand-axe?" I exclaimed, startled out of myself by the picture.
"The hand-axe, and a big bull mammoth, thirty feet long, twenty
feet--"

Nimrod joined me in my merriment, chuckling gleefully.  "Wouldn't
it kill you?" he cried.  "Wasn't it a beaver's dream?  Many's the
time I've laughed about it since, but at the time it was no
laughing matter, I was that danged mad, what of the gun and Klooch.
Think of it, O man!  A brand-new, unclassified, uncopyrighted
breed, and wiped out before ever it opened its eyes or took out its
intention papers!  Well, so be it.  Life's full of disappointments,
and rightly so.  Meat is best after a famine, and a bed soft after
a hard trail.

"As I was saying, I took out after the beast with the hand-axe, and
hung to its heels down the valley; but when he circled back toward
the head, I was left winded at the lower end.  Speaking of grub, I
might as well stop long enough to explain a couple of points.  Up
thereabouts, in the midst of the mountains, is an almighty curious
formation.  There is no end of little valleys, each like the other
much as peas in a pod, and all neatly tucked away with straight,
rocky walls rising on all sides.  And at the lower ends are always
small openings where the drainage or glaciers must have broken out.
The only way in is through these mouths, and they are all small,
and some smaller than others.  As to grub--you've slushed around on
the rain-soaked islands of the Alaskan coast down Sitka way, most
likely, seeing as you're a traveller.  And you know how stuff grows
there--big, and juicy, and jungly.  Well, that's the way it was
with those valleys.  Thick, rich soil, with ferns and grasses and
such things in patches higher than your head.  Rain three days out
of four during the summer months; and food in them for a thousand
mammoths, to say nothing of small game for man.

"But to get back.  Down at the lower end of the valley I got winded
and gave over.  I began to speculate, for when my wind left me my
dander got hotter and hotter, and I knew I'd never know peace of
mind till I dined on roasted mammoth-foot.  And I knew, also, that
that stood for SKOOKUM MAMOOK PUKAPUK--excuse Chinook, I mean there
was a big fight coming.  Now the mouth of my valley was very
narrow, and the walls steep.  High up on one side was one of those
big pivot rocks, or balancing rocks, as some call them, weighing
all of a couple of hundred tons.  Just the thing.  I hit back for
camp, keeping an eye open so the bull couldn't slip past, and got
my ammunition.  It wasn't worth anything with the rifle smashed; so
I opened the shells, planted the powder under the rock, and touched
it off with slow fuse.  Wasn't much of a charge, but the old
boulder tilted up lazily and dropped down into place, with just
space enough to let the creek drain nicely.  Now I had him."

"But how did you have him?" I queried.  "Who ever heard of a man
killing a mammoth with a hand-axe?  And, for that matter, with
anything else?"

"O man, have I not told you I was mad?" Nimrod replied, with a
slight manifestation of sensitiveness.  "Mad clean through, what of
Klooch and the gun.  Also, was I not a hunter?  And was this not
new and most unusual game?  A hand-axe?  Pish!  I did not need it.
Listen, and you shall hear of a hunt, such as might have happened
in the youth of the world when cavemen rounded up the kill with
hand-axe of stone.  Such would have served me as well.  Now is it
not a fact that man can outwalk the dog or horse?  That he can wear
them out with the intelligence of his endurance?"

I nodded.

"Well?"

The light broke in on me, and I bade him continue.

"My valley was perhaps five miles around.  The mouth was closed.
There was no way to get out.  A timid beast was that bull mammoth,
and I had him at my mercy.  I got on his heels again hollered like
a fiend, pelted him with cobbles, and raced him around the valley
three times before I knocked off for supper.  Don't you see?  A
race-course!  A man and a mammoth!  A hippodrome, with sun, moon,
and stars to referee!

"It took me two months to do it, but I did it.  And that's no
beaver dream.  Round and round I ran him, me travelling on the
inner circle, eating jerked meat and salmon berries on the run, and
snatching winks of sleep between.  Of course, he'd get desperate at
times and turn.  Then I'd head for soft ground where the creek
spread out, and lay anathema upon him and his ancestry, and dare
him to come on.  But he was too wise to bog in a mud puddle.  Once
he pinned me in against the walls, and I crawled back into a deep
crevice and waited.  Whenever he felt for me with his trunk, I'd
belt him with the hand-axe till he pulled out, shrieking fit to
split my ear drums, he was that mad.  He knew he had me and didn't
have me, and it near drove him wild.  But he was no man's fool.  He
knew he was safe as long as I stayed in the crevice, and he made up
his mind to keep me there.  And he was dead right, only he hadn't
figured on the commissary.  There was neither grub nor water around
that spot, so on the face of it he couldn't keep up the siege.
He'd stand before the opening for hours, keeping an eye on me and
flapping mosquitoes away with his big blanket ears.  Then the
thirst would come on him and he'd ramp round and roar till the
earth shook, calling me every name he could lay tongue to.  This
was to frighten me, of course; and when he thought I was
sufficiently impressed, he'd back away softly and try to make a
sneak for the creek.  Sometimes I'd let him get almost there--only
a couple of hundred yards away it was--when out I'd pop and back
he'd come, lumbering along like the old landslide he was.  After
I'd done this a few times, and he'd figured it out, he changed his
tactics.  Grasped the time element, you see.  Without a word of
warning, away he'd go, tearing for the water like mad, scheming to
get there and back before I ran away.  Finally, after cursing me
most horribly, he raised the siege and deliberately stalked off to
the water-hole.

"That was the only time he penned me,--three days of it,--but after
that the hippodrome never stopped.  Round, and round, and round,
like a six days' go-as-I-please, for he never pleased.  My clothes
went to rags and tatters, but I never stopped to mend, till at last
I ran naked as a son of earth, with nothing but the old hand-axe in
one hand and a cobble in the other.  In fact, I never stopped, save
for peeps of sleep in the crannies and ledges of the cliffs.  As
for the bull, he got perceptibly thinner and thinner--must have
lost several tons at least--and as nervous as a schoolmarm on the
wrong side of matrimony.  When I'd come up with him and yell, or
lain him with a rock at long range, he'd jump like a skittish colt
and tremble all over.  Then he'd pull out on the run, tail and
trunk waving stiff, head over one shoulder and wicked eyes blazing,
and the way he'd swear at me was something dreadful.  A most
immoral beast he was, a murderer, and a blasphemer.

"But towards the end he quit all this, and fell to whimpering and
crying like a baby.  His spirit broke and he became a quivering
jelly-mountain of misery.  He'd get attacks of palpitation of the
heart, and stagger around like a drunken man, and fall down and
bark his shins.  And then he'd cry, but always on the run.  O man,
the gods themselves would have wept with him, and you yourself or
any other man.  It was pitiful, and there was so I much of it, but
I only hardened my heart and hit up the pace.  At last I wore him
clean out, and he lay down, broken-winded, broken-hearted, hungry,
and thirsty.  When I found he wouldn't budge, I hamstrung him, and
spent the better part of the day wading into him with the hand-axe,
he a-sniffing and sobbing till I worked in far enough to shut him
off.  Thirty feet long he was, and twenty high, and a man could
sling a hammock between his tusks and sleep comfortably.  Barring
the fact that I had run most of the juices out of him, he was fair
eating, and his four feet, alone, roasted whole, would have lasted
a man a twelvemonth.  I spent the winter there myself."

"And where is this valley?" I asked

He waved his hand in the direction of the north-east, and said:
"Your tobacco is very good.  I carry a fair share of it in my
pouch, but I shall carry the recollection of it until I die.  In
token of my appreciation, and in return for the moccasins on your
own feet, I will present to you these muclucs.  They commemorate
Klooch and the seven blind little beggars.  They are also souvenirs
of an unparalleled event in history, namely, the destruction of the
oldest breed of animal on earth, and the youngest.  And their chief
virtue lies in that they will never wear out."

Having effected the exchange, he knocked the ashes from his pipe,
gripped my hand good-night, and wandered off through the snow.
Concerning this tale, for which I have already disclaimed
responsibility, I would recommend those of little faith to make a
visit to the Smithsonian Institute.  If they bring the requisite
credentials and do not come in vacation time, they will undoubtedly
gain an audience with Professor Dolvidson.  The muclucs are in his
possession, and he will verify, not the manner in which they were
obtained, but the material of which they are composed.  When he
states that they are made from the skin of the mammoth, the
scientific world accepts his verdict.  What more would you have?



A HYPERBOREAN BREW



[The story of a scheming white man among the strange people who
live on the rim of the Arctic sea]


Thomas Stevens's veracity may have been indeterminate as X, and his
imagination the imagination of ordinary men increased to the nth
power, but this, at least, must be said:  never did he deliver
himself of word nor deed that could be branded as a lie outright. .
. He may have played with probability, and verged on the extremest
edge of possibility, but in his tales the machinery never creaked.
That he knew the Northland like a book, not a soul can deny.  That
he was a great traveller, and had set foot on countless unknown
trails, many evidences affirm.  Outside of my own personal
knowledge, I knew men that had met him everywhere, but principally
on the confines of Nowhere.  There was Johnson, the ex-Hudson Bay
Company factor, who had housed him in a Labrador factory until his
dogs rested up a bit, and he was able to strike out again.  There
was McMahon, agent for the Alaska Commercial Company, who had run
across him in Dutch Harbour, and later on, among the outlying
islands of the Aleutian group.  It was indisputable that he had
guided one of the earlier United States surveys, and history states
positively that in a similar capacity he served the Western Union
when it attempted to put through its trans-Alaskan and Siberian
telegraph to Europe.  Further, there was Joe Lamson, the whaling
captain, who, when ice-bound off the mouth of the Mackenzie, had
had him come aboard after tobacco.  This last touch proves Thomas
Stevens's identity conclusively.  His quest for tobacco was
perennial and untiring.  Ere we became fairly acquainted, I learned
to greet him with one hand, and pass the pouch with the other.  But
the night I met him in John O'Brien's Dawson saloon, his head was
wreathed in a nimbus of fifty-cent cigar smoke, and instead of my
pouch he demanded my sack.  We were standing by a faro table, and
forthwith he tossed it upon the "high card."  "Fifty," he said, and
the game-keeper nodded.  The "high card" turned, and he handed back
my sack, called for a "tab," and drew me over to the scales, where
the weigher nonchalantly cashed him out fifty dollars in dust.

"And now we'll drink," he said; and later, at the bar, when he
lowered his glass:  "Reminds me of a little brew I had up Tattarat
way.  No, you have no knowledge of the place, nor is it down on the
charts.  But it's up by the rim of the Arctic Sea, not so many
hundred miles from the American line, and all of half a thousand
God-forsaken souls live there, giving and taking in marriage, and
starving and dying in-between-whiles.  Explorers have overlooked
them, and you will not find them in the census of 1890.  A whale-
ship was pinched there once, but the men, who had made shore over
the ice, pulled out for the south and were never heard of.

"But it was a great brew we had, Moosu and I," he added a moment
later, with just the slightest suspicion of a sigh.

I knew there were big deeds and wild doings behind that sigh, so I
haled him into a corner, between a roulette outfit and a poker
layout, and waited for his tongue to thaw.

"Had one objection to Moosu," he began, cocking his head
meditatively--"one objection, and only one.  He was an Indian from
over on the edge of the Chippewyan country, but the trouble was,
he'd picked up a smattering of the Scriptures.  Been campmate a
season with a renegade French Canadian who'd studied for the
church.  Moosu'd never seen applied Christianity, and his head was
crammed with miracles, battles, and dispensations, and what not he
didn't understand.  Otherwise he was a good sort, and a handy man
on trail or over a fire.

"We'd had a hard time together and were badly knocked out when we
plumped upon Tattarat.  Lost outfits and dogs crossing a divide in
a fall blizzard, and our bellies clove to our backs and our clothes
were in rags when we crawled into the village.  They weren't much
surprised at seeing us--because of the whalemen--and gave us the
meanest shack in the village to live in, and the worst of their
leavings to live on.  What struck me at the time as strange was
that they left us strictly alone.  But Moosu explained it.

"'Shaman SICK TUMTUM,' he said, meaning the shaman, or medicine
man, was jealous, and had advised the people to have nothing to do
with us.  From the little he'd seen of the whalemen, he'd learned
that mine was a stronger race, and a wiser; so he'd only behaved as
shamans have always behaved the world over.  And before I get done,
you'll see how near right he was.

"'These people have a law,' said Mosu:  'whoso eats of meat must
hunt.  We be awkward, you and I, O master, in the weapons of this
country; nor can we string bows nor fling spears after the manner
approved.  Wherefore the shaman and Tummasook, who is chief, have
put their heads together, and it has been decreed that we work with
the women and children in dragging in the meat and tending the
wants of the hunters.'

"'And this is very wrong,' I made to answer; 'for we be better men,
Moosu, than these people who walk in darkness.  Further, we should
rest and grow strong, for the way south is long, and on that trail
the weak cannot prosper.'"

"'But we have nothing,' he objected, looking about him at the
rotten timbers of the igloo, the stench of the ancient walrus meat
that had been our supper disgusting his nostrils.  'And on this
fare we cannot thrive.  We have nothing save the bottle of "pain-
killer," which will not fill emptiness, so we must bend to the yoke
of the unbeliever and become hewers of wood and drawers of water.
And there be good things in this place, the which we may not have.
Ah, master, never has my nose lied to me, and I have followed it to
secret caches and among the fur-bales of the igloos.  Good
provender did these people extort from the poor whalemen, and this
provender has wandered into few hands.  The woman Ipsukuk, who
dwelleth in the far end of the village next she igloo of the chief,
possesseth much flour and sugar, and even have my eyes told me of
molasses smeared on her face.  And in the igloo of Tummasook, the
chief, there be tea--have I not seen the old pig guzzling?  And the
shaman owneth a caddy of "Star" and two buckets of prime smoking.
And what have we?  Nothing!  Nothing!'

"But I was stunned by the word he brought of the tobacco, and made
no answer.

"And Moosu, what of his own desire, broke silence:  'And there be
Tukeliketa, daughter of a big hunter and wealthy man.  A likely
girl.  Indeed, a very nice girl.'

"I figured hard during the night while Moosu snored, for I could
not bear the thought of the tobacco so near which I could not
smoke.  True, as he had said, we had nothing.  But the way became
clear to me, and in the morning I said to him:  'Go thou cunningly
abroad, after thy fashion, and procure me some sort of bone,
crooked like a goose-neck, and hollow.  Also, walk humbly, but have
eyes awake to the lay of pots and pans and cooking contrivances.
And remember, mine is the white man's wisdom, and do what I have
bid you, with sureness and despatch.'

"While he was away I placed the whale-oil cooking lamp in the
middle of the igloo, and moved the mangy sleeping furs back that I
might have room.  Then I took apart his gun and put the barrel by
handy, and afterwards braided many wicks from the cotton that the
women gather wild in the summer.  When he came back, it was with
the bone I had commanded, and with news that in the igloo of
Tummasook there was a five-gallon kerosene can and a big copper
kettle.  So I said he had done well and we would tarry through the
day.  And when midnight was near I made harangue to him.

"'This chief, this Tummasook, hath a copper kettle, likewise a
kerosene can.'  I put a rock, smooth and wave-washed, in Moosu's
hand.  'The camp is hushed and the stars are winking.  Go thou,
creep into the chief's igloo softly, and smite him thus upon the
belly, and hard.  And let the meat and good grub of the days to
come put strength into thine arm.  There will be uproar and outcry,
and the village will come hot afoot.  But be thou unafraid.  Veil
thy movements and lose thy form in the obscurity of the night and
the confusion of men.  And when the woman Ipsukuk is anigh thee,--
she who smeareth her face with molasses,--do thou smite her
likewise, and whosoever else that possesseth flour and cometh to
thy hand.  Then do thou lift thy voice in pain and double up with
clasped hands, and make outcry in token that thou, too, hast felt
the visitation of the night.  And in this way shall we achieve
honour and great possessions, and the caddy of "Star" and the prime
smoking, and thy Tukeliketa, who is a likely maiden.'

"When he had departed on this errand, I bided patiently in the
shack, and the tobacco seemed very near.  Then there was a cry of
affright in the night, that became an uproar and assailed the sky.
I seized the 'pain-killer' and ran forth.  There was much noise,
and a wailing among the women, and fear sat heavily on all.
Tummasook and the woman Ipsukuk rolled on the ground in pain, and
with them there were divers others, also Moosu.  I thrust aside
those that cluttered the way of my feet, and put the mouth of the
bottle to Moosu's lips.  And straightway he became well and ceased
his howling.  Whereat there was a great clamour for the bottle from
the others so stricken.  But I made harangue, and ere they tasted
and were made well I had mulcted Tummasook of his copper kettle and
kerosene can, and the woman Ipsukuk of her sugar and molasses, and
the other sick ones of goodly measures of flour.  The shaman
glowered wickedly at the people around my knees, though he poorly
concealed the wonder that lay beneath.  But I held my head high,
and Moosu groaned beneath the loot as he followed my heels to the
shack.

"There I set to work.  In Tummasook's copper kettle I mixed three
quarts of wheat flour with five of molasses, and to this I added of
water twenty quarts.  Then I placed the kettle near the lamp, that
it might sour in the warmth and grow strong.  Moosu understood, and
said my wisdom passed understanding and was greater than Solomon's,
who he had heard was a wise man of old time.  The kerosene can I
set over the lamp, and to its nose I affixed a snout, and into the
snout the bone that was like a gooseneck.  I sent Moosu without to
pound ice, while I connected the barrel of his gun with the
gooseneck, and midway on the barrel I piled the ice he had pounded.
And at the far end of the gun-barrel, beyond the pan of ice, I
placed a small iron pot.  When the brew was strong enough (and it
was two days ere it could stand on its own legs), I filled the
kerosene can with it, and lighted the wicks I had braided.

"Now that all was ready, I spoke to Moosu.  'Go forth,' I said, 'to
the chief men of the village, and give them greeting, and bid them
come into my igloo and sleep the night away with me and the gods.'

"The brew was singing merrily when they began shoving aside the
skin flap and crawling in, and I was heaping cracked ice on the
gun-barrel.  Out of the priming hole at the far end, drip, drip,
drip into the iron pot fell the liquor--HOOCH, you know.  But
they'd never seen the like, and giggled nervously when I made
harangue about its virtues.  As I talked I noted the jealousy in
the shaman's eye, so when I had done, I placed him side by side
with Tummasook and the woman Ipsukuk.  Then I gave them to drink,
and their eyes watered and their stomachs warmed, till from being
afraid they reached greedily for more; and when I had them well
started, I turned to the others.  Tummasook made a brag about how
he had once killed a polar bear, and in the vigour of his pantomime
nearly slew his mother's brother.  But nobody heeded.  The woman
Ipsukuk fell to weeping for a son lost long years agone in the ice,
and the shaman made incantation and prophecy.  So it went, and
before morning they were all on the floor, sleeping soundly with
the gods.

"The story tells itself, does it not?  The news of the magic potion
spread.  It was too marvellous for utterance.  Tongues could tell
but a tithe of the miracles it performed.  It eased pain, gave
surcease to sorrow, brought back old memories, dead faces, and
forgotten dreams.  It was a fire that ate through all the blood,
and, burning, burned not.  It stoutened the heart, stiffened the
back, and made men more than men.  It revealed the future, and gave
visions and prophecy.  It brimmed with wisdom and unfolded secrets.
There was no end of the things it could do, and soon there was a
clamouring on all hands to sleep with the gods.  They brought their
warmest furs, their strongest dogs, their best meats; but I sold
the hooch with discretion, and only those were favoured that
brought flour and molasses and sugar.  And such stores poured in
that I set Moosu to build a cache to hold them, for there was soon
no space in the igloo.  Ere three days had passed Tummasook had
gone bankrupt.  The shaman, who was never more than half drunk
after the first night, watched me closely and hung on for the
better part of the week.  But before ten days were gone, even the
woman Ipsukuk exhausted her provisions, and went home weak and
tottery.

"But Moosu complained.  'O master,' he said, 'we have laid by great
wealth in molasses and sugar and flour, but our shack is yet mean,
our clothes thin, and our sleeping furs mangy.  There is a call of
the belly for meat the stench of which offends not the stars, and
for tea such as Tummasook guzzles, and there is a great yearning
for the tobacco of Neewak, who is shaman and who plans to destroy
us.  I have flour until I am sick, and sugar and molasses without
stint, yet is the heart of Moosu sore and his bed empty.'

"'Peace!' I answered, 'thou art weak of understanding and a fool.
Walk softly and wait, and we will grasp it all.  But grasp now, and
we grasp little, and in the end it will be nothing.  Thou art a
child in the way of the white man's wisdom.  Hold thy tongue and
watch, and I will show you the way my brothers do overseas, and, so
doing, gather to themselves the riches of the earth.  It is what is
called "business," and what dost thou know about business?'

"But the next day he came in breathless.  'O master, a strange
thing happeneth in the igloo of Neewak, the shaman; wherefore we
are lost, and we have neither worn the warm furs nor tasted the
good tobacco, what of your madness for the molasses and flour.  Go
thou and witness whilst I watch by the brew.'

"So I went to the igloo of Neewak.  And behold, he had made his own
still, fashioned cunningly after mine.  And as he beheld me he
could ill conceal his triumph.  For he was a man of parts, and his
sleep with the gods when in my igloo had not been sound.

"But I was not disturbed, for I knew what I knew, and when I
returned to my own igloo, I descanted to Moosu, and said:  'Happily
the property right obtains amongst this people, who otherwise have
been blessed with but few of the institutions of men.  And because
of this respect for property shall you and I wax fat, and, further,
we shall introduce amongst them new institutions that other peoples
have worked out through great travail and suffering.'

"But Moosu understood dimly, till the shaman came forth, with eyes
flashing and a threatening note in his voice, and demanded to trade
with me.  'For look you,' he cried, 'there be of flour and molasses
none in all the village.  The like have you gathered with a shrewd
hand from my people, who have slept with your gods and who now have
nothing save large heads, and weak knees, and a thirst for cold
water that they cannot quench.  This is not good, and my voice has
power among them; so it were well that we trade, you and I, even as
you have traded with them, for molasses and flour.'

"And I made answer:  'This be good talk, and wisdom abideth in thy
mouth.  We will trade.  For this much of flour and molasses givest
thou me the caddy of "Star" and the two buckets of smoking.'

"And Moosu groaned, and when the trade was made and the shaman
departed, he upbraided me:  'Now, because of thy madness are we,
indeed, lost!  Neewak maketh hooch on his own account, and when the
time is ripe, he will command the people to drink of no hooch but
his hooch.  And in this way are we undone, and our goods worthless,
and our igloo mean, and the bed of Moosu cold and empty!'

"And I answered:  'By the body of the wolf, say I, thou art a fool,
and thy father before thee, and thy children after thee, down to
the last generation.  Thy wisdom is worse than no wisdom and thine
eyes blinded to business, of which I have spoken and whereof thou
knowest nothing.  Go, thou son of a thousand fools, and drink of
the hooch that Neewak brews in his igloo, and thank thy gods that
thou hast a white man's wisdom to make soft the bed thou liest in.
Go! and when thou hast drunken, return with the taste still on thy
lips, that I may know.'

"And two days after, Neewak sent greeting and invitation to his
igloo.  Moosu went, but I sat alone, with the song of the still in
my ears, and the air thick with the shaman's tobacco; for trade was
slack that night, and no one dropped in but Angeit, a young hunter
that had faith in me.  Later, Moosu came back, his speech thick
with chuckling and his eyes wrinkling with laughter.

"'Thou art a great man,' he said.  'Thou art a great man, O master,
and because of thy greatness thou wilt not condemn Moosu, thy
servant, who ofttimes doubts and cannot be made to understand.'

"'And wherefore now?' I demanded.  'Hast thou drunk overmuch?  And
are they sleeping sound in the igloo of Neewak, the shaman?'

"'Nay, they are angered and sore of body, and Chief Tummasook has
thrust his thumbs in the throat of Neewak, and sworn by the bones
of his ancestors to look upon his face no more.  For behold! I went
to the igloo, and the brew simmered and bubbled, and the steam
journeyed through the gooseneck even as thy steam, and even as
thine it became water where it met the ice, and dropped into the
pot at the far end.  And Neewak gave us to drink, and lo, it was
not like thine, for there was no bite to the tongue nor tingling to
the eyeballs, and of a truth it was water.  So we drank, and we
drank overmuch; yet did we sit with cold hearts and solemn.  And
Neewak was perplexed and a cloud came on his brow.  And he took
Tummasook and Ipsukuk alone of all the company and set them apart,
and bade them drink and drink and drink.  And they drank and drank
and drank, and yet sat solemn and cold, till Tummasook arose in
wrath and demanded back the furs and the tea he had paid.  And
Ipsukuk raised her voice, thin and angry.  And the company demanded
back what they had given, and there was a great commotion.'

"'Does the son of a dog deem me a whale?' demanded Tummasook,
shoving back the skin flap and standing erect, his face black and
his brows angry.  'Wherefore I am filled, like a fish-bladder, to
bursting, till I can scarce walk, what of the weight within me.
Lalah!  I have drunken as never before, yet are my eyes clear, my
knees strong, my hand steady.'

"'The shaman cannot send us to sleep with the gods,' the people
complained, stringing in and joining us, 'and only in thy igloo may
the thing be done.'

"So I laughed to myself as I passed the hooch around and the guests
made merry.  For in the flour I had traded to Neewak I had mixed
much soda that I had got from the woman Ipsukuk.  So how could his
brew ferment when the soda kept it sweet?  Or his hooch be hooch
when it would not sour?

"After that our wealth flowed in without let or hindrance.  Furs we
had without number, and the fancy-work of the women, all of the
chief's tea, and no end of meat.  One day Moosu retold for my
benefit, and sadly mangled, the story of Joseph in Egypt, but from
it I got an idea, and soon I had half the tribe at work building me
great meat caches.  And of all they hunted I got the lion's share
and stored it away.  Nor was Moosu idle.  He made himself a pack of
cards from birch bark, and taught Neewak the way to play seven-up.
He also inveigled the father of Tukeliketa into the game.  And one
day he married the maiden, and the next day he moved into the
shaman's house, which was the finest in the village.  The fall of
Neewak was complete, for he lost all his possessions, his walrus-
hide drums, his incantation tools--everything.  And in the end he
became a hewer of wood and drawer of water at the beck and call of
Moosu.  And Moosu--he set himself up as shaman, or high priest, and
out of his garbled Scripture created new gods and made incantation
before strange altars.

"And I was well pleased, for I thought it good that church and
state go hand in hand, and I had certain plans of my own concerning
the state.  Events were shaping as I had foreseen.  Good temper and
smiling faces had vanished from the village.  The people were
morose and sullen.  There were quarrels and fighting, and things
were in an uproar night and day.  Moosu's cards were duplicated and
the hunters fell to gambling among themselves.  Tummasook beat his
wife horribly, and his mother's brother objected and smote him with
a tusk of walrus till he cried aloud in the night and was shamed
before the people.  Also, amid such diversions no hunting was done,
and famine fell upon the land.  The nights were long and dark, and
without meat no hooch could be bought; so they murmured against the
chief.  This I had played for, and when they were well and hungry,
I summoned the whole village, made a great harangue, posed as
patriarch, and fed the famishing.  Moosu made harangue likewise,
and because of this and the thing I had done I was made chief.
Moosu, who had the ear of God and decreed his judgments, anointed
me with whale blubber, and right blubberly he did it, not
understanding the ceremony.  And between us we interpreted to the
people the new theory of the divine right of kings.  There was
hooch galore, and meat and feastings, and they took kindly to the
new order.

"So you see, O man, I have sat in the high places, and worn the
purple, and ruled populations.  And I might yet be a king had the
tobacco held out, or had Moosu been more fool and less knave.  For
he cast eyes upon Esanetuk, eldest daughter to Tummasook, and I
objected.

"'O brother,' he explained, 'thou hast seen fit to speak of
introducing new institutions amongst this people, and I have
listened to thy words and gained wisdom thereby.  Thou rulest by
the God-given right, and by the God-given right I marry.'

"I noted that he 'brothered' me, and was angry and put my foot
down.  But he fell back upon the people and made incantations for
three days, in which all hands joined; and then, speaking with the
voice of God, he decreed polygamy by divine fiat.  But he was
shrewd, for he limited the number of wives by a property
qualification, and because of which he, above all men, was favoured
by his wealth.  Nor could I fail to admire, though it was plain
that power had turned his head, and he would not be satisfied till
all the power and all the wealth rested in his own hands.  So he
became swollen with pride, forgot it was I that had placed him
there, and made preparations to destroy me.

"But it was interesting, for the beggar was working out in his own
way an evolution of primitive society.  Now I, by virtue of the
hooch monopoly, drew a revenue in which I no longer permitted him
to share.  So he meditated for a while and evolved a system of
ecclesiastical taxation.  He laid tithes upon the people, harangued
about fat firstlings and such things, and twisted whatever twisted
texts he had ever heard to serve his purpose.  Even this I bore in
silence, but when he instituted what may be likened to a graduated
income-tax, I rebelled, and blindly, for this was what he worked
for.  Thereat, he appealed to the people, and they, envious of my
great wealth and well taxed themselves, upheld him.  'Why should we
pay,' they asked, 'and not you?  Does not the voice of God speak
through the lips of Moosu, the shaman?'  So I yielded.  But at the
same time I raised the price of hooch, and lo, he was not a whit
behind me in raising my taxes.

"Then there was open war.  I made a play for Neewak and Tummasook,
because of the traditionary rights they possessed; but Moosu won
out by creating a priesthood and giving them both high office.  The
problem of authority presented itself to him, and he worked it out
as it has often been worked before.  There was my mistake.  I
should have been made shaman, and he chief; but I saw it too late,
and in the clash of spiritual and temporal power I was bound to be
worsted.  A great controversy waged, but it quickly became one-
sided.  The people remembered that he had anointed me, and it was
clear to them that the source of my authority lay, not in me, but
in Moosu.  Only a few faithful ones clung to me, chief among whom
Angeit was; while he headed the popular party and set whispers
afloat that I had it in mind to overthrow him and set up my own
gods, which were most unrighteous gods.  And in this the clever
rascal had anticipated me, for it was just what I had intended--
forsake my kingship, you see, and fight spiritual with spiritual.
So he frightened the people with the iniquities of my peculiar
gods--especially the one he named 'Biz-e-Nass'--and nipped the
scheme in the bud.

"Now, it happened that Kluktu, youngest daughter to Tummasook, had
caught my fancy, and I likewise hers.  So I made overtures, but the
ex-chief refused bluntly--after I had paid the purchase price--and
informed me that she was set aside for Moosu.  This was too much,
and I was half of a mind to go to his igloo and slay him with my
naked hands; but I recollected that the tobacco was near gone, and
went home laughing.  The next day he made incantation, and
distorted the miracle of the loaves and fishes till it became
prophecy, and I, reading between the lines, saw that it was aimed
at the wealth of meat stored in my caches.  The people also read
between the lines, and, as he did not urge them to go on the hunt,
they remained at home, and few caribou or bear were brought in.

"But I had plans of my own, seeing that not only the tobacco but
the flour and molasses were near gone.  And further, I felt it my
duty to prove the white man's wisdom and bring sore distress to
Moosu, who had waxed high-stomached, what of the power I had given
him.  So that night I went to my meat caches and toiled mightily,
and it was noted next day that all the dogs of the village were
lazy.  No one suspected, and I toiled thus every night, and the
dogs grew fat and fatter, and the people lean and leaner.  They
grumbled and demanded the fulfilment of prophecy, but Moosu
restrained them, waiting for their hunger to grow yet greater.  Nor
did he dream, to the very last, of the trick I had been playing on
the empty caches.

"When all was ready, I sent Angeit, and the faithful ones whom I
had fed privily, through the village to call assembly.  And the
tribe gathered on a great space of beaten snow before my door, with
the meat caches towering stilt-legged in the rear.  Moosu came
also, standing on the inner edge of the circle opposite me,
confident that I had some scheme afoot, and prepared at the first
break to down me.  But I arose, giving him salutation before all
men.

"'O Moosu, thou blessed of God,' I began, 'doubtless thou hast
wondered in that I have called this convocation together; and
doubtless, because of my many foolishnesses, art thou prepared for
rash sayings and rash doings.  Not so.  It has been said, that
those the gods would destroy they first make mad.  And I have been
indeed mad.  I have crossed thy will, and scoffed at thy authority,
and done divers evil and wanton things.  Wherefore, last night a
vision was vouchsafed me, and I have seen the wickedness of my
ways.  And thou stoodst forth like a shining star, with brows
aflame, and I knew in mine own heart thy greatness.  I saw all
things clearly.  I knew that thou didst command the ear of God, and
that when you spoke he listened.  And I remembered that whatever of
the good deeds that I had done, I had done through the grace of
God, and the grace of Moosu.

"'Yes, my children,' I cried, turning to the people, 'whatever
right I have done, and whatever good I have done, have been because
of the counsel of Moosu.  When I listened to him, affairs
prospered; when I closed my ears, and acted according to my folly,
things came to folly.  By his advice it was that I laid my store of
meat, and in time of darkness fed the famishing.  By his grace it
was that I was made chief.  And what have I done with my chiefship?
Let me tell you.  I have done nothing.  My head was turned with
power, and I deemed myself greater than Moosu, and, behold I have
come to grief.  My rule has been unwise, and the gods are angered.
Lo, ye are pinched with famine, and the mothers are dry-breasted,
and the little babies cry through the long nights.  Nor do I, who
have hardened my heart against Moosu, know what shall be done, nor
in what manner of way grub shall be had.'

"At this there was nodding and laughing, and the people put their
heads together, and I knew they whispered of the loaves and fishes.
I went on hastily.  'So I was made aware of my foolishness and of
Moosu's wisdom; of my own unfitness and of Moosu's fitness.  And
because of this, being no longer mad, I make acknowledgment and
rectify evil.  I did cast unrighteous eyes upon Kluktu, and lo, she
was sealed to Moosu.  Yet is she mine, for did I not pay to
Tummasook the goods of purchase?  But I am well unworthy of her,
and she shall go from the igloo of her father to the igloo of
Moosu.  Can the moon shine in the sunshine?  And further, Tummasook
shall keep the goods of purchase, and she be a free gift to Moosu,
whom God hath ordained her rightful lord.

"'And further yet, because I have used my wealth unwisely, and to
oppress ye, O my children, do I make gifts of the kerosene can to
Moosu, and the gooseneck, and the gun-barrel, and the copper
kettle.  Therefore, I can gather to me no more possessions, and
when ye are athirst for hooch, he will quench ye and without
robbery.  For he is a great man, and God speaketh through his lips.

"'And yet further, my heart is softened, and I have repented me of
my madness.  I, who am a fool and a son of fools; I, who am the
slave of the bad god Biz-e-Nass; I, who see thy empty bellies and
knew not wherewith to fill them--why shall I be chief, and sit
above thee, and rule to thine own destruction?  Why should I do
this, which is not good?  But Moosu, who is shaman, and who is wise
above men, is so made that he can rule with a soft hand and justly.
And because of the things I have related do I make abdication and
give my chiefship to Moosu, who alone knoweth how ye may be fed in
this day when there be no meat in the land.'

"At this there was a great clapping of hands, and the people cried,
'KLOSHE!  KLOSHE!' which means 'good.'  I had seen the wonder-worry
in Moosu's eyes; for he could not understand, and was fearful of my
white man's wisdom.  I had met his wishes all along the line, and
even anticipated some; and standing there, self-shorn of all my
power, he knew the time did not favour to stir the people against
me.

"Before they could disperse I made announcement that while the
still went to Moosu, whatever hooch I possessed went to the people.
Moosu tried to protest at this, for never had we permitted more
than a handful to be drunk at a time; but they cried, 'KLOSHE!
KLOSHE!' and made festival before my door.  And while they waxed
uproarious without, as the liquor went to their heads, I held
council within with Angeit and the faithful ones.  I set them the
tasks they were to do, and put into their mouths the words they
were to say.  Then I slipped away to a place back in the woods
where I had two sleds, well loaded, with teams of dogs that were
not overfed.  Spring was at hand, you see, and there was a crust to
the snow; so it was the best time to take the way south.  Moreover,
the tobacco was gone.  There I waited, for I had nothing to fear.
Did they bestir themselves on my trail, their dogs were too fat,
and themselves too lean, to overtake me; also, I deemed their
bestirring would be of an order for which I had made due
preparation.

"First came a faithful one, running, and after him another.  'O
master,' the first cried, breathless, 'there be great confusion in
the village, and no man knoweth his own mind, and they be of many
minds.  Everybody hath drunken overmuch, and some be stringing
bows, and some be quarrelling one with another.  Never was there
such a trouble.'

"And the second one:  'And I did as thou biddest, O master,
whispering shrewd words in thirsty ears, and raising memories of
the things that were of old time.  The woman Ipsukuk waileth her
poverty and the wealth that no longer is hers.  And Tummasook
thinketh himself once again chief, and the people are hungry and
rage up and down.'

"And a third one:  'And Neewak hath overthrown the altars of Moosu,
and maketh incantation before the time-honoured and ancient gods.
And all the people remember the wealth that ran down their throats,
and which they possess no more.  And first, Esanetuk, who be SICK
TUMTUM, fought with Kluktu, and there was much noise.  And next,
being daughters of the one mother, did they fight with Tukeliketa.
And after that did they three fall upon Moosu, like wind-squalls,
from every hand, till he ran forth from the igloo, and the people
mocked him.  For a man who cannot command his womankind is a fool.'

"Then came Angeit:  'Great trouble hath befallen Moosu, O master,
for I have whispered to advantage, till the people came to Moosu,
saying they were hungry and demanding the fulfilment of prophecy.
And there was a loud shout of "Itlwillie! Itlwillie!"  (Meat.)  So
he cried peace to his womenfolk, who were overwrought with anger
and with hooch, and led the tribe even to thy meat caches.  And he
bade the men open them and be fed.  And lo, the caches were empty.
There was no meat.  They stood without sound, the people being
frightened, and in the silence I lifted my voice.  "O Moosu, where
is the meat?  That there was meat we know.  Did we not hunt it and
drag it in from the hunt?  And it were a lie to say one man hath
eaten it; yet have we seen nor hide nor hair.  Where is the meat, O
Moosu?  Thou hast the ear of God.  Where is the meat?"

"'And the people cried, "Thou hast the ear of God.  Where is the
meat?"  And they put their heads together and were afraid.  Then I
went among them, speaking fearsomely of the unknown things, of the
dead that come and go like shadows and do evil deeds, till they
cried aloud in terror and gathered all together, like little
children afraid of the dark.  Neewak made harangue, laying this
evil that had come upon them at the door of Moosu.  When he had
done, there was a furious commotion, and they took spears in their
hands, and tusks of walrus, and clubs, and stones from the beach.
But Moosu ran away home, and because he had not drunken of hooch
they could not catch him, and fell one over another and made haste
slowly.  Even now they do howl without his igloo, and his woman-
folk within, and what of the noise, he cannot make himself heard.'

"'O Angeit, thou hast done well,' I commanded.  'Go now, taking
this empty sled and the lean dogs, and ride fast to the igloo of
Moosu; and before the people, who are drunken, are aware, throw him
quick upon the sled and bring him to me.'

"I waited and gave good advice to the faithful ones till Angeit
returned.  Moosu was on the sled, and I saw by the fingermarks on
his face that his womankind had done well by him.  But he tumbled
off and fell in the snow at my feet, crying:  'O master, thou wilt
forgive Moosu, thy servant, for the wrong things he has done!  Thou
art a great man!  Surely wilt thou forgive!'

"'Call me "brother," Moosu--call me "brother,"' I chided, lifting
him to his feet with the toe of my moccasin.  'Wilt thou evermore
obey?'

"'Yea, master,' he whimpered, 'evermore.'

"'Then dispose thy body, so, across the sled,' I shifted the
dogwhip to my right hand.  'And direct thy face downwards, toward
the snow.  And make haste, for we journey south this day.'  And
when he was well fixed I laid the lash upon him, reciting, at every
stroke, the wrongs he had done me. 'This for thy disobedience in
general--whack!  And this for thy disobedience in particular--
whack! whack!  And this for Esanetuk!  And this for thy soul's
welfare!  And this for the grace of thy authority!  And this for
Kluktu!  And this for thy rights God-given!  And this for thy fat
firstlings!  And this and this for thy income-tax and thy loaves
and fishes!  And this for all thy disobedience!  And this, finally,
that thou mayest henceforth walk softly and with understanding!
Now cease thy sniffling and get up!  Gird on thy snowshoes and go
to the fore and break trail for the dogs.  CHOOK!  MUSH-ON!  Git!'"

Thomas Stevens smiled quietly to himself as he lighted his fifth
cigar and sent curling smoke-rings ceilingward.

"But how about the people of Tattarat?" I asked.  "Kind of rough,
wasn't it, to leave them flat with famine?"

And he answered, laughing, between two smoke-rings, "Were there not
the fat dogs?"



THE FAITH OF MEN



"Tell you what we'll do; we'll shake for it."

"That suits me," said the second man, turning, as he spoke, to the
Indian that was mending snow-shoes in a corner of the cabin.
"Here, you Billebedam, take a run down to Oleson's cabin like a
good fellow, and tell him we want to borrow his dice box."

This sudden request in the midst of a council on wages of men,
wood, and grub surprised Billebedam.  Besides, it was early in the
day, and he had never known white men of the calibre of Pentfield
and Hutchinson to dice and play till the day's work was done.  But
his face was impassive as a Yukon Indian's should be, as he pulled
on his mittens and went out the door.

Though eight o'clock, it was still dark outside, and the cabin was
lighted by a tallow candle thrust into an empty whisky bottle.  It
stood on the pine-board table in the middle of a disarray of dirty
tin dishes.  Tallow from innumerable candles had dripped down the
long neck of the bottle and hardened into a miniature glacier.  The
small room, which composed the entire cabin, was as badly littered
as the table; while at one end, against the wall, were two bunks,
one above the other, with the blankets turned down just as the two
men had crawled out in the morning.

Lawrence Pentfield and Corry Hutchinson were millionaires, though
they did not look it.  There seemed nothing unusual about them,
while they would have passed muster as fair specimens of lumbermen
in any Michigan camp.  But outside, in the darkness, where holes
yawned in the ground, were many men engaged in windlassing muck and
gravel and gold from the bottoms of the holes where other men
received fifteen dollars per day for scraping it from off the
bedrock.  Each day thousands of dollars' worth of gold were scraped
from bedrock and windlassed to the surface, and it all belonged to
Pentfield and Hutchinson, who took their rank among the richest
kings of Bonanza.

Pentfield broke the silence that followed on Billebedam's departure
by heaping the dirty plates higher on the table and drumming a
tattoo on the cleared space with his knuckles.  Hutchinson snuffed
the smoky candle and reflectively rubbed the soot from the wick
between thumb and forefinger.

"By Jove, I wish we could both go out!" he abruptly exclaimed.
"That would settle it all."

Pentfield looked at him darkly.

"If it weren't for your cursed obstinacy, it'd be settled anyway.
All you have to do is get up and go.  I'll look after things, and
next year I can go out."

"Why should I go?  I've no one waiting for me--"

"Your people," Pentfield broke in roughly.

"Like you have," Hutchinson went on.  "A girl, I mean, and you know
it."

Pentfield shrugged his shoulders gloomily.  "She can wait, I
guess."

"But she's been waiting two years now."

"And another won't age her beyond recognition."

"That'd be three years.  Think of it, old man, three years in this
end of the earth, this falling-off place for the damned!"
Hutchinson threw up his arm in an almost articulate groan.

He was several years younger than his partner, not more than
twenty-six, and there was a certain wistfulness in his face that
comes into the faces of men when they yearn vainly for the things
they have been long denied.  This same wistfulness was in
Pentfield's face, and the groan of it was articulate in the heave
of his shoulders.

"I dreamed last night I was in Zinkand's," he said.  "The music
playing, glasses clinking, voices humming, women laughing, and I
was ordering eggs--yes, sir, eggs, fried and boiled and poached and
scrambled, and in all sorts of ways, and downing them as fast as
they arrived."

"I'd have ordered salads and green things," Hutchinson criticized
hungrily, "with a big, rare, Porterhouse, and young onions and
radishes,--the kind your teeth sink into with a crunch."

"I'd have followed the eggs with them, I guess, if I hadn't
awakened," Pentfield replied.

He picked up a trail-scarred banjo from the floor and began to
strum a few wandering notes.  Hutchinson winced and breathed
heavily.

"Quit it!" he burst out with sudden fury, as the other struck into
a gaily lifting swing.  "It drives me mad.  I can't stand it"

Pentfield tossed the banjo into a bunk and quoted:-


"Hear me babble what the weakest won't confess -
I am Memory and Torment--I am Town!
I am all that ever went with evening dress!"


The other man winced where he sat and dropped his head forward on
the table.  Pentfield resumed the monotonous drumming with his
knuckles.  A loud snap from the door attracted his attention.  The
frost was creeping up the inside in a white sheet, and he began to
hum:-


"The flocks are folded, boughs are bare,
The salmon takes the sea;
And oh, my fair, would I somewhere
Might house my heart with thee."


Silence fell and was not again broken till Billebedam arrived and
threw the dice box on the table.

"Um much cold," he said.  "Oleson um speak to me, um say um Yukon
freeze last night."

"Hear that, old man!" Pentfield cried, slapping Hutchinson on the
shoulder.  "Whoever wins can be hitting the trail for God's country
this time tomorrow morning!"

He picked up the box, briskly rattling the dice.

"What'll it be?"

"Straight poker dice," Hutchinson answered.  "Go on and roll them
out."

Pentfield swept the dishes from the table with a crash and rolled
out the five dice.  Both looked tragedy.  The shake was without a
pair and five-spot high.

"A stiff!" Pentfield groaned.

After much deliberating Pentfield picked up all the five dice and
put them in the box.

"I'd shake to the five if I were you," Hutchinson suggested.

"No, you wouldn't, not when you see this," Pentfield replied,
shaking out the dice.

Again they were without a pair, running this time in unbroken
sequence from two to six.

"A second stiff!" he groaned.  "No use your shaking, Corry.  You
can't lose."

The other man gathered up the dice without a word, rattled them,
rolled them out on the table with a flourish, and saw that he had
likewise shaken a six-high stiff.

"Tied you, anyway, but I'll have to do better than that," he said,
gathering in four of them and shaking to the six.  "And here's what
beats you!"

But they rolled out deuce, tray, four, and five--a stiff still and
no better nor worse than Pentfield's throw.

Hutchinson sighed.

"Couldn't happen once in a million times," said.

"Nor in a million lives," Pentfield added, catching up the dice and
quickly throwing them out.  Three fives appeared, and, after much
delay, he was rewarded by a fourth five on the second shake.
Hutchinson seemed to have lost his last hope.

But three sixes turned up on his first shake.  A great doubt rose
in the other's eyes, and hope returned into his.  He had one more
shake.  Another six and he would go over the ice to salt water and
the States.

He rattled the dice in the box, made as though to cast them,
hesitated, and continued rattle them.

"Go on!  Go on!  Don't take all night about it!" Pentfield cried
sharply, bending his nails on the table, so tight was the clutch
with which he strove to control himself.

The dice rolled forth, an upturned six meeting their eyes.  Both
men sat staring at it.  There was a long silence.  Hutchinson shot
a covert glance at his partner, who, still more covertly, caught
it, and pursed up his lips in an attempt to advertise his
unconcern.

Hutchinson laughed as he got up on his feet.  It was a nervous,
apprehensive laugh.  It was a case where it was more awkward to win
than lose.  He walked over to his partner, who whirled upon him
fiercely:-

"Now you just shut up, Corry!  I know all you're going to say--that
you'd rather stay in and let me go, and all that; so don't say it.
You've your own people in Detroit to see, and that's enough.
Besides, you can do for me the very thing I expected to do if I
went out."

"And that is--?"

Pentfield read the full question in his partner's eyes, and
answered:-

"Yes, that very thing.  You can bring her in to me.  The only
difference will be a Dawson wedding instead of a San Franciscan
one."

"But, man alike!" Corry Hutchinson objected "how under the sun can
I bring her in?  We're not exactly brother and sister, seeing that
I have not even met her, and it wouldn't be just the proper thing,
you know, for us to travel together.  Of course, it would be all
right--you and I know that; but think of the looks of it, man!"

Pentfield swore under his breath, consigning the looks of it to a
less frigid region than Alaska.

"Now, if you'll just listen and not get astride that high horse of
yours so blamed quick," his partner went on, "you'll see that the
only fair thing under the circumstances is for me to let you go out
this year.  Next year is only a year away, and then I can take my
fling."

Pentfield shook his head, though visibly swayed by the temptation.

"It won't do, Corry, old man.  I appreciate your kindness and all
that, but it won't do.  I'd be ashamed every time I thought of you
slaving away in here in my place."

A thought seemed suddenly to strike him.  Burrowing into his bunk
and disrupting it in his eagerness, he secured a writing-pad and
pencil, and sitting down at the table, began to write with
swiftness and certitude.

"Here," he said, thrusting the scrawled letter into his partner's
hand.  "You just deliver that and everything'll be all right."

Hutchinson ran his eye over it and laid it down.

"How do you know the brother will be willing to make that beastly
trip in here?" he demanded.

"Oh, he'll do it for me--and for his sister," Pentfield replied.
"You see, he's tenderfoot, and I wouldn't trust her with him alone.
But with you along it will be an easy trip and a safe one.  As soon
as you get out, you'll go to her and prepare her.  Then you can
take your run east to your own people, and in the spring she and
her brother'll be ready to start with you.  You'll like her, I
know, right from the jump; and from that, you'll know her as soon
as you lay eyes on her."

So saying he opened the back of his watch and exposed a girl's
photograph pasted on the inside of the case.  Corry Hutchinson
gazed at it with admiration welling up in his eyes.

"Mabel is her name," Pentfield went on.  "And it's just as well you
should know how to find the house.  Soon as you strike 'Frisco,
take a cab, and just say, 'Holmes's place, Myrdon Avenue'--I doubt
if the Myrdon Avenue is necessary.  The cabby'll know where Judge
Holmes lives.

"And say," Pentfield continued, after a pause, "it won't be a bad
idea for you to get me a few little things which a--er--"

"A married man should have in his business," Hutchinson blurted out
with a grin.

Pentfield grinned back.

"Sure, napkins and tablecloths and sheets and pillowslips, and such
things.  And you might get a good set of china.  You know it'll
come hard for her to settle down to this sort of thing.  You can
freight them in by steamer around by Bering Sea.  And, I say,
what's the matter with a piano?"

Hutchinson seconded the idea heartily.  His reluctance had
vanished, and he was warming up to his mission.

"By Jove!  Lawrence," he said at the conclusion of the council, as
they both rose to their feet, "I'll bring back that girl of yours
in style.  I'll do the cooking and take care of the dogs, and all
that brother'll have to do will be to see to her comfort and do for
her whatever I've forgotten.  And I'll forget damn little, I can
tell you."

The next day Lawrence Pentfield shook hands with him for the last
time and watched him, running with his dogs, disappear up the
frozen Yukon on his way to salt water and the world.  Pentfield
went back to his Bonanza mine, which was many times more dreary
than before, and faced resolutely into the long winter.  There was
work to be done, men to superintend, and operations to direct in
burrowing after the erratic pay streak; but his heart was not in
the work.  Nor was his heart in any work till the tiered logs of a
new cabin began to rise on the hill behind the mine.  It was a
grand cabin, warmly built and divided into three comfortable rooms.
Each log was hand-hewed and squared--an expensive whim when the
axemen received a daily wage of fifteen dollars; but to him nothing
could be too costly for the home in which Mabel Holmes was to live.

So he went about with the building of the cabin, singing, "And oh,
my fair, would I somewhere might house my heart with thee!"  Also,
he had a calendar pinned on the wall above the table, and his first
act each morning was to check off the day and to count the days
that were left ere his partner would come booming down the Yukon
ice in the spring.  Another whim of his was to permit no one to
sleep in the new cabin on the hill.  It must be as fresh for her
occupancy as the square-hewed wood was fresh; and when it stood
complete, he put a padlock on the door.  No one entered save
himself, and he was wont to spend long hours there, and to come
forth with his face strangely radiant and in his eyes a glad, warm
light.

In December he received a letter from Corry Hutchinson.  He had
just seen Mabel Holmes.  She was all she ought to be, to be
Lawrence Pentfield's wife, he wrote.  He was enthusiastic, and his
letter sent the blood tingling through Pentfield's veins.  Other
letters followed, one on the heels of another, and sometimes two or
three together when the mail lumped up.  And they were all in the
same tenor.  Corry had just come from Myrdon Avenue; Corry was just
going to Myrdon Avenue; or Corry was at Myrdon Avenue.  And he
lingered on and on in San Francisco, nor even mentioned his trip to
Detroit.

Lawrence Pentfield began to think that his partner was a great deal
in the company of Mabel Holmes for a fellow who was going east to
see his people.  He even caught himself worrying about it at times,
though he would have worried more had he not known Mabel and Corry
so well.  Mabel's letters, on the other hand, had a great deal to
say about Corry.  Also, a thread of timidity that was near to
disinclination ran through them concerning the trip in over the ice
and the Dawson marriage.  Pentfield wrote back heartily, laughing
at her fears, which he took to be the mere physical ones of danger
and hardship rather than those bred of maidenly reserve.

But the long winter and tedious wait, following upon the two
previous long winters, were telling upon him.  The superintendence
of the men and the pursuit of the pay streak could not break the
irk of the daily round, and the end of January found him making
occasional trips to Dawson, where he could forget his identity for
a space at the gambling tables.  Because he could afford to lose,
he won, and "Pentfield's luck" became a stock phrase among the faro
players.

His luck ran with him till the second week in February.  How much
farther it might have run is conjectural; for, after one big game,
he never played again.

It was in the Opera House that it occurred, and for an hour it had
seemed that he could not place his money on a card without making
the card a winner.  In the lull at the end of a deal, while the
game-keeper was shuffling the deck, Nick Inwood the owner of the
game, remarked, apropos of nothing:-

"I say, Pentfield, I see that partner of yours has been cutting up
monkey-shines on the outside."

"Trust Corry to have a good time," Pentfield had answered;
"especially when he has earned it."

"Every man to his taste," Nick Inwood laughed; "but I should
scarcely call getting married a good time."

"Corry married!" Pentfield cried, incredulous and yet surprised out
of himself for the moment.

'Sure," Inwood said.  "I saw it in the 'Frisco paper that came in
over the ice this morning."

"Well, and who's the girl?" Pentfield demanded, somewhat with the
air of patient fortitude with which one takes the bait of a catch
and is aware at the time of the large laugh bound to follow at his
expense.

Nick Inwood pulled the newspaper from his pocket and began looking
it over, saying:-

"I haven't a remarkable memory for names, but it seems to me it's
something like Mabel--Mabel--oh yes, here it--'Mabel Holmes,
daughter of Judge Holmes,'--whoever he is."

Lawrence Pentfield never turned a hair, though he wondered how any
man in the North could know her name.  He glanced coolly from face
to face to note any vagrant signs of the game that was being played
upon him, but beyond a healthy curiosity the faces betrayed
nothing.  Then he turned to the gambler and said in cold, even
tones:-

"Inwood, I've got an even five hundred here that says the print of
what you have just said is not in that paper."

The gambler looked at him in quizzical surprise.  "Go 'way, child.
I don't want your money."

"I thought so," Pentfield sneered, returning to the game and laying
a couple of bets.

Nick Inwood's face flushed, and, as though doubting his senses, he
ran careful eyes over the print of a quarter of a column.  Then be
turned on Lawrence Pentfield.

"Look here, Pentfield," he said, in a quiet, nervous manner; "I
can't allow that, you know."

"Allow what?" Pentfield demanded brutally.

"You implied that I lied."

"Nothing of the sort," came the reply.  "I merely implied that you
were trying to be clumsily witty."

"Make your bets, gentlemen," the dealer protested.

"But I tell you it's true," Nick Inwood insisted.

"And I have told you I've five hundred that says it's not in that
paper," Pentfield answered, at the same time throwing a heavy sack
of dust on the table.

"I am sorry to take your money," was the retort, as Inwood thrust
the newspaper into Pentfield's hand.

Pentfield saw, though he could not quite bring himself to believe.
Glancing through the headline, "Young Lochinvar came out of the
North," and skimming the article until the names of Mabel Holmes
and Corry Hutchinson, coupled together, leaped squarely before his
eyes, he turned to the top of the page.  It was a San Francisco
paper.

"The money's yours, Inwood," he remarked, with a short laugh.
"There's no telling what that partner of mine will do when he gets
started."

Then he returned to the article and read it word for word, very
slowly and very carefully.  He could no longer doubt.  Beyond
dispute, Corry Hutchinson had married Mabel Holmes.  "One of the
Bonanza kings," it described him, "a partner with Lawrence
Pentfield (whom San Francisco society has not yet forgotten), and
interested with that gentleman in other rich, Klondike properties."
Further, and at the end, he read, "It is whispered that Mr. and
Mrs. Hutchinson will, after a brief trip east to Detroit, make
their real honeymoon journey into the fascinating Klondike
country."

"I'll be back again; keep my place for me," Pentfield said, rising
to his feet and taking his sack, which meantime had hit the blower
and came back lighter by five hundred dollars.

He went down the street and bought a Seattle paper.  It contained
the same facts, though somewhat condensed.  Corry and Mabel were
indubitably married.  Pentfield returned to the Opera House and
resumed his seat in the game.  He asked to have the limit removed.

"Trying to get action," Nick Inwood laughed, as he nodded assent to
the dealer.  "I was going down to the A. C. store, but now I guess
I'll stay and watch you do your worst."

This Lawrence Pentfield did at the end of two hours' plunging, when
the dealer bit the end off a fresh cigar and struck a match as he
announced that the bank was broken.  Pentfield cashed in for forty
thousand, shook hands with Nick Inwood, and stated that it was the
last time he would ever play at his game or at anybody's else's.

No one knew nor guessed that he had been hit, much less hit hard.
There was no apparent change in his manner.  For a week he went
about his work much as he had always done, when he read an account
of the marriage in a Portland paper.  Then he called in a friend to
take charge of his mine and departed up the Yukon behind his dogs.
He held to the Salt Water trail till White River was reached, into
which he turned.  Five days later he came upon a hunting camp of
the White River Indians.  In the evening there was a feast, and he
sat in honour beside the chief; and next morning he headed his dogs
back toward the Yukon.  But he no longer travelled alone.  A young
squaw fed his dogs for him that night and helped to pitch camp.
She had been mauled by a bear in her childhood and suffered from a
slight limp.  Her name was Lashka, and she was diffident at first
with the strange white man that had come out of the Unknown,
married her with scarcely a look or word, and now was carrying her
back with him into the Unknown.

But Lashka's was better fortune than falls to most Indian girls
that mate with white men in the Northland.  No sooner was Dawson
reached than the barbaric marriage that had joined them was re-
solemnized, in the white man's fashion, before a priest.  From
Dawson, which to her was all a marvel and a dream, she was taken
directly to the Bonanza claim and installed in the square-hewed
cabin on the hill.

The nine days' wonder that followed arose not so much out of the
fact of the squaw whom Lawrence Pentfield had taken to bed and
board as out of the ceremony that had legalized the tie.  The
properly sanctioned marriage was the one thing that passed the
community's comprehension.  But no one bothered Pentfield about it.
So long as a man's vagaries did no special hurt to the community,
the community let the man alone, nor was Pentfield barred from the
cabins of men who possessed white wives.  The marriage ceremony
removed him from the status of squaw-man and placed him beyond
moral reproach, though there were men that challenged his taste
where women were concerned.

No more letters arrived from the outside.  Six sledloads of mails
had been lost at the Big Salmon.  Besides, Pentfield knew that
Corry and his bride must by that time have started in over the
trail.  They were even then on their honeymoon trip--the honeymoon
trip he had dreamed of for himself through two dreary years.  His
lip curled with bitterness at the thought; but beyond being kinder
to Lashka he gave no sign.

March had passed and April was nearing its end, when, one spring
morning, Lashka asked permission to go down the creek several miles
to Siwash Pete's cabin.  Pete's wife, a Stewart River woman, had
sent up word that something was wrong with her baby, and Lashka,
who was pre-eminently a mother-woman and who held herself to be
truly wise in the matter of infantile troubles, missed no
opportunity of nursing the children of other women as yet more
fortunate than she.

Pentfield harnessed his dogs, and with Lashka behind took the trail
down the creek bed of Bonanza.  Spring was in the air.  The
sharpness had gone out of the bite of the frost and though snow
still covered the land, the murmur and trickling of water told that
the iron grip of winter was relaxing.  The bottom was dropping out
of the trail, and here and there a new trail had been broken around
open holes.  At such a place, where there was not room for two
sleds to pass, Pentfield heard the jingle of approaching bells and
stopped his dogs.

A team of tired-looking dogs appeared around the narrow bend,
followed by a heavily-loaded sled.  At the gee-pole was a man who
steered in a manner familiar to Pentfield, and behind the sled
walked two women.  His glance returned to the man at the gee-pole.
It was Corry.  Pentfield got on his feet and waited.  He was glad
that Lashka was with him.  The meeting could not have come about
better had it been planned, he thought.  And as he waited he
wondered what they would say, what they would be able to say.  As
for himself there was no need to say anything.  The explaining was
all on their side, and he was ready to listen to them.

As they drew in abreast, Corry recognized him and halted the dogs.
With a "Hello, old man," he held out his hand.

Pentfield shook it, but without warmth or speech.  By this time the
two women had come up, and he noticed that the second one was Dora
Holmes.  He doffed his fur cap, the flaps of which were flying,
shook hands with her, and turned toward Mabel.  She swayed forward,
splendid and radiant, but faltered before his outstretched hand.
He had intended to say, "How do you do, Mrs. Hutchinson?"--but
somehow, the Mrs. Hutchinson had choked him, and all he had managed
to articulate was the "How do you do?"

There was all the constraint and awkwardness in the situation he
could have wished.  Mabel betrayed the agitation appropriate to her
position, while Dora, evidently brought along as some sort of
peacemaker, was saying:-

"Why, what is the matter, Lawrence?"

Before he could answer, Corry plucked him by the sleeve and drew
him aside.

"See here, old man, what's this mean?" Corry demanded in a low
tone, indicating Lashka with his eyes.

"I can hardly see, Corry, where you can have any concern in the
matter," Pentfield answered mockingly.

But Corry drove straight to the point.

"What is that squaw doing on your sled?  A nasty job you've given
me to explain all this away.  I only hope it can be explained away.
Who is she?  Whose squaw is she?"

Then Lawrence Pentfield delivered his stroke, and he delivered it
with a certain calm elation of spirit that seemed somewhat to
compensate for the wrong that had been done him.

"She is my squaw," he said; "Mrs. Pentfield, if you please."

Corry Hutchinson gasped, and Pentfield left him and returned to the
two women.  Mabel, with a worried expression on her face, seemed
holding herself aloof.  He turned to Dora and asked, quite
genially, as though all the world was sunshine:- "How did you stand
the trip, anyway?  Have any trouble to sleep warm?"

"And, how did Mrs. Hutchinson stand it?" he asked next, his eyes on
Mabel.

"Oh, you dear ninny!" Dora cried, throwing her arms around him and
hugging him.  "Then you saw it, too!  I thought something was the
matter, you were acting so strangely."

"I--I hardly understand," he stammered.

"It was corrected in next day's paper," Dora chattered on.  "We did
not dream you would see it.  All the other papers had it correctly,
and of course that one miserable paper was the very one you saw!"

"Wait a moment!  What do you mean?" Pentfield demanded, a sudden
fear at his heart, for he felt himself on the verge of a great
gulf.

But Dora swept volubly on.

"Why, when it became known that Mabel and I were going to Klondike,
EVERY OTHER WEEK said that when we were gone, it would be lovely on
Myrdon Avenue, meaning, of course, lonely."

"Then--"

"I am Mrs. Hutchinson," Dora answered.  "And you thought it was
Mabel all the time--"

"Precisely the way of it," Pentfield replied slowly.  "But I can
see now.  The reporter got the names mixed.  The Seattle and
Portland paper copied."

He stood silently for a minute.  Mabel's face was turned toward him
again, and he could see the glow of expectancy in it.  Corry was
deeply interested in the ragged toe of one of his moccasins, while
Dora was stealing sidelong glances at the immobile face of Lashka
sitting on the sled.  Lawrence Pentfield stared straight out before
him into a dreary future, through the grey vistas of which he saw
himself riding on a sled behind running dogs with lame Lashka by
his side.

Then he spoke, quite simply, looking Mabel in the eyes.

"I am very sorry.  I did not dream it.  I thought you had married
Corry.  That is Mrs. Pentfield sitting on the sled over there."

Mabel Holmes turned weakly toward her sister, as though all the
fatigue of her great journey had suddenly descended on her.  Dora
caught her around the waist.  Corry Hutchinson was still occupied
with his moccasins.  Pentfield glanced quickly from face to face,
then turned to his sled.

"Can't stop here all day, with Pete's baby waiting," he said to
Lashka.

The long whip-lash hissed out, the dogs sprang against the breast
bands, and the sled lurched and jerked ahead.

"Oh, I say, Corry," Pentfield called back, "you'd better occupy the
old cabin.  It's not been used for some time.  I've built a new one
on the hill."



TOO MUCH GOLD



This being a story--and a truer one than it may appear--of a mining
country, it is quite to be expected that it will be a hard-luck
story.  But that depends on the point of view.  Hard luck is a mild
way of terming it so far as Kink Mitchell and Hootchinoo Bill are
concerned; and that they have a decided opinion on the subject is a
matter of common knowledge in the Yukon country.

It was in the fall of 1896 that the two partners came down to the
east bank of the Yukon, and drew a Peterborough canoe from a moss-
covered cache.  They were not particularly pleasant-looking
objects.  A summer's prospecting, filled to repletion with hardship
and rather empty of grub, had left their clothes in tatters and
themselves worn and cadaverous.  A nimbus of mosquitoes buzzed
about each man's head.  Their faces were coated with blue clay.
Each carried a lump of this damp clay, and, whenever it dried and
fell from their faces, more was daubed on in its place.  There was
a querulous plaint in their voices, an irritability of movement and
gesture, that told of broken sleep and a losing struggle with the
little winged pests.

"Them skeeters'll be the death of me yet," Kink Mitchell whimpered,
as the canoe felt the current on her nose, and leaped out from the
bank

"Cheer up, cheer up.  We're about done," Hootchinoo Bill answered,
with an attempted heartiness in his funereal tones that was
ghastly.  "We'll be in Forty Mile in forty minutes, and then--
cursed little devil!"

One hand left his paddle and landed on the back of his neck with a
sharp slap.  He put a fresh daub of clay on the injured part,
swearing sulphurously the while.  Kink Mitchell was not in the
least amused.  He merely improved the opportunity by putting a
thicker coating of clay on his own neck.

They crossed the Yukon to its west bank, shot down-stream with easy
stroke, and at the end of forty minutes swung in close to the left
around the tail of an island.  Forty Mile spread itself suddenly
before them.  Both men straightened their backs and gazed at the
sight.  They gazed long and carefully, drifting with the current,
in their faces an expression of mingled surprise and consternation
slowly gathering.  Not a thread of smoke was rising from the
hundreds of log-cabins.  There was no sound of axes biting sharply
into wood, of hammering and sawing.  Neither dogs nor men loitered
before the big store.  No steamboats lay at the bank, no canoes,
nor scows, nor poling-boats.  The river was as bare of craft as the
town was of life.

"Kind of looks like Gabriel's tooted his little horn, and you an'
me has turned up missing," remarked Hootchinoo Bill.

His remark was casual, as though there was nothing unusual about
the occurrence.  Kink Mitchell's reply was just as casual as though
he, too, were unaware of any strange perturbation of spirit.

"Looks as they was all Baptists, then, and took the boats to go by
water," was his contribution.

"My ol' dad was a Baptist," Hootchinoo Bill supplemented.  "An' he
always did hold it was forty thousand miles nearer that way."

This was the end of their levity.  They ran the canoe in and
climbed the high earth bank.  A feeling of awe descended upon them
as they walked the deserted streets.  The sunlight streamed
placidly over the town.  A gentle wind tapped the halyards against
the flagpole before the closed doors of the Caledonia Dance Hall.
Mosquitoes buzzed, robins sang, and moose birds tripped hungrily
among the cabins; but there was no human life nor sign of human
life.

"I'm just dyin' for a drink," Hootchinoo Bill said and
unconsciously his voice sank to a hoarse whisper.

His partner nodded his head, loth to hear his own voice break the
stillness.  They trudged on in uneasy silence till surprised by an
open door.  Above this door, and stretching the width of the
building, a rude sign announced the same as the "Monte Carlo."  But
beside the door, hat over eyes, chair tilted back, a man sat
sunning himself.  He was an old man.  Beard and hair were long and
white and patriarchal.

"If it ain't ol' Jim Cummings, turned up like us, too late for
Resurrection!" said Kink Mitchell.

"Most like he didn't hear Gabriel tootin'," was Hootchinoo Bill's
suggestion.

"Hello, Jim!  Wake up!" he shouted.

The old man unlimbered lamely, blinking his eyes and murmuring
automatically:  "What'll ye have, gents?  What'll ye have?"

They followed him inside and ranged up against the long bar where
of yore a half-dozen nimble bar-keepers found little time to loaf.
The great room, ordinarily aroar with life, was still and gloomy as
a tomb.  There was no rattling of chips, no whirring of ivory
balls.  Roulette and faro tables were like gravestones under their
canvas covers.  No women's voices drifted merrily from the dance-
room behind.  Ol' Jim Cummings wiped a glass with palsied hands,
and Kink Mitchell scrawled his initials on the dust-covered bar.

"Where's the girls?" Hootchinoo Bill shouted, with affected
geniality.

"Gone," was the ancient bar-keeper's reply, in a voice thin and
aged as himself, and as unsteady as his hand.

"Where's Bidwell and Barlow?"

"Gone."

"And Sweetwater Charley?"

"Gone."

"And his sister?"

"Gone too."

"Your daughter Sally, then, and her little kid?"

"Gone, all gone."  The old man shook his head sadly, rummaging in
an absent way among the dusty bottles.

"Great Sardanapolis!  Where?" Kink Mitchell exploded, unable longer
to restrain himself.  "You don't say you've had the plague?"

"Why, ain't you heerd?"  The old man chuckled quietly.  "They-all's
gone to Dawson."

"What-like is that?" Bill demanded.  "A creek? or a bar? or a
place?"

"Ain't never heered of Dawson, eh?"  The old man chuckled
exasperatingly.  "Why, Dawson's a town, a city, bigger'n Forty
Mile.  Yes, sir, bigger'n Forty Mile."

"I've ben in this land seven year," Bill announced emphatically,
"an' I make free to say I never heard tell of the burg before.
Hold on!  Let's have some more of that whisky.  Your information's
flabbergasted me, that it has.  Now just whereabouts is this
Dawson-place you was a-mentionin'?"

"On the big flat jest below the mouth of Klondike," ol' Jim
answered.  "But where has you-all ben this summer?"

"Never you mind where we-all's ben," was Kink Mitchell's testy
reply.  "We-all's ben where the skeeters is that thick you've got
to throw a stick into the air so as to see the sun and tell the
time of day.  Ain't I right, Bill?"

"Right you are," said Bill.  "But speakin' of this Dawson-place how
like did it happen to be, Jim?"

"Ounce to the pan on a creek called Bonanza, an' they ain't got to
bed-rock yet."

"Who struck it?"

"Carmack."

At mention of the discoverer's name the partners stared at each
other disgustedly.  Then they winked with great solemnity.

"Siwash George," sniffed Hootchinoo Bill.

"That squaw-man," sneered Kink Mitchell.

"I wouldn't put on my moccasins to stampede after anything he'd
ever find," said Bill.

"Same here," announced his partner.  "A cuss that's too plumb lazy
to fish his own salmon.  That's why he took up with the Indians.
S'pose that black brother-in-law of his,--lemme see, Skookum Jim,
eh?--s'pose he's in on it?"

The old bar-keeper nodded.  "Sure, an' what's more, all Forty Mile,
exceptin' me an' a few cripples."

"And drunks," added Kink Mitchell.

"No-sir-ee!" the old man shouted emphatically.

"I bet you the drinks Honkins ain't in on it!" Hootchinoo Bill
cried with certitude.

Ol' Jim's face lighted up.  "I takes you, Bill, an' you loses."

"However did that ol' soak budge out of Forty Mile?" Mitchell
demanded.

"The ties him down an' throws him in the bottom of a polin'-boat,"
ol' Jim explained.  "Come right in here, they did, an' takes him
out of that there chair there in the corner, an' three more drunks
they finds under the pianny.  I tell you-alls the whole camp hits
up the Yukon for Dawson jes' like Sam Scratch was after them,--
wimmen, children, babes in arms, the whole shebang.  Bidwell comes
to me an' sez, sez he, 'Jim, I wants you to keep tab on the Monte
Carlo.  I'm goin'.'

"'Where's Barlow?' sez I.  'Gone,' sez he, 'an' I'm a-followin'
with a load of whisky.'  An' with that, never waitin' for me to
decline, he makes a run for his boat an' away he goes, polin' up
river like mad.  So here I be, an' these is the first drinks I've
passed out in three days."

The partners looked at each other.

"Gosh darn my buttoms!" said Hootchinoo Bill.  "Seems likes you and
me, Kink, is the kind of folks always caught out with forks when it
rains soup."

"Wouldn't it take the saleratus out your dough, now?" said Kink
Mitchell.  "A stampede of tin-horns, drunks, an' loafers."

"An' squaw-men," added Bill.  "Not a genooine miner in the whole
caboodle."

"Genooine miners like you an' me, Kink," he went on academically,
"is all out an' sweatin' hard over Birch Creek way.  Not a genooine
miner in this whole crazy Dawson outfit, and I say right here, not
a step do I budge for any Carmack strike.  I've got to see the
colour of the dust first."

"Same here," Mitchell agreed.  "Let's have another drink."

Having wet this resolution, they beached the canoe, transferred its
contents to their cabin, and cooked dinner.  But as the afternoon
wore along they grew restive.  They were men used to the silence of
the great wilderness, but this gravelike silence of a town worried
them.  They caught themselves listening for familiar sounds--
"waitin' for something to make a noise which ain't goin' to make a
noise," as Bill put it.  They strolled through the deserted streets
to the Monte Carlo for more drinks, and wandered along the river
bank to the steamer landing, where only water gurgled as the eddy
filled and emptied, and an occasional salmon leapt flashing into
the sun.

They sat down in the shade in front of the store and talked with
the consumptive storekeeper, whose liability to hemorrhage
accounted for his presence.  Bill and Kink told him how they
intended loafing in their cabin and resting up after the hard
summer's work.  They told him, with a certain insistence, that was
half appeal for belief, half challenge for contradiction, how much
they were going to enjoy their idleness.  But the storekeeper was
uninterested.  He switched the conversation back to the strike on
Klondike, and they could not keep him away from it.  He could think
of nothing else, talk of nothing else, till Hootchinoo Bill rose up
in anger and disgust.

"Gosh darn Dawson, say I!" he cried.

"Same here," said Kink Mitchell, with a brightening face.  "One'd
think something was doin' up there, 'stead of bein' a mere stampede
of greenhorns an' tinhorns."

But a boat came into view from downstream.  It was long and slim.
It hugged the bank closely, and its three occupants, standing
upright, propelled it against the stiff current by means of long
poles.

"Circle City outfit," said the storekeeper.  "I was lookin' for 'em
along by afternoon.  Forty Mile had the start of them by a hundred
and seventy miles.  But gee! they ain't losin' any time!"

'We'll just sit here quiet-like and watch 'em string by," Bill said
complacently.

As he spoke, another boat appeared in sight, followed after a brief
interval by two others.  By this time the first boat was abreast of
the men on the bank.  Its occupants did not cease poling while
greetings were exchanged, and, though its progress was slow, a
half-hour saw it out of sight up river.

Still they came from below, boat after boat, in endless procession.
The uneasiness of Bill and Kink increased.  They stole speculative,
tentative glances at each other, and when their eyes met looked
away in embarrassment.  Finally, however, their eyes met and
neither looked away.

Kink opened his mouth to speak, but words failed him and his mouth
remained open while he continued to gaze at his partner.

"Just what I was thinken', Kink," said Bill.

They grinned sheepishly at each other, and by tacit consent started
to walk away.  Their pace quickened, and by the time they arrived
at their cabin they were on the run.

"Can't lose no time with all that multitude a-rushin' by," Kink
spluttered, as he jabbed the sour-dough can into the beanpot with
one hand and with the other gathered in the frying-pan and coffee-
pot.

"Should say not," gasped Bill, his head and shoulders buried in a
clothes-sack wherein were stored winter socks and underwear.  "I
say, Kink, don't forget the saleratus on the corner shelf back of
the stove."

Half-an-hour later they were launching the canoe and loading up,
while the storekeeper made jocular remarks about poor, weak mortals
and the contagiousness of "stampedin' fever."  But when Bill and
Kink thrust their long poles to bottom and started the canoe
against the current, he called after them:-

"Well, so-long and good luck!  And don't forget to blaze a stake or
two for me!"

They nodded their heads vigorously and felt sorry for the poor
wretch who remained perforce behind.

* * * * *

Kink and Bill were sweating hard.  According to the revised
Northland Scripture, the stampede is to the swift, the blazing of
stakes to the strong, and the Crown in royalties, gathers to itself
the fulness thereof.  Kink and Bill were both swift and strong.
They took the soggy trail at a long, swinging gait that broke the
hearts of a couple of tender-feet who tried to keep up with them.
Behind, strung out between them and Dawson (where the boats were
discarded and land travel began), was the vanguard of the Circle
City outfit.  In the race from Forty Mile the partners had passed
every boat, winning from the leading boat by a length in the Dawson
eddy, and leaving its occupants sadly behind the moment their feet
struck the trail.

"Huh! couldn't see us for smoke," Hootchinoo Bill chuckled,
flirting the stinging sweat from his brow and glancing swiftly back
along the way they had come.

Three men emerged from where the trail broke through the trees.
Two followed close at their heels, and then a man and a woman shot
into view.

"Come on, you Kink!  Hit her up!  Hit her up!"

Bill quickened his pace.  Mitchell glanced back in more leisurely
fashion.

"I declare if they ain't lopin'!"

"And here's one that's loped himself out," said Bill, pointing to
the side of the trail.

A man was lying on his back panting in the culminating stages of
violent exhaustion.  His face was ghastly, his eyes bloodshot and
glazed, for all the world like a dying man.

"CHECHAQUO!" Kink Mitchell grunted, and it was the grunt of the old
"sour dough" for the green-horn, for the man who outfitted with
"self-risin'" flour and used baking-powder in his biscuits.

The partners, true to the old-timer custom, had intended to stake
down-stream from the strike, but when they saw claim 81 BELOW
blazed on a tree,--which meant fully eight miles below Discovery,--
they changed their minds.  The eight miles were covered in less
than two hours.  It was a killing pace, over so rough trail, and
they passed scores of exhausted men that had fallen by the wayside.

At Discovery little was to be learned of the upper creek.
Cormack's Indian brother-in-law, Skookum Jim, had a hazy notion
that the creek was staked as high as the 30's; but when Kink and
Bill looked at the corner-stakes of 79 ABOVE, they threw their
stampeding packs off their backs and sat down to smoke.  All their
efforts had been vain.  Bonanza was staked from mouth to source,--
"out of sight and across the next divide."  Bill complained that
night as they fried their bacon and boiled their coffee over
Cormack's fire at Discovery.

"Try that pup," Carmack suggested next morning.

"That pup" was a broad creek that flowed into Bonanza at 7 ABOVE.
The partners received his advice with the magnificent contempt of
the sour dough for a squaw-man, and, instead, spent the day on
Adam's Creek, another and more likely-looking tributary of Bonanza.
But it was the old story over again--staked to the sky-line.

For threes days Carmack repeated his advice, and for three days
they received it contemptuously.  But on the fourth day, there
being nowhere else to go, they went up "that pup."  They knew that
it was practically unstaked, but they had no intention of staking.
The trip was made more for the purpose of giving vent to their ill-
humour than for anything else.  They had become quite cynical,
sceptical.  They jeered and scoffed at everything, and insulted
every chechaquo they met along the way.

At No. 23 the stakes ceased.  The remainder of the creek was open
for location.

"Moose pasture," sneered Kink Mitchell.

But Bill gravely paced off five hundred feet up the creek and
blazed the corner-stakes.  He had picked up the bottom of a candle-
box, and on the smooth side he wrote the notice for his centre-
stake:-


THIS MOOSE PASTURE IS RESERVED FOR THE
SWEDES AND CHECHAQUOS.
- BILL RADER.


Kink read it over with approval, saying:-

"As them's my sentiments, I reckon I might as well subscribe."

So the name of Charles Mitchell was added to the notice; and many
an old sour dough's face relaxed that day at sight of the handiwork
of a kindred spirit.

"How's the pup?" Carmack inquired when they strolled back into
camp.

"To hell with pups!" was Hootchinoo Bill's reply.  "Me and Kink's
goin' a-lookin' for Too Much Gold when we get rested up."

Too Much Gold was the fabled creek of which all sour doughs
dreamed, whereof it was said the gold was so thick that, in order
to wash it, gravel must first be shovelled into the sluice-boxes.
But the several days' rest, preliminary to the quest for Too Much
Gold, brought a slight change in their plan, inasmuch as it brought
one Ans Handerson, a Swede.

Ans Handerson had been working for wages all summer at Miller Creek
over on the Sixty Mile, and, the summer done, had strayed up
Bonanza like many another waif helplessly adrift on the gold tides
that swept willy-nilly across the land.  He was tall and lanky.
His arms were long, like prehistoric man's, and his hands were like
soup-plates, twisted and gnarled, and big-knuckled from toil.  He
was slow of utterance and movement, and his eyes, pale blue as his
hair was pale yellow, seemed filled with an immortal dreaming, the
stuff of which no man knew, and himself least of all.  Perhaps this
appearance of immortal dreaming was due to a supreme and vacuous
innocence.  At any rate, this was the valuation men of ordinary
clay put upon him, and there was nothing extraordinary about the
composition of Hootchinoo Bill and Kink Mitchell.

The partners had spent a day of visiting and gossip, and in the
evening met in the temporary quarters of the Monte Carlo--a large
tent were stampeders rested their weary bones and bad whisky sold
at a dollar a drink.  Since the only money in circulation was dust,
and since the house took the "down-weight" on the scales, a drink
cost something more than a dollar.  Bill and Kink were not
drinking, principally for the reason that their one and common sack
was not strong enough to stand many excursions to the scales.

"Say, Bill, I've got a chechaquo on the string for a sack of
flour," Mitchell announced jubilantly.

Bill looked interested and pleased.  Grub as scarce, and they were
not over-plentifully supplied for the quest after Too Much Gold.

"Flour's worth a dollar a pound," he answered.  "How like do you
calculate to get your finger on it?"

"Trade 'm a half-interest in that claim of ourn," Kink answered.

"What claim?" Bill was surprised.  Then he remembered the
reservation he had staked off for the Swedes, and said, "Oh!"

"I wouldn't be so clost about it, though," he added.  "Give 'm the
whole thing while you're about it, in a right free-handed way."

Bill shook his head.  "If I did, he'd get clean scairt and prance
off.  I'm lettin' on as how the ground is believed to be valuable,
an' that we're lettin' go half just because we're monstrous short
on grub.  After the dicker we can make him a present of the whole
shebang."

"If somebody ain't disregarded our notice," Bill objected, though
he was plainly pleased at the prospect of exchanging the claim for
a sack of flour.

"She ain't jumped," Kink assured him.  "It's No. 24, and it stands.
The chechaquos took it serious, and they begun stakin' where you
left off.  Staked clean over the divide, too.  I was gassin' with
one of them which has just got in with cramps in his legs."

It was then, and for the first time, that they heard the slow and
groping utterance of Ans Handerson.

"Ay like the looks," he was saying to the bar-keeper.  "Ay tank Ay
gat a claim."

The partners winked at each other, and a few minutes later a
surprised and grateful Swede was drinking bad whisky with two hard-
hearted strangers.  But he was as hard-headed as they were hard-
hearted.  The sack made frequent journeys to the scales, followed
solicitously each time by Kink Mitchell's eyes, and still Ans
Handerson did not loosen up.  In his pale blue eyes, as in summer
seas, immortal dreams swam up and burned, but the swimming and the
burning were due to the tales of gold and prospect pans he heard,
rather than to the whisky he slid so easily down his throat.

The  partners were in despair, though they appeared boisterous and
jovial of speech and action.

"Don't mind me, my friend," Hootchinoo Bill hiccoughed, his hand
upon Ans Handerson's shoulder.  "Have another drink.  We're just
celebratin' Kink's birthday here.  This is my pardner, Kink, Kink
Mitchell.  An' what might your name be?"

This learned, his hand descended resoundingly on Kink's back, and
Kink simulated clumsy self-consciousness in that he was for the
time being the centre of the rejoicing, while Ans Handerson looked
pleased and asked them to have a drink with him.  It was the first
and last time he treated, until the play changed and his canny soul
was roused to unwonted prodigality.  But he paid for the liquor
from a fairly healthy-looking sack.  "Not less 'n eight hundred in
it," calculated the lynx-eyed Kink; and on the strength of it he
took the first opportunity of a privy conversation with Bidwell,
proprietor of the bad whisky and the tent.

"Here's my sack, Bidwell," Kink said, with the intimacy and surety
of one old-timer to another.  "Just weigh fifty dollars into it for
a day or so more or less, and we'll be yours truly, Bill an' me."

Thereafter the journeys of the sack to the scales were more
frequent, and the celebration of Kink's natal day waxed hilarious.
He even essayed to sing the old-timer's classic, "The Juice of the
Forbidden Fruit," but broke down and drowned his embarrassment in
another round of drinks.  Even Bidwell honoured him with a round or
two on the house; and he and Bill were decently drunk by the time
Ans Handerson's eyelids began to droop and his tongue gave promise
of loosening.

Bill grew affectionate, then confidential.  He told his troubles
and hard luck to the bar-keeper and the world in general, and to
Ans Handerson in particular.  He required no histrionic powers to
act the part.  The bad whisky attended to that.  He worked himself
into a great sorrow for himself and Bill, and his tears were
sincere when he told how he and his partner were thinking of
selling a half-interest in good ground just because they were short
of grub.  Even Kink listened and believed.

Ans Handerson's eyes were shining unholily as he asked, "How much
you tank you take?"

Bill and Kink did not hear him, and he was compelled to repeat his
query.  They appeared reluctant.  He grew keener.  And he swayed
back and forward, holding on to the bar and listened with all his
ears while they conferred together on one side, and wrangled as to
whether they should or not, and disagreed in stage whispers over
the price they should set.

"Two hundred and--hic!--fifty," Bill finally announced, "but we
reckon as we won't sell."

"Which is monstrous wise if I might chip in my little say,"
seconded Bidwell.

"Yes, indeedy," added Kink.  "We ain't in no charity business a-
disgorgin' free an' generous to Swedes an' white men."

"Ay tank we haf another drink," hiccoughed Ans Handerson, craftily
changing the subject against a more propitious time.

And thereafter, to bring about that propitious time, his own sack
began to see-saw between his hip pocket and the scales.  Bill and
Kink were coy, but they finally yielded to his blandishments.
Whereupon he grew shy and drew Bidwell to one side.  He staggered
exceedingly, and held on to Bidwell for support as he asked -

"They ban all right, them men, you tank so?"

"Sure," Bidwell answered heartily.  "Known 'em for years.  Old sour
doughs.  When they sell a claim, they sell a claim.  They ain't no
air-dealers."

"Ay tank Ay buy," Ans Handerson announced, tottering back to the
two men.

But by now he was dreaming deeply, and he proclaimed he would have
the whole claim or nothing.  This was the cause of great pain to
Hootchinoo Bill.  He orated grandly against the "hawgishness" of
chechaquos and Swedes, albeit he dozed between periods, his voice
dying away to a gurgle, and his head sinking forward on his breast.
But whenever roused by a nudge from Kink or Bidwell, he never
failed to explode another volley of abuse and insult.

Ans Handerson was calm under it all.  Each insult added to the
value of the claim.  Such unamiable reluctance to sell advertised
but one thing to him, and he was aware of a great relief when
Hootchinoo Bill sank snoring to the floor, and he was free to turn
his attention to his less intractable partner.

Kink Mitchell was persuadable, though a poor mathematician.  He
wept dolefully, but was willing to sell a half-interest for two
hundred and fifty dollars or the whole claim for seven hundred and
fifty.  Ans Handerson and Bidwell laboured to clear away his
erroneous ideas concerning fractions, but their labour was vain.
He spilled tears and regrets all over the bar and on their
shoulders, which tears, however, did not wash away his opinion,
that if one half was worth two hundred and fifty, two halves were
worth three times as much.

In the end,--and even Bidwell retained no more than hazy
recollections of how the night terminated,--a bill of sale was
drawn up, wherein Bill Rader and Charles Mitchell yielded up all
right and title to the claim known as 24 ELDORADO, the same being
the name the creek had received from some optimistic chechaquo.

When Kink had signed, it took the united efforts of the three to
arouse Bill.  Pen in hand, he swayed long over the document; and,
each time he rocked back and forth, in Ans Handerson's eyes flashed
and faded a wondrous golden vision.  When the precious signature
was at last appended and the dust paid over, he breathed a great
sigh, and sank to sleep under a table, where he dreamed immortally
until morning.

But the day was chill and grey.  He felt bad.  His first act,
unconscious and automatic, was to feel for his sack.  Its lightness
startled him.  Then, slowly, memories of the night thronged into
his brain.  Rough voices disturbed him.  He opened his eyes and
peered out from under the table.  A couple of early risers, or,
rather, men who had been out on trail all night, were vociferating
their opinions concerning the utter and loathsome worthlessness of
Eldorado Creek.  He grew frightened, felt in his pocket, and found
the deed to 24 ELDORADO.

Ten minutes later Hootchinoo Bill and Kink Mitchell were roused
from their blankets by a wild-eyed Swede that strove to force upon
them an ink-scrawled and very blotty piece of paper.

"Ay tank Ay take my money back," he gibbered.  "Ay tank Ay take my
money back."

Tears were in his eyes and throat.  They ran down his cheeks as he
knelt before them and pleaded and implored.  But Bill and Kink did
not laugh.  They might have been harder hearted.

"First time I ever hear a man squeal over a minin' deal," Bill
said.  "An' I make free to say 'tis too onusual for me to savvy."

"Same here," Kink Mitchell remarked.  "Minin' deals is like horse-
tradin'."

They were honest in their wonderment.  They could not conceive of
themselves raising a wail over a business transaction, so they
could not understand it in another man.

"The poor, ornery chechaquo," murmured Hootchinoo Bill, as they
watched the sorrowing Swede disappear up the trail.

"But this ain't Too Much Gold," Kink Mitchell said cheerfully.

And ere the day was out they purchased flour and bacon at
exorbitant prices with Ans Handerson's dust and crossed over the
divide in the direction of the creeks that lie between Klondike and
Indian River.

Three months later they came back over the divide in the midst of a
snow-storm and dropped down the trail to 24 ELDORADO.  It merely
chanced that the trail led them that way.  They were not looking
for the claim.  Nor could they see much through the driving white
till they set foot upon the claim itself.  And then the air
lightened, and they beheld a dump, capped by a windlass that a man
was turning.  They saw him draw a bucket of gravel from the hole
and tilt it on the edge of the dump.  Likewise they saw another,
man, strangely familiar, filling a pan with the fresh gravel.  His
hands were large; his hair wets pale yellow.  But before they
reached him, he turned with the pan and fled toward a cabin.  He
wore no hat, and the snow falling down his neck accounted for his
haste.  Bill and Kink ran after him, and came upon him in the
cabin, kneeling by the stove and washing the pan of gravel in a tub
of water.

He was too deeply engaged to notice more than that somebody had
entered the cabin.  They stood at his shoulder and looked on.  He
imparted to the pan a deft circular motion, pausing once or twice
to rake out the larger particles of gravel with his fingers.  The
water was muddy, and, with the pan buried in it, they could see
nothing of its contents.  Suddenly he lifted the pan clear and sent
the water out of it with a flirt.  A mass of yellow, like butter in
a churn, showed across the bottom.

Hootchinoo Bill swallowed.  Never in his life had he dreamed of so
rich a test-pan.

"Kind of thick, my friend," he said huskily.  "How much might you
reckon that-all to be?"

Ans Handerson did not look up as he replied, "Ay tank fafty
ounces."

"You must be scrumptious rich, then, eh?"

Still Ans Handerson kept his head down, absorbed in putting in the
fine touches which wash out the last particles of dross, though he
answered, "Ay tank Ay ban wort' five hundred t'ousand dollar."

"Gosh!" said Hootchinoo Bill, and he said it reverently.

"Yes, Bill, gosh!" said Kink Mitchell; and they went out softly and
closed the door.



THE ONE THOUSAND DOZEN



David Rasmunsen was a hustler, and, like many a greater man, a man
of the one idea.  Wherefore, when the clarion call of the North
rang on his ear, he conceived an adventure in eggs and bent all his
energy to its achievement.  He figured briefly and to the point,
and the adventure became iridescent-hued, splendid.  That eggs
would sell at Dawson for five dollars a dozen was a safe working
premise.  Whence it was incontrovertible that one thousand dozen
would bring, in the Golden Metropolis, five thousand dollars.

On the other hand, expense was to be considered, and he considered
it well, for he was a careful man, keenly practical, with a hard
head and a heart that imagination never warmed.  At fifteen cents a
dozen, the initial cost of his thousand dozen would be one hundred
and fifty dollars, a mere bagatelle in face of the enormous profit.
And suppose, just suppose, to be wildly extravagant for once, that
transportation for himself and eggs should run up eight hundred and
fifty more; he would still have four thousand clear cash and clean
when the last egg was disposed of and the last dust had rippled
into his sack

"You see, Alma,"--he figured it over with his wife, the cosy
dining-room submerged in a sea of maps, government surveys, guide-
books, and Alaskan itineraries,--"you see, expenses don't really
begin till you make Dyea--fifty dollars'll cover it with a first-
class passage thrown in.  Now from Dyea to Lake Linderman, Indian
packers take your goods over for twelve cents a pound, twelve
dollars a hundred, or one hundred and twenty dollars a thousand.
Say I have fifteen hundred pounds, it'll cost one hundred and
eighty dollars--call it two hundred and be safe.  I am creditably
informed by a Klondiker just come out that I can buy a boat for
three hundred.  But the same man says I'm sure to get a couple of
passengers for one hundred and fifty each, which will give me the
boat for nothing, and, further, they can help me manage it.  And .
. . that's all; I put my eggs ashore from the boat at Dawson.  Now
let me see how much is that?"

"Fifty dollars from San Francisco to Dyea, two hundred from Dyea to
Linderman, passengers pay for the boat--two hundred and fifty all
told," she summed up swiftly.

"And a hundred for my clothes and personal outfit," he went on
happily; "that leaves a margin of five hundred for emergencies.
And what possible emergencies can arise?"

Alma shrugged her shoulders and elevated her brows.  If that vast
Northland was capable of swallowing up a man and a thousand dozen
eggs, surely there was room and to spare for whatever else he might
happen to possess.  So she thought, but she said nothing.  She knew
David Rasmunsen too well to say anything.

"Doubling the time because of chance delays, I should make the trip
in two months.  Think of it, Alma!  Four thousand in two months!
Beats the paltry hundred a month I'm getting now.  Why, we'll build
further out where we'll have more space, gas in every room, and a
view, and the rent of the cottage'll pay taxes, insurance, and
water, and leave something over.  And then there's always the
chance of my striking it and coming out a millionaire.  Now tell
me, Alma, don't you think I'm very moderate?"

And Alma could hardly think otherwise.  Besides, had not her own
cousin,--though a remote and distant one to be sure, the black
sheep, the harum-scarum, the ne'er-do-well,--had not he come down
out of that weird North country with a hundred thousand in yellow
dust, to say nothing of a half-ownership in the hole from which it
came?

David Rasmunsen's grocer was surprised when he found him weighing
eggs in the scales at the end of the counter, and Rasmunsen himself
was more surprised when he found that a dozen eggs weighed a pound
and a half--fifteen hundred pounds for his thousand dozen!  There
would be no weight left for his clothes, blankets, and cooking
utensils, to say nothing of the grub he must necessarily consume by
the way.  His calculations were all thrown out, and he was just
proceeding to recast them when he hit upon the idea of weighing
small eggs.  "For whether they be large or small, a dozen eggs is a
dozen eggs," he observed sagely to himself; and a dozen small ones
he found to weigh but a pound and a quarter.  Thereat the city of
San Francisco was overrun by anxious-eyed emissaries, and
commission houses and dairy associations were startled by a sudden
demand for eggs running not more than twenty ounces to the dozen.

Rasmunsen mortgaged the little cottage for a thousand dollars,
arranged for his wife to make a prolonged stay among her own
people, threw up his job, and started North.  To keep within his
schedule he compromised on a second-class passage, which, because
of the rush, was worse than steerage; and in the late summer, a
pale and wabbly man, he disembarked with his eggs on the Dyea
beach.  But it did not take him long to recover his land legs and
appetite.  His first interview with the Chilkoot packers
straightened him up and stiffened his backbone.  Forty cents a
pound they demanded for the twenty-eight-mile portage, and while he
caught his breath and swallowed, the price went up to forty-three.
Fifteen husky Indians put the straps on his packs at forty-five,
but took them off at an offer of forty-seven from a Skaguay Croesus
in dirty shirt and ragged overalls who had lost his horses on the
White Pass trail and was now making a last desperate drive at the
country by way of Chilkoot.

But Rasmunsen was clean grit, and at fifty cents found takers, who,
two days later, set his eggs down intact at Linderman.  But fifty
cents a pound is a thousand dollars a ton, and his fifteen hundred
pounds had exhausted his emergency fund and left him stranded at
the Tantalus point where each day he saw the fresh-whipsawed boats
departing for Dawson.  Further, a great anxiety brooded over the
camp where the boats were built.  Men worked frantically, early and
late, at the height of their endurance, caulking, nailing, and
pitching in a frenzy of haste for which adequate explanation was
not far to seek.  Each day the snow-line crept farther down the
bleak, rock-shouldered peaks, and gale followed gale, with sleet
and slush and snow, and in the eddies and quiet places young ice
formed and thickened through the fleeting hours.  And each morn,
toil-stiffened men turned wan faces across the lake to see if the
freeze-up had come.  For the freeze-up heralded the death of their
hope--the hope that they would be floating down the swift river ere
navigation closed on the chain of lakes.

To harrow Rasmunsen's soul further, he discovered three competitors
in the egg business.  It was true that one, a little German, had
gone broke and was himself forlornly back-tripping the last pack of
the portage; but the other two had boats nearly completed, and were
daily supplicating the god of merchants and traders to stay the
iron hand of winter for just another day.  But the iron hand closed
down over the land.  Men were being frozen in the blizzard which
swept Chilkoot, and Rasmunsen frosted his toes ere he was aware.
He found a chance to go passenger with his freight in a boat just
shoving off through the rubble, but two hundred hard cash, was
required, and he had no money.

"Ay tank you yust wait one leedle w'ile," said the Swedish boat-
builder, who had struck his Klondike right there and was wise
enough to know it--"one leedle w'ile und I make you a tam fine
skiff boat, sure Pete."

With this unpledged word to go on, Rasmunsen hit the back trail to
Crater Lake, where he fell in with two press correspondents whose
tangled baggage was strewn from Stone House, over across the Pass,
and as far as Happy Camp.

"Yes," he said with consequence.  "I've a thousand dozen eggs at
Linderman, and my boat's just about got the last seam caulked.
Consider myself in luck to get it.  Boats are at a premium, you
know, and none to be had."

Whereupon and almost with bodily violence the correspondents
clamoured to go with him, fluttered greenbacks before his eyes, and
spilled yellow twenties from hand to hand.  He could not hear of
it, but they over-persuaded him, and he reluctantly consented to
take them at three hundred apiece.  Also they pressed upon him the
passage money in advance.  And while they wrote to their respective
journals concerning the Good Samaritan with the thousand dozen
eggs, the Good Samaritan was hurrying back to the Swede at
Linderman.

"Here, you!  Gimme that boat!" was his salutation, his hand
jingling the correspondents' gold pieces and his eyes hungrily bent
upon the finished craft.

The Swede regarded him stolidly and shook his head.

"How much is the other fellow paying?  Three hundred?  Well, here's
four.  Take it."

He tried to press it upon him, but the man backed away.

"Ay tank not.  Ay say him get der skiff boat.  You yust wait--"

'Here's six hundred.  Last call.  Take it or leave it.  Tell 'm
it's a mistake.'

The Swede wavered.  "Ay tank yes," he finally said, and the last
Rasmunsen saw of him his vocabulary was going to wreck in a vain
effort to explain the mistake to the other fellows.

The German slipped and broke his ankle on the steep hogback above
Deep Lake, sold out his stock for a dollar a dozen, and with the
proceeds hired Indian packers to carry him back to Dyea.  But on
the morning Rasmunsen shoved off with his correspondents, his two
rivals followed suit.

'How many you got?" one of them, a lean little New Englander,
called out.

"One thousand dozen," Rasmunsen answered proudly.

"Huh!  I'll go you even stakes I beat you in with my eight
hundred."

The correspondents offered to lend him the money; but Rasmunsen
declined, and the Yankee closed with the remaining rival, a brawny
son of the sea and sailor of ships and things, who promised to show
them all a wrinkle or two when it came to cracking on.  And crack
on he did, with a large tarpaulin square-sail which pressed the bow
half under at every jump.  He was the first to run out of
Linderman, but, disdaining the portage, piled his loaded boat on
the rocks in the boiling rapids.  Rasmunsen and the Yankee, who
likewise had two passengers, portaged across on their backs and
then lined their empty boats down through the bad water to Bennett.

Bennett was a twenty-five-mile lake, narrow and deep, a funnel
between the mountains through which storms ever romped.  Rasmunsen
camped on the sand-pit at its head, where were many men and boats
bound north in the teeth of the Arctic winter.  He awoke in the
morning to find a piping gale from the south, which caught the
chill from the whited peaks and glacial valleys and blew as cold as
north wind ever blew.  But it was fair, and he also found the
Yankee staggering past the first bold headland with all sail set.
Boat after boat was getting under way, and the correspondents fell
to with enthusiasm.

"We'll catch him before Cariboo Crossing," they assured Rasmunsen,
as they ran up the sail and the Alma took the first icy spray over
her bow.

Now Rasmunsen all his life had been prone to cowardice on water,
but he clung to the kicking steering-oar with set face and
determined jaw.  His thousand dozen were there in the boat before
his eyes, safely secured beneath the correspondents' baggage, and
somehow, before his eyes were the little cottage and the mortgage
for a thousand dollars.

It was bitter cold.  Now and again he hauled in the steering-sweep
and put out a fresh one while his passengers chopped the ice from
the blade.  Wherever the spray struck, it turned instantly to
frost, and the dipping boom of the spritsail was quickly fringed
with icicles.  The Alma strained and hammered through the big seas
till the seams and butts began to spread, but in lieu of bailing
the correspondents chopped ice and flung it overboard.  There was
no let-up.  The mad race with winter was on, and the boats tore
along in a desperate string.

"W-w-we can't stop to save our souls!" one of the correspondents
chattered, from cold, not fright.

"That's right!  Keep her down the middle, old man!" the other
encouraged.

Rasmunsen replied with an idiotic grin.  The iron-bound shores were
in a lather of foam, and even down the middle the only hope was to
keep running away from the big seas.  To lower sail was to be
overtaken and swamped.  Time and again they passed boats pounding
among the rocks, and once they saw one on the edge of the breakers
about to strike.  A little craft behind them, with two men, jibed
over and turned bottom up.

"W-w-watch out, old man," cried he of the chattering teeth.

Rasmunsen grinned and tightened his aching grip on the sweep.
Scores of times had the send of the sea caught the big square stern
of the Alma and thrown her off from dead before it till the after
leach of the spritsail fluttered hollowly, and each time, and only
with all his strength, had he forced her back.  His grin by then
had become fixed, and it disturbed the correspondents to look at
him.

They roared down past an isolated rock a hundred yards from shore.
From its wave-drenched top a man shrieked wildly, for the instant
cutting the storm with his voice.  But the next instant the Alma
was by, and the rock growing a black speck in the troubled froth.

"That settles the Yankee!  Where's the sailor?" shouted one of his
passengers.

Rasmunsen shot a glance over his shoulder at a black square-sail.
He had seen it leap up out of the grey to windward, and for an
hour, off and on, had been watching it grow.  The sailor had
evidently repaired damages and was making up for lost time.

"Look at him come!"

Both passengers stopped chopping ice to watch.  Twenty miles of
Bennett were behind them--room and to spare for the sea to toss up
its mountains toward the sky.  Sinking and soaring like a storm-
god, the sailor drove by them.  The huge sail seemed to grip the
boat from the crests of the waves, to tear it bodily out of the
water, and fling it crashing and smothering down into the yawning
troughs.

"The sea'll never catch him!"

"But he'll r-r-run her nose under!"

Even as they spoke, the black tarpaulin swooped from sight behind a
big comber.  The next wave rolled over the spot, and the next, but
the boat did not reappear.  The Alma rushed by the place.  A little
riffraff of oats and boxes was seen.  An arm thrust up and a shaggy
head broke surface a score of yards away.

For a time there was silence.  As the end of the lake came in
sight, the waves began to leap aboard with such steady recurrence
that the correspondents no longer chopped ice but flung the water
out with buckets.  Even this would not do, and, after a shouted
conference with Rasmunsen, they attacked the baggage.  Flour,
bacon, beans, blankets, cooking-stove, ropes, odds and ends,
everything they could get hands on, flew overboard.  The boat
acknowledged it at once, taking less water and rising more
buoyantly.

"That'll do!" Rasmunsen called sternly, as they applied themselves
to the top layer of eggs.

"The h-hell it will!" answered the shivering one, savagely.  With
the exception of their notes, films, and cameras, they had
sacrificed their outfit.  He bent over, laid hold of an egg-box,
and began to worry it out from under the lashing.

"Drop it!  Drop it, I say!"

Rasmunsen had managed to draw his revolver, and with the crook of
his arm over the sweep head, was taking aim.  The correspondent
stood up on the thwart, balancing back and forth, his face twisted
with menace and speechless anger.

"My God!"

So cried his brother correspondent, hurling himself, face downward,
into the bottom of the boat.  The Alma, under the divided attention
of Rasmunsen, had been caught by a great mass of water and whirled
around.  The after leach hollowed, the sail emptied and jibed, and
the boom, sweeping with terrific force across the boat, carried the
angry correspondent overboard with a broken back.  Mast and sail
had gone over the side as well.  A drenching sea followed, as the
boat lost headway, and Rasmunsen sprang to the bailing bucket

Several boats hurtled past them in the next half-hour,--small
boats, boats of their own size, boats afraid, unable to do aught
but run madly on.  Then a ten-ton barge, at imminent risk of
destruction, lowered sail to windward and lumbered down upon them.

"Keep off!  Keep off!" Rasmunsen screamed.

But his low gunwale ground against the heavy craft, and the
remaining correspondent clambered aboard.  Rasmunsen was over the
eggs like a cat and in the bow of the Alma, striving with numb
fingers to bend the hauling-lines together.

"Come on!" a red-whiskered man yelled at him.

"I've a thousand dozen eggs here," he shouted back.  "Gimme a tow!
I'll pay you!"

"Come on!" they howled in chorus.

A big whitecap broke just beyond, washing over the barge and
leaving the Alma half swamped.  The men cast off, cursing him as
they ran up their sail.  Rasmunsen cursed back and fell to bailing.
The mast and sail, like a sea anchor, still fast by the halyards,
held the boat head on to wind and sea and gave him a chance to
fight the water out.

Three hours later, numbed, exhausted, blathering like a lunatic,
but still bailing, he went ashore on an ice-strewn beach near
Cariboo Crossing.  Two men, a government courier and a half-breed
voyageur, dragged him out of the surf, saved his cargo, and beached
the Alma.  They were paddling out of the country in a Peterborough,
and gave him shelter for the night in their storm-bound camp.  Next
morning they departed, but he elected to stay by his eggs.  And
thereafter the name and fame of the man with the thousand dozen
eggs began to spread through the land.  Gold-seekers who made in
before the freeze-up carried the news of his coming.  Grizzled old-
timers of Forty Mile and Circle City, sour doughs with leathern
jaws and bean-calloused stomachs, called up dream memories of
chickens and green things at mention of his name.  Dyea and Skaguay
took an interest in his being, and questioned his progress from
every man who came over the passes, while Dawson--golden,
omeletless Dawson--fretted and worried, and way-laid every chance
arrival for word of him.

But of this Rasmunsen knew nothing.  The day after the wreck he
patched up the Alma and pulled out.  A cruel east wind blew in his
teeth from Tagish, but he got the oars over the side and bucked
manfully into it, though half the time he was drifting backward and
chopping ice from the blades.  According to the custom of the
country, he was driven ashore at Windy Arm; three times on Tagish
saw him swamped and beached; and Lake Marsh held him at the freeze-
up.  The Alma was crushed in the jamming of the floes, but the eggs
were intact.  These he back-tripped two miles across the ice to the
shore, where he built a cache, which stood for years after and was
pointed out by men who knew.

Half a thousand frozen miles stretched between him and Dawson, and
the waterway was closed.  But Rasmunsen, with a peculiar tense look
in his face, struck back up the lakes on foot.  What he suffered on
that lone trip, with nought but a single blanket, an axe, and a
handful of beans, is not given to ordinary mortals to know.  Only
the Arctic adventurer may understand.  Suffice that he was caught
in a blizzard on Chilkoot and left two of his toes with the surgeon
at Sheep Camp.  Yet he stood on his feet and washed dishes in the
scullery of the PAWONA to the Puget Sound, and from there passed
coal on a P. S. boat to San Francisco.

It was a haggard, unkempt man who limped across the shining office
floor to raise a second mortgage from the bank people.  His hollow
cheeks betrayed themselves through the scraggy beard, and his eyes
seemed to have retired into deep caverns where they burned with
cold fires.  His hands were grained from exposure and hard work,
and the nails were rimmed with tight-packed dirt and coal-dust.  He
spoke vaguely of eggs and ice-packs, winds and tides; but when they
declined to let him have more than a second thousand, his talk
became incoherent, concerning itself chiefly with the price of dogs
and dog-food, and such things as snowshoes and moccasins and winter
trails.  They let him have fifteen hundred, which was more than the
cottage warranted, and breathed easier when he scrawled his
signature and passed out the door.

Two weeks later he went over Chilkoot with three dog sleds of five
dogs each.  One team he drove, the two Indians with him driving the
others.  At Lake Marsh they broke out the cache and loaded up.  But
there was no trail.  He was the first in over the ice, and to him
fell the task of packing the snow and hammering away through the
rough river jams.  Behind him he often observed a camp-fire smoke
trickling thinly up through the quiet air, and he wondered why the
people did not overtake him.  For he was a stranger to the land and
did not understand.  Nor could he understand his Indians when they
tried to explain.  This they conceived to be a hardship, but when
they balked and refused to break camp of mornings, he drove them to
their work at pistol point.

When he slipped through an ice bridge near the White Horse and
froze his foot, tender yet and oversensitive from the previous
freezing, the Indians looked for him to lie up.  But he sacrificed
a blanket, and, with his foot incased in an enormous moccasin, big
as a water-bucket, continued to take his regular turn with the
front sled.  Here was the cruellest work, and they respected him,
though on the side they rapped their foreheads with their knuckles
and significantly shook their heads.  One night they tried to run
away, but the zip-zip of his bullets in the snow brought them back,
snarling but convinced.  Whereupon, being only savage Chilkat men,
they put their heads together to kill him; but he slept like a cat,
and, waking or sleeping, the chance never came.  Often they tried
to tell him the import of the smoke wreath in the rear, but he
could not comprehend and grew suspicious of them.  And when they
sulked or shirked, he was quick to let drive at them between the
eyes, and quick to cool their heated souls with sight of his ready
revolver.

And so it went--with mutinous men, wild dogs, and a trail that
broke the heart.  He fought the men to stay with him, fought the
dogs to keep them away from the eggs, fought the ice, the cold, and
the pain of his foot, which would not heal.  As fast as the young
tissue renewed, it was bitten and scared by the frost, so that a
running sore developed, into which he could almost shove his fist.
In the mornings, when he first put his weight upon it, his head
went dizzy, and he was near to fainting from the pain; but later on
in the day it usually grew numb, to recommence when he crawled into
his blankets and tried to sleep.  Yet he, who had been a clerk and
sat at a desk all his days, toiled till the Indians were exhausted,
and even out-worked the dogs.  How hard he worked, how much he
suffered, he did not know.  Being a man of the one idea, now that
the idea had come, it mastered him.  In the foreground of his
consciousness was Dawson, in the background his thousand dozen
eggs, and midway between the two his ego fluttered, striving always
to draw them together to a glittering golden point.  This golden
point was the five thousand dollars, the consummation of the idea
and the point of departure for whatever new idea might present
itself.  For the rest, he was a mere automaton.  He was unaware of
other things, seeing them as through a glass darkly, and giving
them no thought.  The work of his hands he did with machine-like
wisdom; likewise the work of his head.  So the look on his face
grew very tense, till even the Indians were afraid of it, and
marvelled at the strange white man who had made them slaves and
forced them to toil with such foolishness.

Then came a snap on Lake Le Barge, when the cold of outer space
smote the tip of the planet, and the force ranged sixty and odd
degrees below zero.  Here, labouring with open mouth that he might
breathe more freely, he chilled his lungs, and for the rest of the
trip he was troubled with a dry, hacking cough, especially
irritable in smoke of camp or under stress of undue exertion.  On
the Thirty Mile river he found much open water, spanned by
precarious ice bridges and fringed with narrow rim ice, tricky and
uncertain.  The rim ice was impossible to reckon on, and he dared
it without reckoning, falling back on his revolver when his drivers
demurred.  But on the ice bridges, covered with snow though they
were, precautions could be taken.  These they crossed on their
snowshoes, with long poles, held crosswise in their hands, to which
to cling in case of accident.  Once over, the dogs were called to
follow.  And on such a bridge, where the absence of the centre ice
was masked by the snow, one of the Indians met his end.  He went
through as quickly and neatly as a knife through thin cream, and
the current swept him from view down under the stream ice.

That night his mate fled away through the pale moonlight, Rasmunsen
futilely puncturing the silence with his revolver--a thing that he
handled with more celerity than cleverness.  Thirty-six hours later
the Indian made a police camp on the Big Salmon.

"Um--um--um funny mans--what you call?--top um head all loose," the
interpreter explained to the puzzled captain.  "Eh?  Yep, clazy,
much clazy mans.  Eggs, eggs, all a time eggs--savvy?  Come bime-
by."

It was several days before Rasmunsen arrived, the three sleds
lashed together, and all the dogs in a single team.  It was
awkward, and where the going was bad he was compelled to back-trip
it sled by sled, though he managed most of the time, through
herculean efforts, to bring all along on the one haul.  He did not
seem moved when the captain of police told him his man was hitting
the high places for Dawson, and was by that time, probably, half-
way between Selkirk and Stewart.  Nor did he appear interested when
informed that the police had broken the trail as far as Pelly; for
he had attained to a fatalistic acceptance of all natural
dispensations, good or ill.  But when they told him that Dawson was
in the bitter clutch of famine, he smiled, threw the harness on his
dogs, and pulled out.

But it was at his next halt that the mystery of the smoke was
explained.  With the word at Big Salmon that the trail was broken
to Pelly, there was no longer any need for the smoke wreath to
linger in his wake; and Rasmunsen, crouching over lonely fire, saw
a motley string of sleds go by.  First came the courier and the
half-breed who had hauled him out from Bennett; then mail-carriers
for Circle City, two sleds of them, and a mixed following of
ingoing Klondikers.  Dogs and men were fresh and fat, while
Rasmunsen and his brutes were jaded and worn down to the skin and
bone.  They of the smoke wreath had travelled one day in three,
resting and reserving their strength for the dash to come when
broken trail was met with; while each day he had plunged and
floundered forward, breaking the spirit of his dogs and robbing
them of their mettle.

As for himself, he was unbreakable.  They thanked him kindly for
his efforts in their behalf, those fat, fresh men,--thanked him
kindly, with broad grins and ribald laughter; and now, when he
understood, he made no answer.  Nor did he cherish silent
bitterness.  It was immaterial.  The idea--the fact behind the
idea--was not changed.  Here he was and his thousand dozen; there
was Dawson; the problem was unaltered.

At the Little Salmon, being short of dog food, the dogs got into
his grub, and from there to Selkirk he lived on beans--coarse,
brown beans, big beans, grossly nutritive, which griped his stomach
and doubled him up at two-hour intervals.  But the Factor at
Selkirk had a notice on the door of the Post to the effect that no
steamer had been up the Yukon for two years, and in consequence
grub was beyond price.  He offered to swap flour, however, at the
rate of a cupful of each egg, but Rasmunsen shook his head and hit
the trail.  Below the Post he managed to buy frozen horse hide for
the dogs, the horses having been slain by the Chilkat cattle men,
and the scraps and offal preserved by the Indians.  He tackled the
hide himself, but the hair worked into the bean sores of his mouth,
and was beyond endurance.

Here at Selkirk he met the forerunners of the hungry exodus of
Dawson, and from there on they crept over the trail, a dismal
throng.  "No grub!" was the song they sang.  "No grub, and had to
go."  "Everybody holding candles for a rise in the spring."  "Flour
dollar 'n a half a pound, and no sellers."

"Eggs?" one of them answered.  "Dollar apiece, but there ain't
none."

Rasmunsen made a rapid calculation.  "Twelve thousand dollars," he
said aloud.

"Hey?" the man asked.

"Nothing," he answered, and MUSHED the dogs along.

When he arrived at Stewart River, seventy from Dawson, five of his
dogs were gone, and the remainder were falling in the traces.  He,
also, was in the traces, hauling with what little strength was left
in him.  Even then he was barely crawling along ten miles a day.
His cheek-bones and nose, frost-bitten again and again, were turned
bloody-black and hideous.  The thumb, which was separated from the
fingers by the gee-pole, had likewise been nipped and gave him
great pain.  The monstrous moccasin still incased his foot, and
strange pains were beginning to rack the leg.  At Sixty Mile, the
last beans, which he had been rationing for some time, were
finished; yet he steadfastly refused to touch the eggs.  He could
not reconcile his mind to the legitimacy of it, and staggered and
fell along the way to Indian River.  Here a fresh-killed moose and
an open-handed old-timer gave him and his dogs new strength, and at
Ainslie's he felt repaid for it all when a stampede, ripe from
Dawson in five hours, was sure he could get a dollar and a quarter
for every egg he possessed.

He came up the steep bank by the Dawson barracks with fluttering
heart and shaking knees.  The dogs were so weak that he was forced
to rest them, and, waiting, he leaned limply against the gee-pole.
A man, an eminently decorous-looking man, came sauntering by in a
great bearskin coat.  He glanced at Rasmunsen curiously, then
stopped and ran a speculative eye over the dogs and the three
lashed sleds.

"What you got?" he asked.

"Eggs," Rasmunsen answered huskily, hardly able to pitch his voice
above a whisper.

"Eggs!  Whoopee!  Whoopee!"  He sprang up into the air, gyrated
madly, and finished with half-a-dozen war steps.  "You don't say--
all of 'em?"

"All of 'em."

"Say, you must be the Egg Man."  He walked around and viewed
Rasmunsen from the other side.  "Come, now, ain't you the Egg Man?"

Rasmunsen didn't know, but supposed he was, and the man sobered
down a bit.

"What d'ye expect to get for 'em?" he asked cautiously.

Rasmunsen became audacious. "Dollar 'n a half," he said.

"Done!" the man came back promptly.  "Gimme a dozen."

"I--I mean a dollar 'n a half apiece," Rasmunsen hesitatingly
explained.

"Sure.  I heard you.  Make it two dozen.  Here's the dust."

The man pulled out a healthy gold sack the size of a small sausage
and knocked it negligently against the gee-pole.  Rasmunsen felt a
strange trembling in the pit of his stomach, a tickling of the
nostrils, and an almost overwhelming desire to sit down and cry.
But a curious, wide-eyed crowd was beginning to collect, and man
after man was calling out for eggs.  He was without scales, but the
man with the bearskin coat fetched a pair and obligingly weighed in
the dust while Rasmunsen passed out the goods.  Soon there was a
pushing and shoving and shouldering, and a great clamour.
Everybody wanted to buy and to be served first.  And as the
excitement grew, Rasmunsen cooled down.  This would never do.
There must be something behind the fact of their buying so eagerly.
It would be wiser if he rested first and sized up the market.
Perhaps eggs were worth two dollars apiece.  Anyway, whenever he
wished to sell, he was sure of a dollar and a half.  "Stop!" he
cried, when a couple of hundred had been sold.  "No more now.  I'm
played out.  I've got to get a cabin, and then you can come and see
me."

A groan went up at this, but the man with the bearskin coat
approved.  Twenty-four of the frozen eggs went rattling in his
capacious pockets, and he didn't care whether the rest of the town
ate or not.  Besides, he could see Rasmunsen was on his last legs.

"There's a cabin right around the second corner from the Monte
Carlo," he told him--"the one with the sody-bottle window.  It
ain't mine, but I've got charge of it.  Rents for ten a day and
cheap for the money.  You move right in, and I'll see you later.
Don't forget the sody-bottle window."

"Tra-la-loo!" he called back a moment later.  "I'm goin' up the
hill to eat eggs and dream of home."

On his way to the cabin, Rasmunsen recollected he was hungry and
bought a small supply of provisions at the N. A. T. & T. store--
also a beefsteak at the butcher shop and dried salmon for the dogs.
He found the cabin without difficulty, and left the dogs in the
harness while he started the fire and got the coffee under way.

A dollar 'n a half apiece--one thousand dozen--eighteen thousand
dollars!" he kept muttering it to himself, over and over, as he
went about his work.

As he flopped the steak into the frying-pan the door opened.  He
turned.  It was the man with the bearskin coat.  He seemed to come
in with determination, as though bound on some explicit errand, but
as he looked at Rasmunsen an expression of perplexity came into his
face.

"I say--now I say--" he began, then halted.

Rasmunsen wondered if he wanted the rent.

"I say, damn it, you know, them eggs is bad."

Rasmunsen staggered.  He felt as though some one had struck him an
astounding blow between the eyes.  The walls of the cabin reeled
and tilted up.  He put out his hand to steady himself and rested it
on the stove.  The sharp pain and the smell of the burning flesh
brought him back to himself.

"I see," he said slowly, fumbling in his pocket for the sack.  "You
want your money back."

"It ain't the money," the man said, "but hain't you got any eggs--
good?"

Rasmunsen shook his head.  "You'd better take the money."

But the man refused and backed away.  "I'll come back," he said,
"when you've taken stock, and get what's comin'."

Rasmunsen rolled the chopping-block into the cabin and carried in
the eggs.  He went about it quite calmly.  He took up the hand-axe,
and, one by one, chopped the eggs in half.  These halves he
examined carefully and let fall to the floor.  At first he sampled
from the different cases, then deliberately emptied one case at a
time.  The heap on the floor grew larger.  The coffee boiled over
and the smoke of the burning beefsteak filled the cabin.  He
chopped steadfastly and monotonously till the last case was
finished.

Somebody knocked at the door, knocked again, and let himself in.

"What a mess!" he remarked, as he paused and surveyed the scene.

The severed eggs were beginning to thaw in the heat of the stove,
and a miserable odour was growing stronger.

"Must a-happened on the steamer," he suggested.

Rasmunsen looked at him long and blankly.

"I'm Murray, Big Jim Murray, everybody knows me," the man
volunteered.  "I'm just hearin' your eggs is rotten, and I'm
offerin' you two hundred for the batch.  They ain't good as salmon,
but still they're fair scoffin's for dogs."

Rasmunsen seemed turned to stone.  He did not move.  "You go to
hell," he said passionlessly.

"Now just consider.  I pride myself it's a decent price for a mess
like that, and it's better 'n nothin'.  Two hundred.  What you
say?"

"You go to hell," Rasmunsen repeated softly, "and get out of here."

Murray gaped with a great awe, then went out carefully, backward,
with his eyes fixed an the other's face.

Rasmunsen followed him out and turned the dogs loose.  He threw
them all the salmon he had bought, and coiled a sled-lashing up in
his hand.  Then he re-entered the cabin and drew the latch in after
him.  The smoke from the cindered steak made his eyes smart.  He
stood on the bunk, passed the lashing over the ridge-pole, and
measured the swing-off with his eye.  It did not seem to satisfy,
for he put the stool on the bunk and climbed upon the stool.  He
drove a noose in the end of the lashing and slipped his head
through.  The other end he made fast.  Then he kicked the stool out
from under.



THE MARRIAGE OF LIT-LIT



When John Fox came into a country where whisky freezes solid and
may be used as a paper-weight for a large part of the year, he came
without the ideals and illusions that usually hamper the progress
of more delicately nurtured adventurers.  Born and reared on the
frontier fringe of the United States, he took with him into Canada
a primitive cast of mind, an elemental simplicity and grip on
things, as it were, that insured him immediate success in his new
career.  From a mere servant of the Hudson Bay Company, driving a
paddle with the voyageurs and carrying goods on his back across the
portages, he swiftly rose to a Factorship and took charge of a
trading post at Fort Angelus.

Here, because of his elemental simplicity, he took to himself a
native wife, and, by reason of the connubial bliss that followed,
he escaped the unrest and vain longings that curse the days of more
fastidious men, spoil their work, and conquer them in the end.  He
lived contentedly, was at single purposes with the business he was
set there to do, and achieved a brilliant record in the service of
the Company.  About this time his wife died, was claimed by her
people, and buried with savage circumstance in a tin trunk in the
top of a tree.

Two sons she had borne him, and when the Company promoted him, he
journeyed with them still deeper into the vastness of the North-
West Territory to a place called Sin Rock, where he took charge of
a new post in a more important fur field.  Here he spent several
lonely and depressing months, eminently disgusted with the
unprepossessing appearance of the Indian maidens, and greatly
worried by his growing sons who stood in need of a mother's care.
Then his eyes chanced upon Lit-lit.

"Lit-lit--well, she is Lit-lit," was the fashion in which he
despairingly described her to his chief clerk, Alexander McLean.

McLean was too fresh from his Scottish upbringing--"not dry behind
the ears yet," John Fox put it--to take to the marriage customs of
the country.  Nevertheless he was not averse to the Factor's
imperilling his own immortal soul, and, especially, feeling an
ominous attraction himself for Lit-lit, he was sombrely content to
clinch his own soul's safety by seeing her married to the Factor.

Nor is it to be wondered that McLean's austere Scotch soul stood in
danger of being thawed in the sunshine of Lit-lit's eyes.  She was
pretty, and slender, and willowy; without the massive face and
temperamental stolidity of the average squaw.  "Lit-lit," so called
from her fashion, even as a child, of being fluttery, of darting
about from place to place like a butterfly, of being inconsequent
and merry, and of laughing as lightly as she darted and danced
about.

Lit-lit was the daughter of Snettishane, a prominent chief in the
tribe, by a half-breed mother, and to him the Factor fared casually
one summer day to open negotiations of marriage.  He sat with the
chief in the smoke of a mosquito smudge before his lodge, and
together they talked about everything under the sun, or, at least,
everything that in the Northland is under the sun, with the sole
exception of marriage.  John Fox had come particularly to talk of
marriage; Snettishane knew it, and John Fox knew he knew it,
wherefore the subject was religiously avoided.  This is alleged to
be Indian subtlety.  In reality it is transparent simplicity.

The hours slipped by, and Fox and Snettishane smoked interminable
pipes, looking each other in the eyes with a guilelessness superbly
histrionic.  In the mid-afternoon McLean and his brother clerk,
McTavish, strolled past, innocently uninterested, on their way to
the river.  When they strolled back again an hour later, Fox and
Snettishane had attained to a ceremonious discussion of the
condition and quality of the gunpowder and bacon which the Company
was offering in trade.  Meanwhile Lit-lit, divining the Factor's
errand, had crept in under the rear wall of the lodge, and through
the front flap was peeping out at the two logomachists by the
mosquito smudge.  She was flushed and happy-eyed, proud that no
less a man than the Factor (who stood next to God in the Northland
hierarchy) had singled her out, femininely curious to see at close
range what manner of man he was.  Sunglare on the ice, camp smoke,
and weather beat had burned his face to a copper-brown, so that her
father was as fair as he, while she was fairer.  She was remotely
glad of this, and more immediately glad that he was large and
strong, though his great black beard half frightened her, it was so
strange.

Being very young, she was unversed in the ways of men.  Seventeen
times she had seen the sun travel south and lose itself beyond the
sky-line, and seventeen times she had seen it travel back again and
ride the sky day and night till there was no night at all.  And
through these years she had been cherished jealously by
Snettishane, who stood between her and all suitors, listening
disdainfully to the young hunters as they bid for her hand, and
turning them away as though she were beyond price.  Snettishane was
mercenary.  Lit-lit was to him an investment.  She represented so
much capital, from which he expected to receive, not a certain
definite interest, but an incalculable interest.

And having thus been reared in a manner as near to that of the
nunnery as tribal conditions would permit, it was with a great and
maidenly anxiety that she peeped out at the man who had surely come
for her, at the husband who was to teach her all that was yet
unlearned of life, at the masterful being whose word was to be her
law, and who was to mete and bound her actions and comportment for
the rest of her days.

But, peeping through the front flap of the lodge, flushed and
thrilling at the strange destiny reaching out for her, she grew
disappointed as the day wore along, and the Factor and her father
still talked pompously of matters concerning other things and not
pertaining to marriage things at all.  As the sun sank lower and
lower toward the north and midnight approached, the Factor began
making unmistakable preparations for departure.  As he turned to
stride away Lit-lit's heart sank; but it rose again as he halted,
half turning on one heel.

"Oh, by the way, Snettishane," he said, "I want a squaw to wash for
me and mend my clothes."

Snettishane grunted and suggested Wanidani, who was an old woman
and toothless.

"No, no," interposed the Factor.  "What I want is a wife.  I've
been kind of thinking about it, and the thought just struck me that
you might know of some one that would suit."

Snettishane looked interested, whereupon the Factor retraced his
steps, casually and carelessly to linger and discuss this new and
incidental topic.

"Kattou?" suggested Snettishane.

"She has but one eye," objected the Factor.

"Laska?"

"Her knees be wide apart when she stands upright.  Kips, your
biggest dog, can leap between her knees when she stands upright."

"Senatee?" went on the imperturbable Snettishane.

But John Fox feigned anger, crying:  "What foolishness is this?  Am
I old, that thou shouldst mate me with old women?  Am I toothless?
lame of leg? blind of eye?  Or am I poor that no bright-eyed maiden
may look with favour upon me?  Behold!  I am the Factor, both rich
and great, a power in the land, whose speech makes men tremble and
is obeyed!"

Snettishane was inwardly pleased, though his sphinx-like visage
never relaxed.  He was drawing the Factor, and making him break
ground.  Being a creature so elemental as to have room for but one
idea at a time, Snettishane could pursue that one idea a greater
distance than could John Fox.  For John Fox, elemental as he was,
was still complex enough to entertain several glimmering ideas at a
time, which debarred him from pursuing the one as single-heartedly
or as far as did the chief.

Snettishane calmly continued calling the roster of eligible
maidens, which, name by name, as fast as uttered, were stamped
ineligible by John Fox, with specified objections appended.  Again
he gave it up and started to return to the Fort.  Snettishane
watched him go, making no effort to stop him, but seeing him, in
the end, stop himself.

"Come to think of it," the Factor remarked, "we both of us forgot
Lit-lit.  Now I wonder if she'll suit me?"

Snettishane met the suggestion with a mirthless face, behind the
mask of which his soul grinned wide.  It was a distinct victory.
Had the Factor gone but one step farther, perforce Snettishane
would himself have mentioned the name of Lit-lit, but--the Factor
had not gone that one step farther.

The chief was non-committal concerning Lit-lit's suitability, till
he drove the white man into taking the next step in order of
procedure.

"Well," the Factor meditated aloud, "the only way to find out is to
make a try of it."  He raised his voice.  "So I will give for Lit-
lit ten blankets and three pounds of tobacco which is good
tobacco."

Snettishane replied with a gesture which seemed to say that all the
blankets and tobacco in all the world could not compensate him for
the loss of Lit-lit and her manifold virtues.  When pressed by the
Factor to set a price, he coolly placed it at five hundred
blankets, ten guns, fifty pounds of tobacco, twenty scarlet cloths,
ten bottles of rum, a music-box, and lastly the good-will and best
offices of the Factor, with a place by his fire.

The Factor apparently suffered a stroke of apoplexy, which stroke
was successful in reducing the blankets to two hundred and in
cutting out the place by the fire--an unheard-of condition in the
marriages of white men with the daughters of the soil.  In the end,
after three hours more of chaffering, they came to an agreement.
For Lit-lit Snettishane was to receive one hundred blankets, five
pounds of tobacco, three guns, and a bottle of rum, goodwill and
best offices included, which according to John Fox, was ten
blankets and a gun more than she was worth.  And as he went home
through the wee sma' hours, the three-o'clock sun blazing in the
due north-east, he was unpleasantly aware that Snettishane had
bested him over the bargain.

Snettishane, tired and victorious, sought his bed, and discovered
Lit-lit before she could escape from the lodge.

He grunted knowingly:  "Thou hast seen.  Thou has heard.  Wherefore
it be plain to thee thy father's very great wisdom and
understanding.  I have made for thee a great match.  Heed my words
and walk in the way of my words, go when I say go, come when I bid
thee come, and we shall grow fat with the wealth of this big white
man who is a fool according to his bigness."

The next day no trading was done at the store.  The Factor opened
whisky before breakfast, to the delight of McLean and McTavish,
gave his dogs double rations, and wore his best moccasins.  Outside
the Fort preparations were under way for a POTLATCH.  Potlatch
means "a giving," and John Fox's intention was to signalize his
marriage with Lit-lit by a potlatch as generous as she was good-
looking.  In the afternoon the whole tribe gathered to the feast.
Men, women, children, and dogs gorged to repletion, nor was there
one person, even among the chance visitors and stray hunters from
other tribes, who failed to receive some token of the bridegroom's
largess.

Lit-lit, tearfully shy and frightened, was bedecked by her bearded
husband with a new calico dress, splendidly beaded moccasins, a
gorgeous silk handkerchief over her raven hair, a purple scarf
about her throat, brass ear-rings and finger-rings, and a whole
pint of pinchbeck jewellery, including a Waterbury watch.
Snettishane could scarce contain himself at the spectacle, but
watching his chance drew her aside from the feast.

"Not this night, nor the next night," he began ponderously, "but in
the nights to come, when I shall call like a raven by the river
bank, it is for thee to rise up from thy big husband, who is a
fool, and come to me.

"Nay, nay," he went on hastily, at sight of the dismay in her face
at turning her back upon her wonderful new life.  "For no sooner
shall this happen than thy big husband, who is a fool, will come
wailing to my lodge.  Then it is for thee to wail likewise,
claiming that this thing is not well, and that the other thing thou
dost not like, and that to be the wife of the Factor is more than
thou didst bargain for, only wilt thou be content with more
blankets, and more tobacco, and more wealth of various sorts for
thy poor old father, Snettishane.  Remember well, when I call in
the night, like a raven, from the river bank."

Lit-lit nodded; for to disobey her father was a peril she knew
well; and, furthermore, it was a little thing he asked, a short
separation from the Factor, who would know only greater gladness at
having her back.  She returned to the feast, and, midnight being
well at hand, the Factor sought her out and led her away to the
Fort amid joking and outcry, in which the squaws were especially
conspicuous.

Lit-lit quickly found that married life with the head-man of a fort
was even better than she had dreamed.  No longer did she have to
fetch wood and water and wait hand and foot upon cantankerous
menfolk.  For the first time in her life she could lie abed till
breakfast was on the table.  And what a bed!--clean and soft, and
comfortable as no bed she had ever known.  And such food!  Flour,
cooked into biscuits, hot-cakes and bread, three times a day and
every day, and all one wanted!  Such prodigality was hardly
believable.

To add to her contentment, the Factor was cunningly kind.  He had
buried one wife, and he knew how to drive with a slack rein that
went firm only on occasion, and then went very firm.  "Lit-lit is
boss of this place," he announced significantly at the table the
morning after the wedding.  "What she says goes.  Understand?"  And
McLean and McTavish understood.  Also, they knew that the Factor
had a heavy hand.

But Lit-lit did not take advantage.  Taking a leaf from the book of
her husband, she at once assumed charge of his own growing sons,
giving them added comforts and a measure of freedom like to that
which he gave her.  The two sons were loud in the praise of their
new mother; McLean and McTavish lifted their voices; and the Factor
bragged of the joys of matrimony till the story of her good
behaviour and her husband's satisfaction became the property of all
the dwellers in the Sin Rock district.

Whereupon Snettishane, with visions of his incalculable interest
keeping him awake of nights, thought it time to bestir himself.  On
the tenth night of her wedded life Lit-lit was awakened by the
croaking of a raven, and she knew that Snettishane was waiting for
her by the river bank.  In her great happiness she had forgotten
her pact, and now it came back to her with behind it all the
childish terror of her father.  For a time she lay in fear and
trembling, loath to go, afraid to stay.  But in the end the Factor
won the silent victory, and his kindness plus his great muscles and
square jaw, nerved her to disregard Snettishane's call.

But in the morning she arose very much afraid, and went about her
duties in momentary fear of her father's coming.  As the day wore
along, however, she began to recover her spirits.  John Fox,
soundly berating McLean and McTavish for some petty dereliction of
duty, helped her to pluck up courage.  She tried not to let him go
out of her sight, and when she followed him into the huge cache and
saw him twirling and tossing great bales around as though they were
feather pillows, she felt strengthened in her disobedience to her
father.  Also (it was her first visit to the warehouse, and Sin
Rock was the chief distributing point to several chains of lesser
posts), she was astounded at the endlessness of the wealth there
stored away.

This sight and the picture in her mind's eye of the bare lodge of
Snettishane, put all doubts at rest.  Yet she capped her conviction
by a brief word with one of her step-sons.  "White daddy good?" was
what she asked, and the boy answered that his father was the best
man he had ever known.  That night the raven croaked again.  On the
night following the croaking was more persistent.  It awoke the
Factor, who tossed restlessly for a while.  Then he said aloud,
"Damn that raven," and Lit-lit laughed quietly under the blankets.

In the morning, bright and early, Snettishane put in an ominous
appearance and was set to breakfast in the kitchen with Wanidani.
He refused "squaw food," and a little later bearded his son-in-law
in the store where the trading was done.  Having learned, he said,
that his daughter was such a jewel, he had come for more blankets,
more tobacco, and more guns--especially more guns.  He had
certainly been cheated in her price, he held, and he had come for
justice.  But the Factor had neither blankets nor justice to spare.
Whereupon he was informed that Snettishane had seen the missionary
at Three Forks, who had notified him that such marriages were not
made in heaven, and that it was his father's duty to demand his
daughter back.

"I am good Christian man now," Snettishane concluded.  "I want my
Lit-lit to go to heaven."

The Factor's reply was short and to the point; for he directed his
father-in-law to go to the heavenly antipodes, and by the scruff of
the neck and the slack of the blanket propelled him on that trail
as far as the door.

But Snettishane sneaked around and in by the kitchen, cornering
Lit-lit in the great living-room of the Fort.

"Mayhap thou didst sleep over-sound last night when I called by the
river bank," he began, glowering darkly.

"Nay, I was awake and heard."  Her heart was beating as though it
would choke her, but she went on steadily, "And the night before I
was awake and heard, and yet again the night before."

And thereat, out of her great happiness and out of the fear that it
might be taken from her, she launched into an original and glowing
address upon the status and rights of woman--the first new-woman
lecture delivered north of Fifty-three.

But it fell on unheeding ears.  Snettishane was still in the dark
ages.  As she paused for breath, he said threateningly, "To-night I
shall call again like the raven."

At this moment the Factor entered the room and again helped
Snettishane on his way to the heavenly antipodes.

That night the raven croaked more persistently than ever.  Lit-lit,
who was a light sleeper, heard and smiled.  John Fox tossed
restlessly.  Then he awoke and tossed about with greater
restlessness.  He grumbled and snorted, swore under his breath and
over his breath, and finally flung out of bed.  He groped his way
to the great living-room, and from the rack took down a loaded
shot-gun--loaded with bird-shot, left therein by the careless
McTavish.

The Factor crept carefully out of the Fort and down to the river.
The croaking had ceased, but he stretched out in the long grass and
waited.  The air seemed a chilly balm, and the earth, after the
heat of the day, now and again breathed soothingly against him.
The Factor, gathered into the rhythm of it all, dozed off, with his
head upon his arm, and slept.

Fifty yards away, head resting on knees, and with his back to John
Fox, Snettishane likewise slept, gently conquered by the quietude
of the night.  An hour slipped by and then he awoke, and, without
lifting his head, set the night vibrating with the hoarse gutturals
of the raven call.

The Factor roused, not with the abrupt start of civilized man, but
with the swift and comprehensive glide from sleep to waking of the
savage.  In the night-light he made out a dark object in the midst
of the grass and brought his gun to bear upon it.  A second croak
began to rise, and he pulled the trigger.  The crickets ceased from
their sing-song chant, the wildfowl from their squabbling, and the
raven croak broke midmost and died away in gasping silence.

John Fox ran to the spot and reached for the thing he had killed,
but his fingers closed on a coarse mop of hair and he turned
Snettishane's face upward to the starlight.  He knew how a shotgun
scattered at fifty yards, and he knew that he had peppered
Snettishane across the shoulders and in the small of the back.  And
Snettishane knew that he knew, but neither referred to it

"What dost thou here?" the Factor demanded.  "It were time old
bones should be in bed."

But Snettishane was stately in spite of the bird-shot burning under
his skin.

"Old bones will not sleep," he said solemnly.  "I weep for my
daughter, for my daughter Lit-lit, who liveth and who yet is dead,
and who goeth without doubt to the white man's hell."

"Weep henceforth on the far bank, beyond ear-shot of the Fort,"
said John Fox, turning on his heel, "for the noise of thy weeping
is exceeding great and will not let one sleep of nights."

"My heart is sore," Snettishane answered, "and my days and nights
be black with sorrow."

"As the raven is black," said John Fox.

"As the raven is black," Snettishane said.

Never again was the voice of the raven heard by the river bank.
Lit-lit grows matronly day by day and is very happy.  Also, there
are sisters to the sons of John Fox's first wife who lies buried in
a tree.  Old Snettishane is no longer a visitor at the Fort, and
spends long hours raising a thin, aged voice against the filial
ingratitude of children in general and of his daughter Lit-lit in
particular.  His declining years are embittered by the knowledge
that he was cheated, and even John Fox has withdrawn the assertion
that the price for Lit-lit was too much by ten blankets and a gun.



BATARD



Batard was a devil.  This was recognized throughout the Northland.
"Hell's Spawn" he was called by many men, but his master, Black
Leclere, chose for him the shameful name "Batard."  Now Black
Leclere was also a devil, and the twain were well matched.  There
is a saying that when two devils come together, hell is to pay.
This is to be expected, and this certainly was to be expected when
Batard and Black Leclere came together.  The first time they met,
Batard was a part-grown puppy, lean and hungry, with bitter eyes;
and they met with snap and snarl, and wicked looks, for Leclere's
upper lip had a wolfish way of lifting and showing the white, cruel
teeth.  And it lifted then, and his eyes glinted viciously, as he
reached for Batard and dragged him out from the squirming litter.
It was certain that they divined each other, for on the instant
Batard had buried his puppy fangs in Leclere's hand, and Leclere,
thumb and finger, was coolly choking his young life out of him.

"SACREDAM," the Frenchman said softly, flirting the quick blood
from his bitten hand and gazing down on the little puppy choking
and gasping in the snow.

Leclere turned to John Hamlin, storekeeper of the Sixty Mile Post.
"Dat fo' w'at Ah lak heem.  'Ow moch, eh, you, M'sieu'?  'Ow moch?
Ah buy heem, now; Ah buy heem queek."

And because he hated him with an exceeding bitter hate, Leclere
bought Batard and gave him his shameful name.  And for five years
the twain adventured across the Northland, from St. Michael's and
the Yukon delta to the head-reaches of the Pelly and even so far as
the Peace River, Athabasca, and the Great Slave.  And they acquired
a reputation for uncompromising wickedness, the like of which never
before attached itself to man and dog.

Batard did not know his father--hence his name--but, as John Hamlin
knew, his father was a great grey timber wolf.  But the mother of
Batard, as he dimly remembered her, was snarling, bickering,
obscene, husky, full-fronted and heavy-chested, with a malign eye,
a cat-like grip on life, and a genius for trickery and evil.  There
was neither faith nor trust in her.  Her treachery alone could be
relied upon, and her wild-wood amours attested her general
depravity.  Much of evil and much of strength were there in these,
Batard's progenitors, and, bone and flesh of their bone and flesh,
he had inherited it all.  And then came Black Leclere, to lay his
heavy hand on the bit of pulsating puppy life, to press and prod
and mould till it became a big bristling beast, acute in knavery,
overspilling with hate, sinister, malignant, diabolical.  With a
proper master Batard might have made an ordinary, fairly efficient
sled-dog.  He never got the chance:  Leclere but confirmed him in
his congenital iniquity.

The history of Batard and Leclere is a history of war--of five
cruel, relentless years, of which their first meeting is fit
summary.  To begin with, it was Leclere's fault, for he hated with
understanding and intelligence, while the long-legged, ungainly
puppy hated only blindly, instinctively, without reason or method.
At first there were no refinements of cruelty (these were to come
later), but simple beatings and crude brutalities.  In one of these
Batard had an ear injured.  He never regained control of the riven
muscles, and ever after the ear drooped limply down to keep keen
the memory of his tormentor.  And he never forgot.

His puppyhood was a period of foolish rebellion.  He was always
worsted, but he fought back because it was his nature to fight
back.  And he was unconquerable.  Yelping shrilly from the pain of
lash and club, he none the less contrived always to throw in the
defiant snarl, the bitter vindictive menace of his soul which
fetched without fail more blows and beatings.  But his was his
mother's tenacious grip on life.  Nothing could kill him.  He
flourished under misfortune, grew fat with famine, and out of his
terrible struggle for life developed a preternatural intelligence.
His were the stealth and cunning of the husky, his mother, and the
fierceness and valour of the wolf, his father.

Possibly it was because of his father that he never wailed.  His
puppy yelps passed with his lanky legs, so that he became grim and
taciturn, quick to strike, slow to warn.  He answered curse with
snarl, and blow with snap, grinning the while his implacable
hatred; but never again, under the extremest agony, did Leclere
bring from him the cry of fear nor of pain.  This unconquerableness
but fanned Leclere's wrath and stirred him to greater deviltries.

Did Leclere give Batard half a fish and to his mates whole ones,
Batard went forth to rob other dogs of their fish.  Also he robbed
caches and expressed himself in a thousand rogueries, till he
became a terror to all dogs and masters of dogs.  Did Leclere beat
Batard and fondle Babette--Babette who was not half the worker he
was--why, Batard threw her down in the snow and broke her hind leg
in his heavy jaws, so that Leclere was forced to shoot her.
Likewise, in bloody battles, Batard mastered all his team-mates,
set them the law of trail and forage, and made them live to the law
he set.

In five years he heard but one kind word, received but one soft
stroke of a hand, and then he did not know what manner of things
they were.  He leaped like the untamed thing he was, and his jaws
were together in a flash.  It was the missionary at Sunrise, a
newcomer in the country, who spoke the kind word and gave the soft
stroke of the hand.  And for six months after, he wrote no letters
home to the States, and the surgeon at McQuestion travelled two
hundred miles on the ice to save him from blood-poisoning.

Men and dogs looked askance at Batard when he drifted into their
camps and posts.  The men greeted him with feet threateningly
lifted for the kick, the dogs with bristling manes and bared fangs.
Once a man did kick Batard, and Batard, with quick wolf snap,
closed his jaws like a steel trap on the man's calf and crunched
down to the bone.  Whereat the man was determined to have his life,
only Black Leclere, with ominous eyes and naked hunting-knife,
stepped in between.  The killing of Batard--ah, SACREDAM, THAT was
a pleasure Leclere reserved for himself.  Some day it would happen,
or else--bah! who was to know?  Anyway, the problem would be
solved.

For they had become problems to each other.  The very breath each
drew was a challenge and a menace to the other.  Their hate bound
them together as love could never bind.  Leclere was bent on the
coming of the day when Batard should wilt in spirit and cringe and
whimper at his feet.  And Batard--Leclere knew what was in Batard's
mind, and more than once had read it in Batard's eyes.  And so
clearly had he read, that when Batard was at his back, he made it a
point to glance often over his shoulder.

Men marvelled when Leclere refused large money for the dog.  "Some
day you'll kill him and be out his price," said John Hamlin once,
when Batard lay panting in the snow where Leclere had kicked him,
and no one knew whether his ribs were broken, and no one dared look
to see.

"Dat," said Leclere, dryly, "dat is my biz'ness, M'sieu'."

And the men marvelled that Batard did not run away.  They did not
understand.  But Leclere understood.  He was a man who lived much
in the open, beyond the sound of human tongue, and he had learned
the voices of wind and storm, the sigh of night, the whisper of
dawn, the clash of day.  In a dim way he could hear the green
things growing, the running of the sap, the bursting of the bud.
And he knew the subtle speech of the things that moved, of the
rabbit in the snare, the moody raven beating the air with hollow
wing, the baldface shuffling under the moon, the wolf like a grey
shadow gliding betwixt the twilight and the dark.  And to him
Batard spoke clear and direct.  Full well he understood why Batard
did not run away, and he looked more often over his shoulder.

When in anger, Batard was not nice to look upon, and more than once
had he leapt for Leclere's throat, to be stretched quivering and
senseless in the snow, by the butt of the ever ready dogwhip.  And
so Batard learned to bide his time.  When he reached his full
strength and prime of youth, he thought the time had come.  He was
broad-chested, powerfully muscled, of far more than ordinary size,
and his neck from head to shoulders was a mass of bristling hair--
to all appearances a full-blooded wolf.  Leclere was lying asleep
in his furs when Batard deemed the time to be ripe.  He crept upon
him stealthily, head low to earth and lone ear laid back, with a
feline softness of tread.  Batard breathed gently, very gently, and
not till he was close at hand did he raise his head.  He paused for
a moment and looked at the bronzed bull throat, naked and knotty,
and swelling to a deep steady pulse.  The slaver dripped down his
fangs and slid off his tongue at the sight, and in that moment he
remembered his drooping ear, his uncounted blows and prodigious
wrongs, and without a sound sprang on the sleeping man.

Leclere awoke to the pang of the fangs in his throat, and, perfect
animal that he was, he awoke clear-headed and with full
comprehension.  He closed on Batard's windpipe with both his hands,
and rolled out of his furs to get his weight uppermost.  But the
thousands of Batard's ancestors had clung at the throats of
unnumbered moose and caribou and dragged them down, and the wisdom
of those ancestors was his.  When Leclere's weight came on top of
him, he drove his hind legs upwards and in, and clawed down chest
and abdomen, ripping and tearing through skin and muscle.  And when
he felt the man's body wince above him and lift, he worried and
shook at the man's throat.  His team-mates closed around in a
snarling circle, and Batard, with failing breath and fading sense,
knew that their jaws were hungry for him.  But that did not matter-
-it was the man, the man above him, and he ripped and clawed, and
shook and worried, to the last ounce of his strength.  But Leclere
choked him with both his hands, till Batard's chest heaved and
writhed for the air denied, and his eyes glazed and set, and his
jaws slowly loosened, and his tongue protruded black and swollen.

"Eh?  Bon, you devil!" Leclere gurgled mouth and throat clogged
with his own blood, as he shoved the dizzy dog from him.

And then Leclere cursed the other dogs off as they fell upon
Batard.  They drew back into a wider circle, squatting alertly on
their haunches and licking their chops, the hair on every neck
bristling and erect.

Batard recovered quickly, and at sound of Leclere's voice, tottered
to his feet and swayed weakly back and forth.

"A-h-ah!  You beeg devil!" Leclere spluttered.  "Ah fix you; Ah fix
you plentee, by GAR!"

Batard, the air biting into his exhausted lungs like wine, flashed
full into the man's face, his jaws missing and coming together with
a metallic clip.  They rolled over and over on the snow, Leclere
striking madly with his fists.  Then they separated, face to face,
and circled back and forth before each other.  Leclere could have
drawn his knife.  His rifle was at his feet.  But the beast in him
was up and raging.  He would do the thing with his hands--and his
teeth.  Batard sprang in, but Leclere knocked him over with a blow
of the fist, fell upon him, and buried his teeth to the bone in the
dog's shoulder.

It was a primordial setting and a primordial scene, such as might
have been in the savage youth of the world.  An open space in a
dark forest, a ring of grinning wolf-dogs, and in the centre two
beasts, locked in combat, snapping and snarling raging madly about
panting, sobbing, cursing, straining, wild with passion, in a fury
of murder, ripping and tearing and clawing in elemental
brutishness.

But Leclere caught Batard behind the ear with a blow from his fist,
knocking him over, and, for the instant, stunning him.  Then
Leclere leaped upon him with his feet, and sprang up and down,
striving to grind him into the earth.  Both Batard's hind legs were
broken ere Leclere ceased that he might catch breath.

"A-a-ah!  A-a-ah!" he screamed, incapable of speech, shaking his
fist, through sheer impotence of throat and larynx.

But Batard was indomitable.  He lay there in a helpless welter, his
lip feebly lifting and writhing to the snarl he had not the
strength to utter.  Leclere kicked him, and the tired jaws closed
on the ankle, but could not break the skin.

Then Leclere picked up the whip and proceeded almost to cut him to
pieces, at each stroke of the lash crying:  "Dis taim Ah break you!
Eh?  By GAR!  Ah break you!"

In the end, exhausted, fainting from loss of blood, he crumpled up
and fell by his victim, and when the wolf-dogs closed in to take
their vengeance, with his last consciousness dragged his body on
top of Batard to shield him from their fangs.

This occurred not far from Sunrise, and the missionary, opening the
door to Leclere a few hours later, was surprised to note the
absence of Batard from the team.  Nor did his surprise lessen when
Leclere threw back the robes from the sled, gathered Batard into
his arms and staggered across the threshold.  It happened that the
surgeon of McQuestion, who was something of a gadabout, was up on a
gossip, and between them they proceeded to repair Leclere,

"Merci, non," said he.  "Do you fix firs' de dog.  To die?  NON.
Eet is not good.  Becos' heem Ah mus' yet break.  Dat fo' w'at he
mus' not die."

The surgeon called it a marvel, the missionary a miracle, that
Leclere pulled through at all; and so weakened was he, that in the
spring the fever got him, and he went on his back again.  Batard
had been in even worse plight, but his grip on life prevailed, and
the bones of his hind legs knit, and his organs righted themselves,
during the several weeks he lay strapped to the floor.  And by the
time Leclere, finally convalescent, sallow and shaky, took the sun
by the cabin door, Batard had reasserted his supremacy among his
kind, and brought not only his own team-mates but the missionary's
dogs into subjection.

He moved never a muscle, nor twitched a hair, when, for the first
time, Leclere tottered out on the missionary's arm, and sank down
slowly and with infinite caution on the three-legged stool.

"BON!" he said.  "BON!  De good sun!"  And he stretched out his
wasted hands and washed them in the warmth.

Then his gaze fell on the dog, and the old light blazed back in his
eyes.  He touched the missionary lightly on the arm.  "Mon pere,
dat is one beeg devil, dat Batard.  You will bring me one pistol,
so, dat Ah drink de sun in peace."

And thenceforth for many days he sat in the sun before the cabin
door.  He never dozed, and the pistol lay always across his knees.
Batard had a way, the first thing each day, of looking for the
weapon in its wonted place.  At sight of it he would lift his lip
faintly in token that he understood, and Leclere would lift his own
lip in an answering grin.  One day the missionary took note of the
trick.

"Bless me!" he said.  "I really believe the brute comprehends."

Leclere laughed softly.  "Look you, mon pere.  Dat w'at Ah now
spik, to dat does he lissen."

As if in confirmation, Batard just perceptibly wriggled his lone
ear up to catch the sound.

"Ah say 'keel'."

Batard growled deep down in his throat, the hair bristled along his
neck, and every muscle went tense and expectant.

"Ah lift de gun, so, like dat."  And suiting action to word, he
sighted the pistol at Batard.  Batard, with a single leap,
sideways, landed around the corner of the cabin out of sight.

"Bless me!" he repeated at intervals.  Leclere grinned proudly.

"But why does he not run away?"

The Frenchman's shoulders went up in the racial shrug that means
all things from total ignorance to infinite understanding.

"Then why do you not kill him?"

Again the shoulders went up.

"Mon pere," he said after a pause, "de taim is not yet.  He is one
beeg devil.  Some taim Ah break heem, so an' so, all to leetle
bits.  Hey? some taim.  BON!"

A day came when Leclere gathered his dogs together and floated down
in a bateau to Forty Mile, and on to the Porcupine, where he took a
commission from the P. C. Company, and went exploring for the
better part of a year.  After that he poled up the Koyokuk to
deserted Arctic City, and later came drifting back, from camp to
camp, along the Yukon.  And during the long months Batard was well
lessoned.  He learned many tortures, and, notably, the torture of
hunger, the torture of thirst, the torture of fire, and, worst of
all, the torture of music.

Like the rest of his kind, he did not enjoy music.  It gave him
exquisite anguish, racking him nerve by nerve, and ripping apart
every fibre of his being.  It made him howl, long and wolf-life, as
when the wolves bay the stars on frosty nights.  He could not help
howling.  It was his one weakness in the contest with Leclere, and
it was his shame.  Leclere, on the other hand, passionately loved
music--as passionately as he loved strong drink.  And when his soul
clamoured for expression, it usually uttered itself in one or the
other of the two ways, and more usually in both ways.  And when he
had drunk, his brain a-lilt with unsung song and the devil in him
aroused and rampant, his soul found its supreme utterance in
torturing Batard.

"Now we will haf a leetle museek," he would say.  "Eh?  W'at you
t'ink, Batard?"

It was only an old and battered harmonica, tenderly treasured and
patiently repaired; but it was the best that money could buy, and
out of its silver reeds he drew weird vagrant airs that men had
never heard before.  Then Batard, dumb of throat, with teeth tight
clenched, would back away, inch by inch, to the farthest cabin
corner.  And Leclere, playing, playing, a stout club tucked under
his arm, followed the animal up, inch by inch, step by step, till
there was no further retreat.

At first Batard would crowd himself into the smallest possible
space, grovelling close to the floor; but as the music came nearer
and nearer, he was forced to uprear, his back jammed into the logs,
his fore legs fanning the air as though to beat off the rippling
waves of sound.  He still kept his teeth together, but severe
muscular contractions attacked his body, strange twitchings and
jerkings, till he was all a-quiver and writhing in silent torment.
As he lost control, his jaws spasmodically wrenched apart, and deep
throaty vibrations issued forth, too low in the register of sound
for human ear to catch.  And then, nostrils distended, eyes
dilated, hair bristling in helpless rage, arose the long wolf howl.
It came with a slurring rush upwards, swelling to a great heart-
breaking burst of sound, and dying away in sadly cadenced woe--then
the next rush upward, octave upon octave; the bursting heart; and
the infinite sorrow and misery, fainting, fading, falling, and
dying slowly away.

It was fit for hell.  And Leclere, with fiendish ken, seemed to
divine each particular nerve and heartstring, and with long wails
and tremblings and sobbing minors to make it yield up its last
shred of grief.  It was frightful, and for twenty-four hours after,
Batard was nervous and unstrung, starting at common sounds,
tripping over his own shadow, but, withal, vicious and masterful
with his team-mates.  Nor did he show signs of a breaking spirit.
Rather did he grow more grim and taciturn, biding his time with an
inscrutable patience that began to puzzle and weigh upon Leclere.
The dog would lie in the firelight, motionless, for hours, gazing
straight before him at Leclere, and hating him with his bitter
eyes.

Often the man felt that he had bucked against the very essence of
life--the unconquerable essence that swept the hawk down out of the
sky like a feathered thunderbolt, that drove the great grey goose
across the zones, that hurled the spawning salmon through two
thousand miles of boiling Yukon flood.  At such times he felt
impelled to--express his own unconquerable essence; and with strong
drink, wild music, and Batard, he indulged in vast orgies, wherein
he pitted his puny strength in the face of things, and challenged
all that was, and had been, and was yet to be.

"Dere is somet'ing dere," he affirmed, when the rhythmed vagaries
of his mind touched the secret chords of Batard's being and brought
forth the long lugubrious howl.  "Ah pool eet out wid bot' my
han's, so, an' so.  Ha! ha!  Eet is fonee!  Eet is ver' fonee!  De
priest chant, de womans pray, de mans swear, de leetle bird go
peep-peep, Batard, heem go yow-yow--an' eet is all de ver' same
t'ing.  Ha! ha!"

Father Gautier, a worthy priest, one reproved him with instances of
concrete perdition.  He never reproved him again.

"Eet may be so, mon pere," he made answer.  "An' Ah t'ink Ah go
troo hell a-snappin', lak de hemlock troo de fire.  Eh, mon pere?"

But all bad things come to an end as well as good, and so with
Black Leclere.  On the summer low water, in a poling boat, he left
McDougall for Sunrise.  He left McDougall in company with Timothy
Brown, and arrived at Sunrise by himself.  Further, it was known
that they had quarrelled just previous to pulling out; for the
Lizzie, a wheezy ten-ton stern-wheeler, twenty-four hours behind,
beat Leclere in by three days.  And when he did get in, it was with
a clean-drilled bullet-hole through his shoulder muscle, and a tale
of ambush and murder.

A strike had been made at Sunrise, and things had changed
considerably.  With the infusion of several hundred gold-seekers, a
deal of whisky, and half-a-dozen equipped gamblers, the missionary
had seen the page of his years of labour with the Indians wiped
clean.  When the squaws became preoccupied with cooking beans and
keeping the fire going for the wifeless miners, and the bucks with
swapping their warm furs for black bottles and broken time-pieces,
he took to his bed, said "Bless me" several times, and departed to
his final accounting in a rough-hewn, oblong box.  Whereupon the
gamblers moved their roulette and faro tables into the mission
house, and the click of chips and clink of glasses went up from
dawn till dark and to dawn again.

Now Timothy Brown was well beloved among these adventurers of the
North.  The one thing against him was his quick temper and ready
fist--a little thing, for which his kind heart and forgiving hand
more than atoned.  On the other hand, there was nothing to atone
for Black Leclere.  He was "black," as more than one remembered
deed bore witness, while he was as well hated as the other was
beloved.  So the men of Sunrise put an antiseptic dressing on his
shoulder and haled him before Judge Lynch.

It was a simple affair.  He had quarrelled with Timothy Brown at
McDougall.  With Timothy Brown he had left McDougall.  Without
Timothy Brown he had arrived at Sunrise.  Considered in the light
of his evilness, the unanimous conclusion was that he had killed
Timothy Brown.  On the other hand, Leclere acknowledged their
facts, but challenged their conclusion, and gave his own
explanation.  Twenty miles out of Sunrise he and Timothy Brown were
poling the boat along the rocky shore.  From that shore two rifle-
shots rang out.  Timothy Brown pitched out of the boat and went
down bubbling red, and that was the last of Timothy Brown.  He,
Leclere, pitched into the bottom of the boat with a stinging
shoulder.  He lay very quiet, peeping at the shore.  After a time
two Indians stuck up their heads and came out to the water's edge,
carrying between them a birch-bark canoe.  As they launched it,
Leclere let fly.  He potted one, who went over the side after the
manner of Timothy Brown.  The other dropped into the bottom of the
canoe, and then canoe and poling boat went down the stream in a
drifting battle.  After that they hung up on a split current, and
the canoe passed on one side of an island, the poling boat on the
other.  That was the last of the canoe, and he came on into
Sunrise.  Yes, from the way the Indian in the canoe jumped, he was
sure he had potted him.  That was all.  This explanation was not
deemed adequate.  They gave him ten hours' grace while the Lizzie
steamed down to investigate.  Ten hours later she came wheezing
back to Sunrise.  There had been nothing to investigate.  No
evidence had been found to back up his statements.  They told him
to make his will, for he possessed a fifty-thousand dollar Sunrise
claim, and they were a law-abiding as well as a law-giving breed.

Leclere shrugged his shoulders.  "Bot one t'ing," he said; "a
leetle, w'at you call, favour--a leetle favour, dat is eet.  I gif
my feefty t'ousan' dollair to de church.  I gif my husky dog,
Batard, to de devil.  De leetle favour?  Firs' you hang heem, an'
den you hang me.  Eet is good, eh?"

Good it was, they agreed, that Hell's Spawn should break trail for
his master across the last divide, and the court was adjourned down
to the river bank, where a big spruce tree stood by itself.
Slackwater Charley put a hangman's knot in the end of a hauling-
line, and the noose was slipped over Leclere's head and pulled
tight around his neck.  His hands were tied behind his back, and he
was assisted to the top of a cracker box.  Then the running end of
the line was passed over an over-hanging branch, drawn taut, and
made fast.  To kick the box out from under would leave him dancing
on the air.

"Now for the dog," said Webster Shaw, sometime mining engineer.
"You'll have to rope him, Slackwater."

Leclere grinned.  Slackwater took a chew of tobacco, rove a running
noose, and proceeded leisurely to coil a few turns in his hand.  He
paused once or twice to brush particularly offensive mosquitoes
from off his face.  Everybody was brushing mosquitoes, except
Leclere, about whose head a small cloud was visible.  Even Batard,
lying full-stretched on the ground with his fore paws rubbed the
pests away from eyes and mouth.

But while Slackwater waited for Batard to lift his head, a faint
call came from the quiet air, and a man was seen waving his arms
and running across the flat from Sunrise.  It was the store-keeper.

"C-call 'er off, boys," he panted, as he came in among them.

"Little Sandy and Bernadotte's jes' got in," he explained with
returning breath.  "Landed down below an' come up by the short cut.
Got the Beaver with 'm.  Picked 'm up in his canoe, stuck in a back
channel, with a couple of bullet-holes in 'm.  Other buck was Klok
Kutz, the one that knocked spots out of his squaw and dusted."

"Eh?  W'at Ah say?  Eh?" Leclere cried exultantly.  "Dat de one fo'
sure!  Ah know.  Ah spik true."

"The thing to do is to teach these damned Siwashes a little
manners," spoke Webster Shaw.  "They're getting fat and sassy, and
we'll have to bring them down a peg.  Round in all the bucks and
string up the Beaver for an object lesson.  That's the programme.
Come on and let's see what he's got to say for himself."

"Heh, M'sieu!" Leclere called, as the crowd began to melt away
through the twilight in the direction of Sunrise.  "Ah lak ver'
moch to see de fon."

"Oh, we'll turn you loose when we come back," Webster Shaw shouted
over his shoulder.  "In the meantime meditate on your sins and the
ways of Providence.  It will do you good, so be grateful."

As is the way with men who are accustomed to great hazards, whose
nerves are healthy and trained in patience, so it was with Leclere
who settled himself to the long wait--which is to say that he
reconciled his mind to it.  There was no settling of the body, for
the taut rope forced him to stand rigidly erect.  The least
relaxation of the leg muscles pressed the rough-fibred noose into
his neck, while the upright position caused him much pain in his
wounded shoulder.  He projected his under lip and expelled his
breath upwards along his face to blow the mosquitoes away from his
eyes.  But the situation had its compensation.  To be snatched from
the maw of death was well worth a little bodily suffering, only it
was unfortunate that he should miss the hanging of the Beaver.

And so he mused, till his eyes chanced to fall upon Batard, head
between fore paws and stretched on the ground asleep.  And their
Leclere ceased to muse.  He studied the animal closely, striving to
sense if the sleep were real or feigned.  Batard's sides were
heaving regularly, but Leclere felt that the breath came and went a
shade too quickly; also he felt that there was a vigilance or
alertness to every hair that belied unshackling sleep.  He would
have given his Sunrise claim to be assured that the dog was not
awake, and once, when one of his joints cracked, he looked quickly
and guiltily at Batard to see if he roused.  He did not rouse then
but a few minutes later he got up slowly and lazily, stretched, and
looked carefully about him.

"Sacredam," said Leclere under his breath.

Assured that no one was in sight or hearing, Batard sat down,
curled his upper lip almost into a smile, looked up at Leclere, and
licked his chops.

"Ah see my feenish," the man said, and laughed sardonically aloud.

Batard came nearer, the useless ear wabbling, the good ear cocked
forward with devilish comprehension.  He thrust his head on one
side quizzically, and advanced with mincing, playful steps.  He
rubbed his body gently against the box till it shook and shook
again.  Leclere teetered carefully to maintain his equilibrium.

"Batard," he said calmly, "look out.  Ah keel you."

Batard snarled at the word and shook the box with greater force.
Then he upreared, and with his fore paws threw his weight against
it higher up.  Leclere kicked out with one foot, but the rope bit
into his neck and checked so abruptly as nearly to overbalance him.

"Hi, ya!  Chook!  Mush-on!" he screamed.

Batard retreated, for twenty feet or so, with a fiendish levity in
his bearing that Leclere could not mistake.  He remembered the dog
often breaking the scum of ice on the water hole by lifting up and
throwing his weight upon it; and remembering, he understood what he
now had in mind.  Batard faced about and paused.  He showed his
white teeth in a grin, which Leclere answered; and then hurled his
body through the air, in full charge, straight for the box.

Fifteen minutes later, Slackwater Charley and Webster Shaw
returning, caught a glimpse of a ghostly pendulum swinging back and
forth in the dim light.  As they hurriedly drew in closer, they
made out the man's inert body, and a live thing that clung to it,
and shook and worried, and gave to it the swaying motion.

"Hi, ya!  Chook! you Spawn of Hell!" yelled Webster Shaw.

But Batard glared at him, and snarled threateningly, without
loosing his jaws.

Slackwater Charley got out his revolver, but his hand was shaking,
as with a chill, and he fumbled.

"Here you take it," he said, passing the weapon over.

Webster Shaw laughed shortly, drew a sight between the gleaming
eyes, and pressed the trigger.  Batard's body twitched with the
shock, threshed the ground spasmodically for a moment, and went
suddenly limp.  But his teeth still held fast locked.



THE STORY OF JEES' UCK



There have been renunciations and renunciations.  But, in its
essence, renunciation is ever the same.  And the paradox of it is,
that men and women forego the dearest thing in the world for
something dearer.  It was never otherwise.  Thus it was when Abel
brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof.  The
firstlings and the fat thereof were to him the dearest things in
the world; yet he gave them over that he might be on good terms
with God.  So it was with Abraham when he prepared to offer up his
son Isaac on a stone.  Isaac was very dear to him; but God, in
incomprehensible ways, was yet dearer.  It may be that Abraham
feared the Lord.  But whether that be true or not it has since been
determined by a few billion people that he loved the Lord and
desired to serve him.

And since it has been determined that love is service, and since to
renounce is to serve, then Jees Uck, who was merely a woman of a
swart-skinned breed, loved with a great love.  She was unversed in
history, having learned to read only the signs of weather and of
game; so she had never heard of Abel nor of Abraham; nor, having
escaped the good sisters at Holy Cross, had she been told the story
of Ruth, the Moabitess, who renounced her very God for the sake of
a stranger woman from a strange land.  Jees Uck had learned only
one way of renouncing, and that was with a club as the dynamic
factor, in much the same manner as a dog is made to renounce a
stolen marrow-bone.  Yet, when the time came, she proved herself
capable of rising to the height of the fair-faced royal races and
of renouncing in right regal fashion.

So this is the story of Jees Uck, which is also the story of Neil
Bonner, and Kitty Bonner, and a couple of Neil Bonner's progeny.
Jees Uck was of a swart-skinned breed, it is true, but she was not
an Indian; nor was she an Eskimo; nor even an Innuit.  Going
backward into mouth tradition, there appears the figure of one
Skolkz, a Toyaat Indian of the Yukon, who journeyed down in his
youth to the Great Delta where dwell the Innuits, and where he
foregathered with a woman remembered as Olillie.  Now the woman
Olillie had been bred from an Eskimo mother by an Innuit man.  And
from Skolkz and Olillie came Halie, who was one-half Toyaat Indian,
one-quarter Innuit, and one-quarter Eskimo.  And Halie was the
grandmother of Jees Uck.

Now Halie, in whom three stocks had been bastardized, who cherished
no prejudice against further admixture, mated with a Russian fur
trader called Shpack, also known in his time as the Big Fat.
Shpack is herein classed Russian for lack of a more adequate term;
for Shpack's father, a Slavonic convict from the Lower Provinces,
had escaped from the quicksilver mines into Northern Siberia, where
he knew Zimba, who was a woman of the Deer People and who became
the mother of Shpack, who became the grandfather of Jees Uck.

Now had not Shpack been captured in his boyhood by the Sea People,
who fringe the rim of the Arctic Sea with their misery, he would
not have become the grandfather of Jees Uck and there would be no
story at all.  But he WAS captured by the Sea People, from whom he
escaped to Kamchatka, and thence, on a Norwegian whale-ship, to the
Baltic.  Not long after that he turned up in St. Petersburg, and
the years were not many till he went drifting east over the same
weary road his father had measured with blood and groans a half-
century before.  But Shpack was a free man, in the employ of the
great Russian Fur Company.  And in that employ he fared farther and
farther east, until he crossed Bering Sea into Russian America; and
at Pastolik, which is hard by the Great Delta of the Yukon, became
the husband of Halie, who was the grandmother of Jees Uck.  Out of
this union came the woman-child, Tukesan.

Shpack, under the orders of the Company, made a canoe voyage of a
few hundred miles up the Yukon to the post of Nulato.  With him he
took Halie and the babe Tukesan.  This was in 1850, and in 1850 it
was that the river Indians fell upon Nulato and wiped it from the
face of the earth.  And that was the end of Shpack and Halie.  On
that terrible night Tukesan disappeared.  To this day the Toyaats
aver they had no hand in the trouble; but, be that as it may, the
fact remains that the babe Tukesan grew up among them.

Tukesan was married successively to two Toyaat brothers, to both of
whom she was barren.  Because of this, other women shook their
heads, and no third Toyaat man could be found to dare matrimony
with the childless widow.  But at this time, many hundred miles
above, at Fort Yukon, was a man, Spike O'Brien.  Fort Yukon was a
Hudson Bay Company post, and Spike O'Brien one of the Company's
servants.  He was a good servant, but he achieved an opinion that
the service was bad, and in the course of time vindicated that
opinion by deserting.  It was a year's journey, by the chain of
posts, back to York Factory on Hudson's Bay.  Further, being
Company posts, he knew he could not evade the Company's clutches.
Nothing retained but to go down the Yukon.  It was true no white
man had ever gone down the Yukon, and no white man knew whether the
Yukon emptied into the Arctic Ocean or Bering Sea; but Spike
O'Brien was a Celt, and the promise of danger was a lure he had
ever followed.

A few weeks later, somewhat battered, rather famished, and about
dead with river-fever, he drove the nose of his canoe into the
earth bank by the village of the Toyaats and promptly fainted away.
While getting his strength back, in the weeks that followed, he
looked upon Tukesan and found her good.  Like the father of Shpack,
who lived to a ripe old age among the Siberian Deer People, Spike
O'Brien might have left his aged bones with the Toyaats.  But
romance gripped his heart-strings and would not let him stay.  As
he had journeyed from York Factory to Fort Yukon, so, first among
men, might he journey from Fort Yukon to the sea and win the honour
of being the first man to make the North-West Passage by land.  So
he departed down the river, won the honour, and was unannaled and
unsung.  In after years he ran a sailors' boarding-house in San
Francisco, where he became esteemed a most remarkable liar by
virtue of the gospel truths he told.  But a child was born to
Tukesan, who had been childless.  And this child was Jees Uck.  Her
lineage has been traced at length to show that she was neither
Indian, nor Eskimo, nor Innuit, nor much of anything else; also to
show what waifs of the generations we are, all of us, and the
strange meanderings of the seed from which we spring.

What with the vagrant blood in her and the heritage compounded of
many races, Jees Uck developed a wonderful young beauty.  Bizarre,
perhaps, it was, and Oriental enough to puzzle any passing
ethnologist.  A lithe and slender grace characterized her.  Beyond
a quickened lilt to the imagination, the contribution of the Celt
was in no wise apparent.  It might possibly have put the warm blood
under her skin, which made her face less swart and her body fairer;
but that, in turn, might have come from Shpack, the Big Fat, who
inherited the colour of his Slavonic father.  And, finally, she had
great, blazing black eyes--the half-caste eye, round, full-orbed,
and sensuous, which marks the collision of the dark races with the
light.  Also, the white blood in her, combined with her knowledge
that it was in her, made her, in a way, ambitious.  Otherwise by
upbringing and in outlook on life, she was wholly and utterly a
Toyaat Indian.

One winter, when she was a young woman, Neil Bonner came into her
life.  But he came into her life, as he had come into the country,
somewhat reluctantly.  In fact, it was very much against his will,
coming into the country.  Between a father who clipped coupons and
cultivated roses, and a mother who loved the social round, Neil
Bonner had gone rather wild.  He was not vicious, but a man with
meat in his belly and without work in the world has to expend his
energy somehow, and Neil Bonner was such a man.  And he expended
his energy in such a fashion and to such extent that when the
inevitable climax came, his father, Neil Bonner, senior, crawled
out of his roses in a panic and looked on his son with a wondering
eye.  Then he hied himself away to a crony of kindred pursuits,
with whom he was wont to confer over coupons and roses, and between
the two the destiny of young Neil Bonner was made manifest.  He
must go away, on probation, to live down his harmless follies in
order that he might live up to their own excellent standard.

This determined upon, and young Neil a little repentant and a great
deal ashamed, the rest was easy.  The cronies were heavy
stockholders in the P. C. Company.  The P. C. Company owned fleets
of river-steamers and ocean-going craft, and, in addition to
farming the sea, exploited a hundred thousand square miles or so of
the land that, on the maps of geographers, usually occupies the
white spaces.  So the P. C. Company sent young Neil Bonner north,
where the white spaces are, to do its work and to learn to be good
like his father.  "Five years of simplicity, close to the soil and
far from temptation, will make a man of him," said old Neil Bonner,
and forthwith crawled back among his roses.  Young Neil set his
jaw, pitched his chin at the proper angle, and went to work.  As an
underling he did his work well and gained the commendation of his
superiors.  Not that he delighted in the work, but that it was the
one thing that prevented him from going mad.

The first year he wished he was dead.  The second year he cursed
God.  The third year he was divided between the two emotions, and
in the confusion quarrelled with a man in authority.  He had the
best of the quarrel, though the man in authority had the last
word,--a word that sent Neil Bonner into an exile that made his old
billet appear as paradise.  But he went without a whimper, for the
North had succeeded in making him into a man.

Here and there, on the white spaces on the map, little circlets
like the letter "o" are to be found, and, appended to these
circlets, on one side or the other, are names such as "Fort
Hamilton," "Yanana Station," "Twenty Mile," thus leading one to
imagine that the white spaces are plentifully besprinkled with
towns and villages.  But it is a vain imagining.  Twenty Mile,
which is very like the rest of the posts, is a log building the
size of a corner grocery with rooms to let up-stairs.  A long-
legged cache on stilts may be found in the back yard; also a couple
of outhouses.  The back yard is unfenced, and extends to the
skyline and an unascertainable bit beyond.  There are no other
houses in sight, though the Toyaats sometimes pitch a winter camp a
mile or two down the Yukon.  And this is Twenty Mile, one tentacle
of the many-tentacled P. C. Company.  Here the agent, with an
assistant, barters with the Indians for their furs, and does an
erratic trade on a gold-dust basis with the wandering miners.
Here, also, the agent and his assistant yearn all winter for the
spring, and when the spring comes, camp blasphemously on the roof
while the Yukon washes out the establishment.  And here, also, in
the fourth year of his sojourn in the land, came Neil Bonner to
take charge.

He had displaced no agent; for the man that previously ran the post
had made away with himself; "because of the rigours of the place,"
said the assistant, who still remained; though the Toyaats, by
their fires, had another version.  The assistant was a shrunken-
shouldered, hollow-chested man, with a cadaverous face and
cavernous cheeks that his sparse black beard could not hide.  He
coughed much, as though consumption gripped his lungs, while his
eyes had that mad, fevered light common to consumptives in the last
stage.  Pentley was his name--Amos Pentley--and Bonner did not like
him, though he felt a pity for the forlorn and hopeless devil.
They did not get along together, these two men who, of all men,
should have been on good terms in the face of the cold and silence
and darkness of the long winter.

In the end, Bonner concluded that Amos was partly demented, and
left him alone, doing all the work himself except the cooking.
Even then, Amos had nothing but bitter looks and an undisguised
hatred for him.  This was a great loss to Bonner; for the smiling
face of one of his own kind, the cheery word, the sympathy of
comradeship shared with misfortune--these things meant much; and
the winter was yet young when he began to realize the added
reasons, with such an assistant, that the previous agent had found
to impel his own hand against his life.

It was very lonely at Twenty Mile.  The bleak vastness stretched
away on every side to the horizon.  The snow, which was really
frost, flung its mantle over the land and buried everything in the
silence of death.  For days it was clear and cold, the thermometer
steadily recording forty to fifty degrees below zero.  Then a
change came over the face of things.  What little moisture had
oozed into the atmosphere gathered into dull grey, formless clouds;
it became quite warm, the thermometer rising to twenty below; and
the moisture fell out of the sky in hard frost-granules that hissed
like dry sugar or driving sand when kicked underfoot.  After that
it became clear and cold again, until enough moisture had gathered
to blanket the earth from the cold of outer space.  That was all.
Nothing happened.  No storms, no churning waters and threshing
forests, nothing but the machine-like precipitation of accumulated
moisture.  Possibly the most notable thing that occurred through
the weary weeks was the gliding of the temperature up to the
unprecedented height of fifteen below.  To atone for this, outer
space smote the earth with its cold till the mercury froze and the
spirit thermometer remained more than seventy below for a
fortnight, when it burst.  There was no telling how much colder it
was after that.  Another occurrence, monotonous in its regularity,
was the lengthening of the nights, till day became a mere blink of
light between the darkness.

Neil Bonner was a social animal.  The very follies for which he was
doing penance had been bred of his excessive sociability.  And
here, in the fourth year of his exile, he found himself in company-
-which were to travesty the word--with a morose and speechless
creature in whose sombre eyes smouldered a hatred as bitter as it
was unwarranted.  And Bonner, to whom speech and fellowship were as
the breath of life, went about as a ghost might go, tantalized by
the gregarious revelries of some former life.  In the day his lips
were compressed, his face stern; but in the night he clenched his
hands, rolled about in his blankets, and cried aloud like a little
child.  And he would remember a certain man in authority and curse
him through the long hours.  Also, he cursed God.  But God
understands.  He cannot find it in his heart to blame weak mortals
who blaspheme in Alaska.

And here, to the post of Twenty Mile, came Jees Uck, to trade for
flour and bacon, and beads, and bright scarlet cloths for her fancy
work.  And further, and unwittingly, she came to the post of Twenty
Mile to make a lonely man more lonely, make him reach out empty
arms in his sleep.  For Neil Bonner was only a man.  When she first
came into the store, he looked at her long, as a thirsty man may
look at a flowing well.  And she, with the heritage bequeathed her
by Spike O'Brien, imagined daringly and smiled up into his eyes,
not as the swart-skinned peoples should smile at the royal races,
but as a woman smiles at a man.  The thing was inevitable; only, he
did not see it, and fought against her as fiercely and passionately
as he was drawn towards her.  And she?  She was Jees Uck, by
upbringing wholly and utterly a Toyaat Indian woman.

She came often to the post to trade.  And often she sat by the big
wood stove and chatted in broken English with Neil Bonner.  And he
came to look for her coming; and on the days she did not come he
was worried and restless.  Sometimes he stopped to think, and then
she was met coldly, with a resolve that perplexed and piqued her,
and which, she was convinced, was not sincere.  But more often he
did not dare to think, and then all went well and there were smiles
and laughter.  And Amos Pentley, gasping like a stranded catfish,
his hollow cough a-reek with the grave, looked upon it all and
grinned.  He, who loved life, could not live, and it rankled his
soul that others should be able to live.  Wherefore he hated
Bonner, who was so very much alive and into whose eyes sprang joy
at the sight of Jees Uck.  As for Amos, the very thought of the
girl was sufficient to send his blood pounding up into a
hemorrhage.

Jees Uck, whose mind was simple, who thought elementally and was
unused to weighing life in its subtler quantities, read Amos
Pentley like a book.  She warned Bonner, openly and bluntly, in few
words; but the complexities of higher existence confused the
situation to him, and he laughed at her evident anxiety.  To him,
Amos was a poor, miserable devil, tottering desperately into the
grave.  And Bonner, who had suffered much, found it easy to forgive
greatly.

But one morning, during a bitter snap, he got up from the
breakfast-table and went into the store.  Jees Uck was already
there, rosy from the trail, to buy a sack of flour.  A few minutes
later, he was out in the snow lashing the flour on her sled.  As he
bent over he noticed a stiffness in his neck and felt a premonition
of impending physical misfortune.  And as he put the last half-
hitch into the lashing and attempted to straighten up, a quick
spasm seized him and he sank into the snow.  Tense and quivering,
head jerked back, limbs extended, back arched and mouth twisted and
distorted, he appeared as though being racked limb from limb.
Without cry or sound, Jees Uck was in the snow beside him; but he
clutched both her wrists spasmodically, and as long as the
convulsion endured she was helpless.  In a few moments the spasm
relaxed and he was left weak and fainting, his forehead beaded with
sweat, and his lips flecked with foam.

"Quick!" he muttered, in a strange, hoarse voice.  "Quick!
Inside!"

He started to crawl on hands and knees, but she raised him up, and,
supported by her young arm, he made faster progress.  As he entered
the store the spasm seized him again, and his body writhed
irresistibly away from her and rolled and curled on the floor.
Amos Pentley came and looked on with curious eyes.

"Oh, Amos!" she cried in an agony of apprehension and helplessness,
"him die, you think?"  But Amos shrugged his shoulders and
continued to look on.

Bonner's body went slack, the tense muscles easing down and an
expression of relief coming into his face.  "Quick!" he gritted
between his teeth, his mouth twisting with the on-coming of the
next spasm and with his effort to control it.  "Quick, Jees Uck!
The medicine!  Never mind!  Drag me!"

She knew where the medicine-chest stood, at the rear of the room
beyond the stove, and thither, by the legs, she dragged the
struggling man.  As the spasm passed he began, very faint and very
sick, to overhaul the chest.  He had seen dogs die exhibiting
symptoms similar to his own, and he knew what should be done.  He
held up a vial of chloral hydrate, but his fingers were too weak
and nerveless to draw the cork.  This Jees Uck did for him, while
he was plunged into another convulsion.  As he came out of it he
found the open bottle proffered him, and looked into the great
black eyes of the woman and read what men have always read in the
Mate-woman's eyes.  Taking a full dose of the stuff, he sank back
until another spasm had passed.  Then he raised himself limply on
his elbow.

"Listen, Jees Uck!" he said very slowly, as though aware of the
necessity for haste and yet afraid to hasten.  "Do what I say.
Stay by my side, but do not touch me.  I must be very quiet, but
you must not go away."  His jaw began to set and his face to quiver
and distort with the fore-running pangs, but he gulped and
struggled to master them.  "Do not got away.  And do not let Amos
go away.  Understand!  Amos must stay right here."

She nodded her head, and he passed off into the first of many
convulsions, which gradually diminished in force and frequency.
Jees Uck hung over him remembering his injunction and not daring to
touch him.  Once Amos grew restless and made as though to go into
the kitchen; but a quick blaze from her eyes quelled him, and after
that, save for his laboured breathing and charnel cough, he was
very quiet.

Bonner slept.  The blink of light that marked the day disappeared.
Amos, followed about by the woman's eyes, lighted the kerosene
lamps.  Evening came on.  Through the north window the heavens were
emblazoned with an auroral display, which flamed and flared and
died down into blackness.  Some time after that, Neil Bonner
roused.  First he looked to see that Amos was still there, then
smiled at Jees Uck and pulled himself up.  Every muscle was stiff
and sore, and he smiled ruefully, pressing and prodding himself as
if to ascertain the extent of the ravage.  Then his face went stern
and businesslike.

"Jees Uck," he said, "take a candle.  Go into the kitchen.  There
is food on the table--biscuits and beans and bacon; also, coffee in
the pot on the stove.  Bring it here on the counter.  Also, bring
tumblers and water and whisky, which you will find on the top shelf
of the locker.  Do not forget the whisky."

Having swallowed a stiff glass of the whisky, he went carefully
through the medicine chest, now and again putting aside, with
definite purpose, certain bottles and vials.  Then he set to work
on the food, attempting a crude analysis.  He had not been unused
to the laboratory in his college days and was possessed of
sufficient imagination to achieve results with his limited
materials.  The condition of tetanus, which had marked his
paroxysms, simplified matters, and he made but one test.  The
coffee yielded nothing; nor did the beans.  To the biscuits he
devoted the utmost care.  Amos, who knew nothing of chemistry,
looked on with steady curiosity.  But Jees Uck, who had boundless
faith in the white man's wisdom, and especially in Neil Bonner's
wisdom, and who not only knew nothing but knew that she knew
nothing watched his face rather than his hands.

Step by step he eliminated possibilities, until he came to the
final test.  He was using a thin medicine vial for a tube, and this
he held between him and the light, watching the slow precipitation
of a salt through the solution contained in the tube.  He said
nothing, but he saw what he had expected to see.  And Jees Uck, her
eyes riveted on his face, saw something too,--something that made
her spring like a tigress upon Amos, and with splendid suppleness
and strength bend his body back across her knee.  Her knife was out
of its sheaf and uplifted, glinting in the lamplight.  Amos was
snarling; but Bonner intervened ere the blade could fall.

"That's a good girl, Jees Uck.  But never mind.  Let him go!"

She dropped the man obediently, though with protest writ large on
her face; and his body thudded to the floor.  Bonner nudged him
with his moccasined foot.

"Get up, Amos!" he commanded.  "You've got to pack an outfit yet
to-night and hit the trail."

"You don't mean to say--" Amos blurted savagely.

"I mean to say that you tried to kill me," Neil went on in cold,
even tones.  "I mean to say that you killed Birdsall, for all the
Company believes he killed himself.  You used strychnine in my
case.  God knows with what you fixed him.  Now I can't hang you.
You're too near dead as it is.  But Twenty Mile is too small for
the pair of us, and you've got to mush.  It's two hundred miles to
Holy Cross.  You can make it if you're careful not to over-exert.
I'll give you grub, a sled, and three dogs.  You'll be as safe as
if you were in jail, for you can't get out of the country.  And
I'll give you one chance.  You're almost dead.  Very well.  I shall
send no word to the Company until the spring.  In the meantime, the
thing for you to do is to die.  Now MUSH!"

"You go to bed!" Jees Uck insisted, when Amos had churned away into
the night towards Holy Cross.  "You sick man yet, Neil."

"And you're a good girl, Jees Uck," he answered.  "And here's my
hand on it.  But you must go home."

"You don't like me," she said simply.

He smiled, helped her on with her PARKA, and led her to the door.
"Only too well, Jees Uck," he said softly; "only too well."

After that the pall of the Arctic night fell deeper and blacker on
the land.  Neil Bonner discovered that he had failed to put proper
valuation upon even the sullen face of the murderous and death-
stricken Amos.  It became very lonely at Twenty Mile.  "For the
love of God, Prentiss, send me a man," he wrote to the agent at
Fort Hamilton, three hundred miles up river.  Six weeks later the
Indian messenger brought back a reply.  It was characteristic:
"Hell.  Both feet frozen.  Need him myself--Prentiss."

To make matters worse, most of the Toyaats were in the back country
on the flanks of a caribou herd, and Jees Uck was with them.
Removing to a distance seemed to bring her closer than ever, and
Neil Bonner found himself picturing her, day by day, in camp and on
trail.  It is not good to be alone.  Often he went out of the quiet
store, bare-headed and frantic, and shook his fist at the blink of
day that came over the southern sky-line.  And on still, cold
nights he left his bed and stumbled into the frost, where he
assaulted the silence at the top of his lungs, as though it were
some tangible, sentiment thing that he might arouse; or he shouted
at the sleeping dogs till they howled and howled again.  One shaggy
brute he brought into the post, playing that it was the new man
sent by Prentiss.  He strove to make it sleep decently under
blankets at nights and to sit at table and eat as a man should; but
the beast, mere domesticated wolf that it was, rebelled, and sought
out dark corners and snarled and bit him in the leg, and was
finally beaten and driven forth.

Then the trick of personification seized upon Neil Bonner and
mastered him.  All the forces of his environment metamorphosed into
living, breathing entities and came to live with him.  He recreated
the primitive pantheon; reared an altar to the sun and burned
candle fat and bacon grease thereon; and in the unfenced yard, by
the long-legged cache, made a frost devil, which he was wont to
make faces at and mock when the mercury oozed down into the bulb.
All this in play, of course.  He said it to himself that it was in
play, and repeated it over and over to make sure, unaware that
madness is ever prone to express itself in make-believe and play.

One midwinter day, Father Champreau, a Jesuit missionary, pulled
into Twenty Mile.  Bonner fell upon him and dragged him into the
post, and clung to him and wept, until the priest wept with him
from sheer compassion.  Then Bonner became madly hilarious and made
lavish entertainment, swearing valiantly that his guest should not
depart.  But Father Champreau was pressing to Salt Water on urgent
business for his order, and pulled out next morning, with Bonner's
blood threatened on his head.

And the threat was in a fair way toward realization, when the
Toyaats returned from their long hunt to the winter camp.  They had
many furs, and there was much trading and stir at Twenty Mile.
Also, Jees Uck came to buy beads and scarlet cloths and things, and
Bonner began to find himself again.  He fought for a week against
her.  Then the end came one night when she rose to leave.  She had
not forgotten her repulse, and the pride that drove Spike O'Brien
on to complete the North-West Passage by land was her pride.

"I go now," she said; "good-night, Neil."

But he came up behind her.  "Nay, it is not well," he said.

And as she turned her face toward his with a sudden joyful flash,
he bent forward, slowly and gravely, as it were a sacred thing, and
kissed her on the lips.  The Toyaats had never taught her the
meaning of a kiss upon the lips, but she understood and was glad.

With the coming of Jees Uck, at once things brightened up.  She was
regal in her happiness, a source of unending delight.  The
elemental workings of her mind and her naive little ways made an
immense sum of pleasurable surprise to the over-civilized man that
had stooped to catch her up.  Not alone was she solace to his
loneliness, but her primitiveness rejuvenated his jaded mind.  It
was as though, after long wandering, he had returned to pillow his
head in the lap of Mother Earth.  In short, in Jees Uck he found
the youth of the world--the youth and the strength and the joy.

And to fill the full round of his need, and that they might not see
overmuch of each other, there arrived at Twenty Mile one Sandy
MacPherson, as companionable a man as ever whistled along the trail
or raised a ballad by a camp-fire.  A Jesuit priest had run into
his camp, a couple of hundred miles up the Yukon, in the nick of
time to say a last word over the body of Sandy's partner.  And on
departing, the priest had said, "My son, you will be lonely now."
And Sandy had bowed his head brokenly.  "At Twenty Mile," the
priest added, "there is a lonely man.  You have need of each other,
my son."

So it was that Sandy became a welcome third at the post, brother to
the man and woman that resided there.  He took Bonner moose-hunting
and wolf-trapping; and, in return, Bonner resurrected a battered
and way-worn volume and made him friends with Shakespeare, till
Sandy declaimed iambic pentameters to his sled-dogs whenever they
waxed mutinous.  And of the long evenings they played cribbage and
talked and disagreed about the universe, the while Jees Uck rocked
matronly in an easy-chair and darned their moccasins and socks.

Spring came.  The sun shot up out of the south.  The land exchanged
its austere robes for the garb of a smiling wanton.  Everywhere
light laughed and life invited.  The days stretched out their balmy
length and the nights passed from blinks of darkness to no darkness
at all.  The river bared its bosom, and snorting steamboats
challenged the wilderness.  There were stir and bustle, new faces,
and fresh facts.  An assistant arrived at Twenty Mile, and Sandy
MacPherson wandered off with a bunch of prospectors to invade the
Koyokuk country.  And there were newspapers and magazines and
letters for Neil Bonner.  And Jees Uck looked on in worriment, for
she knew his kindred talked with him across the world.

Without much shock, it came to him that his father was dead.  There
was a sweet letter of forgiveness, dictated in his last hours.
There were official letters from the Company, graciously ordering
him to turn the post over to the assistant and permitting him to
depart at his earliest pleasure.  A long, legal affair from the
lawyers informed him of interminable lists of stocks and bonds,
real estate, rents, and chattels that were his by his father's
will.  And a dainty bit of stationery, sealed and monogramed,
implored dear Neil's return to his heart-broken and loving mother.

Neil Bonner did some swift thinking, and when the Yukon Belle
coughed in to the bank on her way down to Bering Sea, he departed--
departed with the ancient lie of quick return young and blithe on
his lips.

"I'll come back, dear Jees Uck, before the first snow flies," he
promised her, between the last kisses at the gang-plank.

And not only did he promise, but, like the majority of men under
the same circumstances, he really meant it.  To John Thompson, the
new agent, he gave orders for the extension of unlimited credit to
his wife, Jees Uck.  Also, with his last look from the deck of the
Yukon Belle, he saw a dozen men at work rearing the logs that were
to make the most comfortable house along a thousand miles of river
front--the house of Jees Uck, and likewise the house of Neil
Bonner--ere the first flurry of snow.  For he fully and fondly
meant to come back.  Jees Uck was dear to him, and, further, a
golden future awaited the north.  With his father's money he
intended to verify that future.  An ambitious dream allured him.
With his four years of experience, and aided by the friendly
cooperation of the P. C. Company, he would return to become the
Rhodes of Alaska.  And he would return, fast as steam could drive,
as soon as he had put into shape the affairs of his father, whom he
had never known, and comforted his mother, whom he had forgotten.

There was much ado when Neil Bonner came back from the Arctic.  The
fires were lighted and the fleshpots slung, and he took of it all
and called it good.  Not only was he bronzed and creased, but he
was a new man under his skin, with a grip on things and a
seriousness and control.  His old companions were amazed when he
declined to hit up the pace in the good old way, while his father's
crony rubbed hands gleefully, and became an authority upon the
reclamation of wayward and idle youth.

For four years Neil Bonner's mind had lain fallow.  Little that was
new had been added to it, but it had undergone a process of
selection.  It had, so to say, been purged of the trivial and
superfluous.  He had lived quick years, down in the world; and, up
in the wilds, time had been given him to organize the confused mass
of his experiences.  His superficial standards had been flung to
the winds and new standards erected on deeper and broader
generalizations.  Concerning civilization, he had gone away with
one set of values, had returned with another set of values.  Aided,
also, by the earth smells in his nostrils and the earth sights in
his eyes, he laid hold of the inner significance of civilization,
beholding with clear vision its futilities and powers.  It was a
simple little philosophy he evolved.  Clean living was the way to
grace.  Duty performed was sanctification.  One must live clean and
do his duty in order that he might work.  Work was salvation.  And
to work toward life abundant, and more abundant, was to be in line
with the scheme of things and the will of God.

Primarily, he was of the city.  And his fresh earth grip and virile
conception of humanity gave him a finer sense of civilization and
endeared civilization to him.  Day by day the people of the city
clung closer to him and the world loomed more colossal.  And, day
by day, Alaska grew more remote and less real.  And then he met
Kitty Sharon--a woman of his own flesh and blood and kind; a woman
who put her hand into his hand and drew him to her, till he forgot
the day and hour and the time of the year the first snow flies on
the Yukon.

Jees Uck moved into her grand log-house and dreamed away three
golden summer months.  Then came the autumn, post-haste before the
down rush of winter.  The air grew thin and sharp, the days thin
and short.  The river ran sluggishly, and skin ice formed in the
quiet eddies.  All migratory life departed south, and silence fell
upon the land.  The first snow flurries came, and the last homing
steamboat bucked desperately into the running mush ice.  Then came
the hard ice, solid cakes and sheets, till the Yukon ran level with
its banks.  And when all this ceased the river stood still and the
blinking days lost themselves in the darkness.

John Thompson, the new agent, laughed; but Jees Uck had faith in
the mischances of sea and river.  Neil Bonner might be frozen in
anywhere between Chilkoot Pass and St. Michael's, for the last
travellers of the year are always caught by the ice, when they
exchange boat for sled and dash on through the long hours behind
the flying dogs.

But no flying dogs came up the trail, nor down the trail, to Twenty
Mile.  And John Thompson told Jees Uck, with a certain gladness ill
concealed, that Bonner would never come back again.  Also, and
brutally, he suggested his own eligibility.  Jees Uck laughed in
his face and went back to her grand log-house.  But when midwinter
came, when hope dies down and life is at its lowest ebb, Jees Uck
found she had no credit at the store.  This was Thompson's doing,
and he rubbed his hands, and walked up and down, and came to his
door and looked up at Jees Uck's house and waited.  And he
continued to wait.  She sold her dog-team to a party of miners and
paid cash for her food.  And when Thompson refused to honour even
her coin, Toyaat Indians made her purchases, and sledded them up to
her house in the dark.

In February the first post came in over the ice, and John Thompson
read in the society column of a five-months-old paper of the
marriage of Neil Bonner and Kitty Sharon.  Jees Uck held the door
ajar and him outside while he imparted the information; and, when
he had done, laughed pridefully and did not believe.  In March, and
all alone, she gave birth to a man-child, a brave bit of new life
at which she marvelled.  And at that hour, a year later, Neil
Bonner sat by another bed, marvelling at another bit of new life
that had fared into the world.

The snow went off the ground and the ice broke out of the Yukon.
The sun journeyed north, and journeyed south again; and, the money
from the being spent, Jees Uck went back to her own people.  Oche
Ish, a shrewd hunter, proposed to kill the meat for her and her
babe, and catch the salmon, if she would marry him.  And Imego and
Hah Yo and Wy Nooch, husky young hunters all, made similar
proposals.  But she elected to live alone and seek her own meat and
fish.  She sewed moccasins and PARKAS and mittens--warm,
serviceable things, and pleasing to the eye, withal, what of the
ornamental hair-tufts and bead-work.  These she sold to the miners,
who were drifting faster into the land each year.  And not only did
she win food that was good and plentiful, but she laid money by,
and one day took passage on the Yukon Belle down the river.

At St. Michael's she washed dishes in the kitchen of the post.  The
servants of the Company wondered at the remarkable woman with the
remarkable child, though they asked no questions and she vouchsafed
nothing.  But just before Bering Sea closed in for the year, she
bought a passage south on a strayed sealing schooner.  That winter
she cooked for Captain Markheim's household at Unalaska, and in the
spring continued south to Sitka on a whisky sloop.  Later on
appeared at Metlakahtla, which is near to St. Mary's on the end of
the Pan-Handle, where she worked in the cannery through the salmon
season.  When autumn came and the Siwash fishermen prepared to
return to Puget Sound, she embarked with a couple of families in a
big cedar canoe; and with them she threaded the hazardous chaos of
the Alaskan and Canadian coasts, till the Straits of Juan de Fuca
were passed and she led her boy by the hand up the hard pave of
Seattle.

There she met Sandy MacPherson, on a windy corner, very much
surprised and, when he had heard her story, very wroth--not so
wroth as he might have been, had he known of Kitty Sharon; but of
her Jees Uck breathed not a word, for she had never believed.
Sandy, who read commonplace and sordid desertion into the
circumstance, strove to dissuade her from her trip to San
Francisco, where Neil Bonner was supposed to live when he was at
home.  And, having striven, he made her comfortable, bought her
tickets and saw her off, the while smiling in her face and
muttering "dam-shame" into his beard.

With roar and rumble, through daylight and dark, swaying and
lurching between the dawns, soaring into the winter snows and
sinking to summer valleys, skirting depths, leaping chasms,
piercing mountains, Jees Uck and her boy were hurled south.  But
she had no fear of the iron stallion; nor was she stunned by this
masterful civilization of Neil Bonner's people.  It seemed, rather,
that she saw with greater clearness the wonder that a man of such
godlike race had held her in his arms.  The screaming medley of San
Francisco, with its restless shipping, belching factories, and
thundering traffic, did not confuse her; instead, she comprehended
swiftly the pitiful sordidness of Twenty Mile and the skin-lodged
Toyaat village.  And she looked down at the boy that clutched her
hand and wondered that she had borne him by such a man.

She paid the hack-driver five pieces and went up the stone steps of
Neil Bonner's front door.  A slant-eyed Japanese parleyed with her
for a fruitless space, then led her inside and disappeared.  She
remained in the hall, which to her simply fancy seemed to be the
guest-room--the show-place wherein were arrayed all the household
treasures with the frank purpose of parade and dazzlement.  The
walls and ceiling were of oiled and panelled redwood.  The floor
was more glassy than glare-ice, and she sought standing place on
one of the great skins that gave a sense of security to the
polished surface.  A huge fireplace--an extravagant fireplace, she
deemed it--yawned in the farther wall.  A flood of light, mellowed
by stained glass, fell across the room, and from the far end came
the white gleam of a marble figure.

This much she saw, and more, when the slant-eyed servant led the
way past another room--of which she caught a fleeting glance--and
into a third, both of which dimmed the brave show of the entrance
hall.  And to her eyes the great house seemed to hold out the
promise of endless similar rooms.  There was such length and
breadth to them, and the ceilings were so far away!  For the first
time since her advent into the white man's civilization, a feeling
of awe laid hold of her.  Neil, her Neil, lived in this house,
breathed the air of it, and lay down at night and slept!  It was
beautiful, all this that she saw, and it pleased her; but she felt,
also, the wisdom and mastery behind.  It was the concrete
expression of power in terms of beauty, and it was the power that
she unerringly divined.

And then came a woman, queenly tall, crowned with a glory of hair
that was like a golden sun.  She seemed to come toward Jees Uck as
a ripple of music across still water; her sweeping garment itself a
song, her body playing rhythmically beneath.  Jees Uck herself was
a man compeller.  There were Oche Ish and Imego and Hah Yo and Wy
Nooch, to say nothing of Neil Bonner and John Thompson and other
white men that had looked upon her and felt her power.  But she
gazed upon the wide blue eyes and rose-white skin of this woman
that advanced to meet her, and she measured her with woman's eyes
looking through man's eyes; and as a man compeller she felt herself
diminish and grow insignificant before this radiant and flashing
creature.

"You wish to see my husband?" the woman asked; and Jees Uck gasped
at the liquid silver of a voice that had never sounded harsh cries
at snarling wolf-dogs, nor moulded itself to a guttural speech, nor
toughened in storm and frost and camp smoke.

"No," Jees Uck answered slowly and gropingly, in order that she
might do justice to her English.  "I come to see Neil Bonner."

"He is my husband," the woman laughed.

Then it was true!  John Thompson had not lied that bleak February
day, when she laughed pridefully and shut the door in his face.  As
once she had thrown Amos Pentley across her knee and ripped her
knife into the air, so now she felt impelled to spring upon this
woman and bear her back and down, and tear the life out of her fair
body.  But Jees Uck was thinking quickly and gave no sign, and
Kitty Bonner little dreamed how intimately she had for an instant
been related with sudden death.

Jees Uck nodded her head that she understood, and Kitty Bonner
explained that Neil was expected at any moment.  Then they sat down
on ridiculously comfortable chairs, and Kitty sought to entertain
her strange visitor, and Jees Uck strove to help her.

"You knew my husband in the North?" Kitty asked, once.

"Sure.  I wash um clothes," Jees Uck had answered, her English
abruptly beginning to grow atrocious.

"And this is your boy?  I have a little girl."

Kitty caused her daughter to be brought, and while the children,
after their manner, struck an acquaintance, the mothers indulged in
the talk of mothers and drank tea from cups so fragile that Jees
Uck feared lest hers should crumble to pieces beneath her fingers.
Never had she seen such cups, so delicate and dainty.  In her mind
she compared them with the woman who poured the tea, and there
uprose in contrast the gourds and pannikins of the Toyaat village
and the clumsy mugs of Twenty Mile, to which she likened herself.
And in such fashion and such terms the problem presented itself.
She was beaten.  There was a woman other than herself better fitted
to bear and upbring Neil Bonner's children.  Just as his people
exceeded her people, so did his womankind exceed her.  They were
the man compellers, as their men were the world compellers.  She
looked at the rose-white tenderness of Kitty Bonner's skin and
remembered the sun-beat on her own face.  Likewise she looked from
brown hand to white--the one, work-worn and hardened by whip-handle
and paddle, the other as guiltless of toil and soft as a newborn
babe's.  And, for all the obvious softness and apparent weakness,
Jees Uck looked into the blue eyes and saw the mastery she had seen
in Neil Bonner's eyes and in the eyes of Neil Bonner's people.

"Why, it's Jees Uck!" Neil Bonner said, when he entered.  He said
it calmly, with even a ring of joyful cordiality, coming over to
her and shaking both her hands, but looking into her eyes with a
worry in his own that she understood.

"Hello, Neil!" she said.  "You look much good."

"Fine, fine, Jees Uck," he answered heartily, though secretly
studying Kitty for some sign of what had passed between the two.
Yet he knew his wife too well to expect, even though the worst had
passed, such a sign.

"Well, I can't say how glad I am to see you," he went on.  "What's
happened?  Did you strike a mine?  And when did you get in?"

"Oo-a, I get in to-day," she replied, her voice instinctively
seeking its guttural parts.  "I no strike it, Neil.  You known
Cap'n Markheim, Unalaska?  I cook, his house, long time.  No spend
money.  Bime-by, plenty.  Pretty good, I think, go down and see
White Man's Land.  Very fine, White Man's Land, very fine," she
added.  Her English puzzled him, for Sandy and he had sought,
constantly, to better her speech, and she had proved an apt pupil.
Now it seemed that she had sunk back into her race.  Her face was
guileless, stolidly guileless, giving no cue.  Kitty's untroubled
brow likewise baffled him.  What had happened?  How much had been
said? and how much guessed?

While he wrestled with these questions and while Jees Uck wrestled
with her problem--never had he looked so wonderful and great--a
silence fell.

"To think that you knew my husband in Alaska!" Kitty said softly.

Knew him!  Jees Uck could not forbear a glance at the boy she had
borne him, and his eyes followed hers mechanically to the window
where played the two children.  An iron hand seemed to tighten
across his forehead.  His knees went weak and his heart leaped up
and pounded like a fist against his breast.  His boy!  He had never
dreamed it!

Little Kitty Bonner, fairylike in gauzy lawn, with pinkest of
cheeks and bluest of dancing eyes, arms outstretched and lips
puckered in invitation, was striving to kiss the boy.  And the boy,
lean and lithe, sunbeaten and browned, skin-clad and in hair-
fringed and hair-tufted MUCLUCS that showed the wear of the sea and
rough work, coolly withstood her advances, his body straight and
stiff with the peculiar erectness common to children of savage
people.  A stranger in a strange land, unabashed and unafraid, he
appeared more like an untamed animal, silent and watchful, his
black eyes flashing from face to face, quiet so long as quiet
endured, but prepared to spring and fight and tear and scratch for
life, at the first sign of danger.

The contrast between boy and girl was striking, but not pitiful.
There was too much strength in the boy for that, waif that he was
of the generations of Shpack, Spike O'Brien, and Bonner.  In his
features, clean cut as a cameo and almost classic in their
severity, there were the power and achievement of his father, and
his grandfather, and the one known as the Big Fat, who was captured
by the Sea people and escaped to Kamchatka.

Neil Bonner fought his emotion down, swallowed it down, and choked
over it, though his face smiled with good-humour and the joy with
which one meets a friend.

"Your boy, eh, Jees Uck?" he said.  And then turning to Kitty:
"Handsome fellow!  He'll do something with those two hands of his
in this our world."

Kitty nodded concurrence.  "What is your name?" she asked.

The young savage flashed his quick eyes upon her and dwelt over her
for a space, seeking out, as it were, the motive beneath the
question.

"Neil," he answered deliberately when the scrutiny had satisfied
him.

"Injun talk," Jees Uck interposed, glibly manufacturing languages
on the spur of the moment.  "Him Injun talk, NEE-AL all the same
'cracker.'  Him baby, him like cracker; him cry for cracker.  Him
say, 'NEE-AL, NEE-AL,' all time him say, 'NEE-AL.'  Then I say that
um name.  So um name all time Nee-al."

Never did sound more blessed fall upon Neil Bonner's ear than that
lie from Jees Uck's lips.  It was the cue, and he knew there was
reason for Kitty's untroubled brow.

"And his father?" Kitty asked.  "He must be a fine man."

"Oo-a, yes," was the reply.  "Um father fine man.  Sure!"

"Did you know him, Neil?" queried Kitty.

"Know him?  Most intimately," Neil answered, and harked back to
dreary Twenty Mile and the man alone in the silence with his
thoughts.

And here might well end the story of Jees Uck but for the crown she
put upon her renunciation.  When she returned to the North to dwell
in her grand log-house, John Thompson found that the P. C. Company
could make a shift somehow to carry on its business without his
aid.  Also, the new agent and the succeeding agents received
instructions that the woman Jees Uck should be given whatsoever
goods and grub she desired, in whatsoever quantities she ordered,
and that no charge should be placed upon the books.  Further, the
Company paid yearly to the woman Jees Uck a pension of five
thousand dollars.

When he had attained suitable age, Father Champreau laid hands upon
the boy, and the time was not long when Jees Uck received letters
regularly from the Jesuit college in Maryland.  Later on these
letters came from Italy, and still later from France.  And in the
end there returned to Alaska one Father Neil, a man mighty for good
in the land, who loved his mother and who ultimately went into a
wider field and rose to high authority in the order.

Jees Uck was a young woman when she went back into the North, and
men still looked upon her and yearned.  But she lived straight, and
no breath was ever raised save in commendation.  She stayed for a
while with the good sisters at Holy Cross, where she learned to
read and write and became versed in practical medicine and surgery.
After that she returned to her grand log-house and gathered about
her the young girls of the Toyaat village, to show them the way of
their feet in the world.  It is neither Protestant nor Catholic,
this school in the house built by Neil Bonner for Jees Uck, his
wife; but the missionaries of all the sects look upon it with equal
favour.  The latchstring is always out, and tired prospectors and
trail-weary men turn aside from the flowing river or frozen trail
to rest there for a space and be warm by her fire.  And, down in
the States, Kitty Bonner is pleased at the interest her husband
takes in Alaskan education and the large sums he devotes to that
purpose; and, though she often smiles and chaffs, deep down and
secretly she is but the prouder of him.

========================================
========================================

THE NIGHT-BORN

By Jack London



CONTENTS:

     THE NIGHT-BORN
     THE MADNESS OF JOHN HARNED
     WHEN THE WORLD WAS YOUNG
     THE BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT
     WINGED BLACKMAIL
     BUNCHES OF KNUCKLES
     WAR
     UNDER THE DECK AWNINGS
     TO KILL A MAN
     THE MEXICAN




THE NIGHT-BORN

It was in the old Alta-Inyo Club--a warm night for San Francisco--and
through the open windows, hushed and far, came the brawl of the streets.
The talk had led on from the Graft Prosecution and the latest signs
that the town was to be run wide open, down through all the grotesque
sordidness and rottenness of man-hate and man-meanness, until the name
of O'Brien was mentioned--O'Brien, the promising young pugilist who
had been killed in the prize-ring the night before. At once the air
had seemed to freshen. O'Brien had been a clean-living young man with
ideals. He neither drank, smoked, nor swore, and his had been the body
of a beautiful young god. He had even carried his prayer-book to the
ringside. They found it in his coat pocket in the dressing-room...
afterward.

Here was Youth, clean and wholesome, unsullied--the thing of glory and
wonder for men to conjure with..... after it has been lost to them and
they have turned middle-aged. And so well did we conjure, that Romance
came and for an hour led us far from the man-city and its snarling roar.
Bardwell, in a way, started it by quoting from Thoreau; but it was old
Trefethan, bald-headed and dewlapped, who took up the quotation and for
the hour to come was romance incarnate. At first we wondered how many
Scotches he had consumed since dinner, but very soon all that was
forgotten.

"It was in 1898--I was thirty-five then," he said. "Yes, I know you are
adding it up. You're right. I'm forty-seven now; look ten years more;
and the doctors say--damn the doctors anyway!"

He lifted the long glass to his lips and sipped it slowly to soothe away
his irritation.

"But I was young... once. I was young twelve years ago, and I had
hair on top of my head, and my stomach was lean as a runner's, and the
longest day was none too long for me. I was a husky back there in '98.
You remember me, Milner. You knew me then. Wasn't I a pretty good bit of
all right?"

Milner nodded and agreed. Like Trefethan, he was another mining engineer
who had cleaned up a fortune in the Klondike.

"You certainly were, old man," Milner said. "I'll never forget when
you cleaned out those lumberjacks in the M. & M. that night that
little newspaper man started the row. Slavin was in the country at
the time,"--this to us--"and his manager wanted to get up a match with
Trefethan."

"Well, look at me now," Trefethan commanded angrily. "That's what the
Goldstead did to me--God knows how many millions, but nothing left in my
soul..... nor in my veins. The good red blood is gone. I am a jellyfish,
a huge, gross mass of oscillating protoplasm, a--a..."

But language failed him, and he drew solace from the long glass.

"Women looked at me then; and turned their heads to look a second time.
Strange that I never married. But the girl. That's what I started to
tell you about. I met her a thousand miles from anywhere, and then some.
And she quoted to me those very words of Thoreau that Bardwell quoted a
moment ago--the ones about the day-born gods and the night-born."

"It was after I had made my locations on Goldstead--and didn't know what
a treasure-pot that that trip creek was going to prove--that I made that
trip east over the Rockies, angling across to the Great Up North there
the Rockies are something more than a back-bone. They are a boundary,
a dividing line, a wall impregnable and unscalable. There is no
intercourse across them, though, on occasion, from the early days,
wandering trappers have crossed them, though more were lost by the way
than ever came through. And that was precisely why I tackled the job. It
was a traverse any man would be proud to make. I am prouder of it right
now than anything else I have ever done.

"It is an unknown land. Great stretches of it have never been explored.
There are big valleys there where the white man has never set foot, and
Indian tribes as primitive as ten thousand years... almost, for they
have had some contact with the whites. Parties of them come out once in
a while to trade, and that is all. Even the Hudson Bay Company failed to
find them and farm them.

"And now the girl. I was coming up a stream--you'd call it a river in
California--uncharted--and unnamed. It was a noble valley, now shut in
by high canyon walls, and again opening out into beautiful stretches,
wide and long, with pasture shoulder-high in the bottoms, meadows dotted
with flowers, and with clumps of timberspruce--virgin and magnificent.
The dogs were packing on their backs, and were sore-footed and played
out; while I was looking for any bunch of Indians to get sleds and
drivers from and go on with the first snow. It was late fall, but
the way those flowers persisted surprised me. I was supposed to be in
sub-arctic America, and high up among the buttresses of the Rockies,
and yet there was that everlasting spread of flowers. Some day the white
settlers will be in there and growing wheat down all that valley.

"And then I lifted a smoke, and heard the barking of the dogs--Indian
dogs--and came into camp. There must have been five hundred of them,
proper Indians at that, and I could see by the jerking-frames that the
fall hunting had been good. And then I met her--Lucy. That was her name.
Sign language--that was all we could talk with, till they led me to a
big fly--you know, half a tent, open on the one side where a campfire
burned. It was all of moose-skins, this fly--moose-skins, smoke-cured,
hand-rubbed, and golden-brown. Under it everything was neat and orderly
as no Indian camp ever was. The bed was laid on fresh spruce boughs.
There were furs galore, and on top of all was a robe of swanskins--white
swan-skins--I have never seen anything like that robe. And on top of it,
sitting cross-legged, was Lucy. She was nut-brown. I have called her a
girl. But she was not. She was a woman, a nut-brown woman, an Amazon, a
full-blooded, full-bodied woman, and royal ripe. And her eyes were blue.

"That's what took me off my feet--her eyes--blue, not China blue, but
deep blue, like the sea and sky all melted into one, and very wise. More
than that, they had laughter in them--warm laughter, sun-warm and human,
very human, and... shall I say feminine? They were. They were a woman's
eyes, a proper woman's eyes. You know what that means. Can I say more?
Also, in those blue eyes were, at the same time, a wild unrest, a
wistful yearning, and a repose, an absolute repose, a sort of all-wise
and philosophical calm."

Trefethan broke off abruptly.

"You fellows think I am screwed. I'm not. This is only my fifth since
dinner. I am dead sober. I am solemn. I sit here now side by side with
my sacred youth. It is not I--'old' Trefethan--that talks; it is my
youth, and it is my youth that says those were the most wonderful eyes
I have ever seen--so very calm, so very restless; so very wise, so very
curious; so very old, so very young; so satisfied and yet yearning so
wistfully. Boys, I can't describe them. When I have told you about her,
you may know better for yourselves."

"She did not stand up. But she put out her hand."

"'Stranger,' she said, 'I'm real glad to see you.'

"I leave it to you--that sharp, frontier, Western tang of speech.
Picture my sensations. It was a woman, a white woman, but that tang!
It was amazing that it should be a white woman, here, beyond the last
boundary of the world--but the tang. I tell you, it hurt. It was like
the stab of a flatted note. And yet, let me tell you, that woman was a
poet. You shall see."

"She dismissed the Indians. And, by Jove, they went. They took her
orders and followed her blind. She was hi-yu skookam chief. She told the
bucks to make a camp for me and to take care of my dogs. And they
did, too. And they knew enough not to get away with as much as a
moccasin-lace of my outfit. She was a regular She-Who-Must-Be-Obeyed,
and I want to tell you it chilled me to the marrow, sent those little
thrills Marathoning up and down my spinal column, meeting a white woman
out there at the head of a tribe of savages a thousand miles the other
side of No Man's Land.

"'Stranger," she said, 'I reckon you're sure the first white that ever
set foot in this valley. Set down an' talk a spell, and then we'll have
a bite to eat. Which way might you be comin'?'

"There it was, that tang again. But from now to the end of the yarn I
want you to forget it. I tell you I forgot it, sitting there on the edge
of that swan-skin robe and listening and looking at the most wonderful
woman that ever stepped out of the pages of Thoreau or of any other
man's book.

"I stayed on there a week. It was on her invitation. She promised to fit
me out with dogs and sleds and with Indians that would put me across
the best pass of the Rockies in five hundred miles. Her fly was pitched
apart from the others, on the high bank by the river, and a couple of
Indian girls did her cooking for her and the camp work. And so we talked
and talked, while the first snow fell and continued to fall and make a
surface for my sleds. And this was her story.

"She was frontier-born, of poor settlers, and you know what that
means--work, work, always work, work in plenty and without end.

"'I never seen the glory of the world,' she said. 'I had no time. I knew
it was right out there, anywhere, all around the cabin, but there was
always the bread to set, the scrubbin' and the washin' and the work that
was never done. I used to be plumb sick at times, jes' to get out into
it all, especially in the spring when the songs of the birds drove me
most clean crazy. I wanted to run out through the long pasture grass,
wetting my legs with the dew of it, and to climb the rail fence, and
keep on through the timber and up and up over the divide so as to get a
look around. Oh, I had all kinds of hankerings--to follow up the
canyon beds and slosh around from pool to pool, making friends with
the water-dogs and the speckly trout; to peep on the sly and watch the
squirrels and rabbits and small furry things and see what they was doing
and learn the secrets of their ways. Seemed to me, if I had time, I
could crawl among the flowers, and, if I was good and quiet, catch them
whispering with themselves, telling all kinds of wise things that mere
humans never know.'"

Trefethan paused to see that his glass had been refilled.

"Another time she said: 'I wanted to run nights like a wild thing, just
to run through the moonshine and under the stars, to run white and naked
in the darkness that I knew must feel like cool velvet, and to run and
run and keep on running. One evening, plumb tuckered out--it had been a
dreadful hard hot day, and the bread wouldn't raise and the churning had
gone wrong, and I was all irritated and jerky--well, that evening I
made mention to dad of this wanting to run of mine. He looked at me
curious-some and a bit scared. And then he gave me two pills to take.
Said to go to bed and get a good sleep and I'd be all hunky-dory in
the morning. So I never mentioned my hankerings to him, or any one any
more.'

"The mountain home broke up--starved out, I imagine--and the family came
to Seattle to live. There she worked in a factory--long hours, you
know, and all the rest, deadly work. And after a year of that she became
waitress in a cheap restaurant--hash-slinger, she called it. She said
to me once, 'Romance I guess was what I wanted. But there wan't no
romance floating around in dishpans and washtubs, or in factories and
hash-joints.'

"When she was eighteen she married--a man who was going up to Juneau to
start a restaurant. He had a few dollars saved, and appeared prosperous.
She didn't love him--she was emphatic about that, but she was all tired
out, and she wanted to get away from the unending drudgery. Besides,
Juneau was in Alaska, and her yearning took the form of a desire to see
that wonderland. But little she saw of it. He started the restaurant,
a little cheap one, and she quickly learned what he had married her
for..... to save paying wages. She came pretty close to running the
joint and doing all the work from waiting to dishwashing. She cooked
most of the time as well. And she had four years of it.

"Can't you picture her, this wild woods creature, quick with every old
primitive instinct, yearning for the free open, and mowed up in a vile
little hash-joint and toiling and moiling for four mortal years?

"'There was no meaning in anything,' she said. 'What was it all about!
Why was I born! Was that all the meaning of life--just to work and work
and be always tired!--to go to bed tired and to wake up tired, with
every day like every other day unless it was harder?' She had heard talk
of immortal life from the gospel sharps, she said, but she could
not reckon that what she was doin' was a likely preparation for her
immortality.

"But she still had her dreams, though more rarely. She had read a few
books--what, it is pretty hard to imagine, Seaside Library novels most
likely; yet they had been food for fancy. 'Sometimes,' she said, 'when
I was that dizzy from the heat of the cooking that if I didn't take
a breath of fresh air I'd faint, I'd stick my head out of the kitchen
window, and close my eyes and see most wonderful things. All of a sudden
I'd be traveling down a country road, and everything clean and quiet,
no dust, no dirt; just streams ripplin' down sweet meadows, and lambs
playing, breezes blowing the breath of flowers, and soft sunshine over
everything; and lovely cows lazying knee-deep in quiet pools, and young
girls bathing in a curve of stream all white and slim and natural--and
I'd know I was in Arcady. I'd read about that country once, in a book.
And maybe knights, all flashing in the sun, would come riding around a
bend in the road, or a lady on a milk-white mare, and in the distance
I could see the towers of a castle rising, or I just knew, on the next
turn, that I'd come upon some palace, all white and airy and fairy-like,
with fountains playing, and flowers all over everything, and peacocks
on the lawn..... and then I'd open my eyes, and the heat of the
cooking range would strike on me, and I'd hear Jake sayin'--he was my
husband--I'd hear Jake sayin', "Why ain't you served them beans? Think I
can wait here all day!" Romance!--I reckon the nearest I ever come to
it was when a drunken Armenian cook got the snakes and tried to cut my
throat with a potato knife and I got my arm burned on the stove before I
could lay him out with the potato stomper.

"'I wanted easy ways, and lovely things, and Romance and all that; but
it just seemed I had no luck nohow and was only and expressly born for
cooking and dishwashing. There was a wild crowd in Juneau them days, but
I looked at the other women, and their way of life didn't excite me.
I reckon I wanted to be clean. I don't know why; I just wanted to, I
guess; and I reckoned I might as well die dishwashing as die their way."

Trefethan halted in his tale for a moment, completing to himself some
thread of thought.

"And this is the woman I met up there in the Arctic, running a tribe of
wild Indians and a few thousand square miles of hunting territory. And
it happened, simply enough, though, for that matter, she might have
lived and died among the pots and pans. But 'Came the whisper, came the
vision.' That was all she needed, and she got it.

"'I woke up one day,' she said. 'Just happened on it in a scrap of
newspaper. I remember every word of it, and I can give it to you.' And
then she quoted Thoreau's Cry of the Human:

"'The young pines springing up, in the corn field from year to year are
to me a refreshing fact. We talk of civilizing the Indian, but that is
not the name for his improvement. By the wary independence and aloofness
of his dim forest life he preserves his intercourse with his native gods
and is admitted from time to time to a rare and peculiar society with
nature. He has glances of starry recognition, to which our saloons
are strangers. The steady illumination of his qenius, dim only because
distant, is like the faint but satisfying light of the stars compared
with the dazzling but ineffectual and short-lived blaze of candles. The
Society Islanders had their day-born gods, but they were not supposed to
be of equal antiquity with the..... night-born gods.'

"That's what she did, repeated it word for word, and I forgot the tang,
for it was solemn, a declaration of religion--pagan, if you will; and
clothed in the living garmenture of herself.

"'And the rest of it was torn away,' she added, a great emptiness in her
voice. 'It was only a scrap of newspaper. But that Thoreau was a wise
man. I wish I knew more about him.' She stopped a moment, and I swear
her face was ineffably holy as she said, 'I could have made him a good
wife.'

"And then she went on. 'I knew right away, as soon as I read that, what
was the matter with me. I was a night-born. I, who had lived all my
life with the day-born, was a night-born. That was why I had never been
satisfied with cooking and dishwashing; that was why I had hankered to
run naked in the moonlight. And I knew that this dirty little Juneau
hash-joint was no place for me. And right there and then I said, "I
quit." I packed up my few rags of clothes, and started. Jake saw me and
tried to stop me.

"'What you doing?" he says.

"'Divorcin' you and me,' I says. 'I'm headin' for tall timber and where
I belong.'"

"'No you don't,' he says, reaching for me to stop me. 'The cooking has
got on your head. You listen to me talk before you up and do anything
brash.'

"But I pulled a gun-a little Colt's forty-four--and says, 'This does my
talkin' for me.'

"And I left."

Trefethan emptied his glass and called for another.

"Boys, do you know what that girl did? She was twenty-two. She had spent
her life over the dish-pan and she knew no more about the world than I
do of the fourth dimension, or the fifth. All roads led to her desire.
No; she didn't head for the dance-halls. On the Alaskan Pan-handle it
is preferable to travel by water. She went down to the beach. An Indian
canoe was starting for Dyea--you know the kind, carved out of a single
tree, narrow and deep and sixty feet long. She gave them a couple of
dollars and got on board.

"'Romance?' she told me. 'It was Romance from the jump. There were three
families altogether in that canoe, and that crowded there wasn't room to
turn around, with dogs and Indian babies sprawling over everything, and
everybody dipping a paddle and making that canoe go.' And all around the
great solemn mountains, and tangled drifts of clouds and sunshine. And
oh, the silence! the great wonderful silence! And, once, the smoke of
a hunter's camp, away off in the distance, trailing among the trees.
It was like a picnic, a grand picnic, and I could see my dreams coming
true, and I was ready for something to happen 'most any time. And it
did.

"'And that first camp, on the island! And the boys spearing fish in the
mouth of the creek, and the big deer one of the bucks shot just around
the point. And there were flowers everywhere, and in back from the beach
the grass was thick and lush and neck-high. And some of the girls went
through this with me, and we climbed the hillside behind and picked
berries and roots that tasted sour and were good to eat. And we came
upon a big bear in the berries making his supper, and he said "Oof!" and
ran away as scared as we were. And then the camp, and the camp smoke,
and the smell of fresh venison cooking. It was beautiful. I was with the
night-born at last, and I knew that was where I belonged. And for the
first time in my life, it seemed to me, I went to bed happy that night,
looking out under a corner of the canvas at the stars cut off black by a
big shoulder of mountain, and listening to the night-noises, and knowing
that the same thing would go on next day and forever and ever, for I
wasn't going back. And I never did go back.'

"'Romance! I got it next day. We had to cross a big arm of the
ocean--twelve or fifteen miles, at least; and it came on to blow when we
were in the middle. That night I was along on shore, with one wolf-dog,
and I was the only one left alive.'

"Picture it yourself," Trefethan broke off to say. "The canoe was
wrecked and lost, and everybody pounded to death on the rocks except
her. She went ashore hanging on to a dog's tail, escaping the rocks and
washing up on a tiny beach, the only one in miles.

"'Lucky for me it was the mainland,' she said. 'So I headed right away
back, through the woods and over the mountains and straight on anywhere.
Seemed I was looking for something and knew I'd find it. I wasn't
afraid. I was night-born, and the big timber couldn't kill me. And on
the second day I found it. I came upon a small clearing and a tumbledown
cabin. Nobody had been there for years and years. The roof had fallen
in. Rotted blankets lay in the bunks, and pots and pans were on the
stove. But that was not the most curious thing. Outside, along the
edge of the trees, you can't guess what I found. The skeletons of eight
horses, each tied to a tree. They had starved to death, I reckon, and
left only little piles of bones scattered some here and there. And each
horse had had a load on its back. There the loads lay, in among the
bones--painted canvas sacks, and inside moosehide sacks, and inside the
moosehide sacks--what do you think?'"

She stopped, reached under a corner of the bed among the spruce boughs,
and pulled out a leather sack. She untied the mouth and ran out into my
hand as pretty a stream of gold as I have ever seen--coarse gold, placer
gold, some large dust, but mostly nuggets, and it was so fresh and rough
that it scarcely showed signs of water-wash.

"'You say you're a mining engineer,' she said, 'and you know this
country. Can you name a pay-creek that has the color of that gold!'

"I couldn't! There wasn't a trace of silver. It was almost pure, and I
told her so.

"'You bet,' she said. 'I sell that for nineteen dollars an ounce. You
can't get over seventeen for Eldorado gold, and Minook gold don't fetch
quite eighteen. Well, that was what I found among the bones--eight
horse-loads of it, one hundred and fifty pounds to the load.'

"'A quarter of a million dollars!' I cried out.

"'That's what I reckoned it roughly,' she answered. 'Talk about Romance!
And me a slaving the way I had all the years, when as soon as I ventured
out, inside three days, this was what happened. And what became of the
men that mined all that gold? Often and often I wonder about it. They
left their horses, loaded and tied, and just disappeared off the face of
the earth, leaving neither hide nor hair behind them. I never heard tell
of them. Nobody knows anything about them. Well, being the night-born, I
reckon I was their rightful heir.'"

Trefethan stopped to light a cigar.

"Do you know what that girl did? She cached the gold, saving out thirty
pounds, which she carried back to the coast. Then she signaled a passing
canoe, made her way to Pat Healy's trading post at Dyea, outfitted,
and went over Chilcoot Pass. That was in '88--eight years before the
Klondike strike, and the Yukon was a howling wilderness. She was afraid
of the bucks, but she took two young squaws with her, crossed the lakes,
and went down the river and to all the early camps on the Lower Yukon.
She wandered several years over that country and then on in to where I
met her. Liked the looks of it, she said, seeing, in her own words, 'a
big bull caribou knee-deep in purple iris on the valley-bottom.' She
hooked up with the Indians, doctored them, gained their confidence, and
gradually took them in charge. She had only left that country once, and
then, with a bunch of the young bucks, she went over Chilcoot, cleaned
up her gold-cache, and brought it back with her.

"'And here I be, stranger,' she concluded her yarn, 'and here's the most
precious thing I own.'

"She pulled out a little pouch of buckskin, worn on her neck like a
locket, and opened it. And inside, wrapped in oiled silk, yellowed with
age and worn and thumbed, was the original scrap of newspaper containing
the quotation from Thoreau.

"'And are you happy... satisfied?' I asked her. 'With a quarter of a
million you wouldn't have to work down in the States. You must miss a
lot.'

"'Not much,' she answered. 'I wouldn't swop places with any woman down
in the States. These are my people; this is where I belong. But there
are times--and in her eyes smoldered up that hungry yearning I've
mentioned--'there are times when I wish most awful bad for that Thoreau
man to happen along.'

"'Why?' I asked.

"'So as I could marry him. I do get mighty lonesome at spells. I'm just
a woman--a real woman. I've heard tell of the other kind of women that
gallivanted off like me and did queer things--the sort that become
soldiers in armies, and sailors on ships. But those women are queer
themselves. They're more like men than women; they look like men and
they don't have ordinary women's needs. They don't want love, nor little
children in their arms and around their knees. I'm not that sort. I
leave it to you, stranger. Do I look like a man?'

"She didn't. She was a woman, a beautiful, nut-brown woman, with a
sturdy, health-rounded woman's body and with wonderful deep-blue woman's
eyes.

"'Ain't I woman?' she demanded. 'I am. I'm 'most all woman, and then
some. And the funny thing is, though I'm night-born in everything else,
I'm not when it comes to mating. I reckon that kind likes its own kind
best. That's the way it is with me, anyway, and has been all these
years.'

"'You mean to tell me--' I began.

"'Never,' she said, and her eyes looked into mine with the straightness
of truth. 'I had one husband, only--him I call the Ox; and I reckon he's
still down in Juneau running the hash-joint. Look him up, if you ever
get back, and you'll find he's rightly named.'

"And look him up I did, two years afterward. He was all she said--solid
and stolid, the Ox--shuffling around and waiting on the tables.

"'You need a wife to help you,' I said.

"'I had one once,' was his answer.

"'Widower?'

"'Yep. She went loco. She always said the heat of the cooking would
get her, and it did. Pulled a gun on me one day and ran away with some
Siwashes in a canoe. Caught a blow up the coast and all hands drowned.'"

Trefethan devoted himself to his glass and remained silent.

"But the girl?" Milner reminded him.

"You left your story just as it was getting interesting, tender. Did
it?"

"It did," Trefethan replied. "As she said herself, she was savage in
everything except mating, and then she wanted her own kind. She was very
nice about it, but she was straight to the point. She wanted to marry
me.

"'Stranger,' she said, 'I want you bad. You like this sort of life or
you wouldn't be here trying to cross the Rockies in fall weather. It's
a likely spot. You'll find few likelier. Why not settle down! I'll make
you a good wife.'

"And then it was up to me. And she waited. I don't mind confessing that
I was sorely tempted. I was half in love with her as it was. You know I
have never married. And I don't mind adding, looking back over my life,
that she is the only woman that ever affected me that way. But it was
too preposterous, the whole thing, and I lied like a gentleman. I told
her I was already married.

"'Is your wife waiting for you?' she asked.

"I said yes.

"'And she loves you?'

"I said yes.

"And that was all. She never pressed her point... except once, and then
she showed a bit of fire.

"'All I've got to do,' she said, 'is to give the word, and you don't get
away from here. If I give the word, you stay on... But I ain't going to
give it. I wouldn't want you if you didn't want to be wanted... and if
you didn't want me.'

"She went ahead and outfitted me and started me on my way.

"'It's a darned shame, stranger," she said, at parting. 'I like your
looks, and I like you. If you ever change your mind, come back.'

"Now there was one thing I wanted to do, and that was to kiss her
good-bye, but I didn't know how to go about it nor how she would take
it.--I tell you I was half in love with her. But she settled it herself.

"'Kiss me,' she said. 'Just something to go on and remember.'

"And we kissed, there in the snow, in that valley by the Rockies, and
I left her standing by the trail and went on after my dogs. I was six
weeks in crossing over the pass and coming down to the first post on
Great Slave Lake."

The brawl of the streets came up to us like a distant surf. A
steward, moving noiselessly, brought fresh siphons. And in the silence
Trefethan's voice fell like a funeral bell:

"It would have been better had I stayed. Look at me."

We saw his grizzled mustache, the bald spot on his head, the puff-sacks
under his eyes, the sagging cheeks, the heavy dewlap, the general
tiredness and staleness and fatness, all the collapse and ruin of a man
who had once been strong but who had lived too easily and too well.

"It's not too late, old man," Bardwell said, almost in a whisper.

"By God! I wish I weren't a coward!" was Trefethan's answering cry. "I
could go back to her. She's there, now. I could shape up and live many a
long year... with her... up there. To remain here is to commit suicide.
But I am an old man--forty-seven--look at me. The trouble is," he lifted
his glass and glanced at it, "the trouble is that suicide of this sort
is so easy. I am soft and tender. The thought of the long day's travel
with the dogs appalls me; the thought of the keen frost in the morning
and of the frozen sled-lashings frightens me--"

Automatically the glass was creeping toward his lips. With a swift
surge of anger he made as if to crash it down upon the floor. Next came
hesitancy and second thought. The glass moved upward to his lips and
paused. He laughed harshly and bitterly, but his words were solemn:

"Well, here's to the Night-Born. She WAS a wonder."




THE MADNESS OF JOHN HARNED

I TELL this for a fact. It happened in the bull-ring at Quito. I sat
in the box with John Harned, and with Maria Valenzuela, and with Luis
Cervallos. I saw it happen. I saw it all from first to last. I was on
the steamer Ecuadore from Panama to Guayaquil. Maria Valenzuela is
my cousin. I have known her always. She is very beautiful. I am a
Spaniard--an Ecuadoriano, true, but I am descended from Pedro Patino,
who was one of Pizarro's captains. They were brave men. They were
heroes. Did not Pizarro lead three hundred and fifty Spanish cavaliers
and four thousand Indians into the far Cordilleras in search of
treasure? And did not all the four thousand Indians and three hundred
of the brave cavaliers die on that vain quest? But Pedro Patino did
not die. He it was that lived to found the family of the Patino. I am
Ecuadoriano, true, but I am Spanish. I am Manuel de Jesus Patino. I own
many haciendas, and ten thousand Indians are my slaves, though the law
says they are free men who work by freedom of contract. The law is a
funny thing. We Ecuadorianos laugh at it. It is our law. We make it for
ourselves. I am Manuel de Jesus Patino. Remember that name. It will be
written some day in history. There are revolutions in Ecuador. We call
them elections. It is a good joke is it not?--what you call a pun?

John Harned was an American. I met him first at the Tivoli hotel in
Panama. He had much money--this I have heard. He was going to Lima,
but he met Maria Valenzuela in the Tivoli hotel. Maria Valenzuela is
my cousin, and she is beautiful. It is true, she is the most beautiful
woman in Ecuador. But also is she most beautiful in every country--in
Paris, in Madrid, in New York, in Vienna. Always do all men look at her,
and John Harned looked long at her at Panama. He loved her, that I know
for a fact. She was Ecuadoriano, true--but she was of all countries; she
was of all the world. She spoke many languages. She sang--ah! like an
artiste. Her smile--wonderful, divine. Her eyes--ah! have I not seen
men look in her eyes? They were what you English call amazing. They were
promises of paradise. Men drowned themselves in her eyes.

Maria Valenzuela was rich--richer than I, who am accounted very rich in
Ecuador. But John Harned did not care for her money. He had a heart--a
funny heart. He was a fool. He did not go to Lima. He left the steamer
at Guayaquil and followed her to Quito. She was coming home from Europe
and other places. I do not see what she found in him, but she liked him.
This I know for a fact, else he would not have followed her to Quito.
She asked him to come. Well do I remember the occasion. She said:

"Come to Quito and I will show you the bullfight--brave, clever,
magnificent!"

But he said: "I go to Lima, not Quito. Such is my passage engaged on the
steamer."

"You travel for pleasure--no?" said Maria Valenzuela; and she looked at
him as only Maria Valenzuela could look, her eyes warm with the promise.

And he came. No; he did not come for the bull-fight. He came because of
what he had seen in her eyes. Women like Maria Valenzuela are born once
in a hundred years. They are of no country and no time. They are what
you call goddesses. Men fall down at their feet. They play with men and
run them through their pretty fingers like sand. Cleopatra was such a
woman they say; and so was Circe. She turned men into swine. Ha! ha! It
is true--no?

It all came about because Maria Valenzuela said:

"You English people are--what shall I say?--savage--no? You prize-fight.
Two men each hit the other with their fists till their eyes are blinded
and their noses are broken. Hideous! And the other men who look on cry
out loudly and are made glad. It is barbarous--no?"

"But they are men," said John Harned; "and they prize-fight out of
desire. No one makes them prize-fight. They do it because they desire it
more than anything else in the world."

Maria Valenzuela--there was scorn in her smile as she said: "They kill
each other often--is it not so? I have read it in the papers."

"But the bull," said John Harned.

"The bull is killed many times in the bull-fight, and the bull does not
come into the the ring out of desire. It is not fair to the bull. He
is compelled to fight. But the man in the prize-fight--no; he is not
compelled."

"He is the more brute therefore," said Maria Valenzuela.

"He is savage. He is primitive. He is animal. He strikes with his paws
like a bear from a cave, and he is ferocious. But the bull-fight--ah!
You have not seen the bullfight--no? The toreador is clever. He must
have skill. He is modern. He is romantic. He is only a man, soft and
tender, and he faces the wild bull in conflict. And he kills with a
sword, a slender sword, with one thrust, so, to the heart of the great
beast. It is delicious. It makes the heart beat to behold--the small
man, the great beast, the wide level sand, the thousands that look on
without breath; the great beast rushes to the attack, the small man
stands like a statue; he does not move, he is unafraid, and in his hand
is the slender sword flashing like silver in the sun; nearer and nearer
rushes the great beast with its sharp horns, the man does not move, and
then--so--the sword flashes, the thrust is made, to the heart, to the
hilt, the bull falls to the sand and is dead, and the man is unhurt. It
is brave. It is magnificent! Ah!--I could love the toreador. But the
man of the prize-fight--he is the brute, the human beast, the savage
primitive, the maniac that receives many blows in his stupid face and
rejoices. Come to Quito and I will show you the brave sport of men, the
toreador and the bull."

But John Harned did not go to Quito for the bull-fight. He went because
of Maria Valenzuela. He was a large man, more broad of shoulder than
we Ecuadorianos, more tall, more heavy of limb and bone. True, he was
larger of his own race. His eyes were blue, though I have seen them
gray, and, sometimes, like cold steel. His features were large, too--not
delicate like ours, and his jaw was very strong to look at. Also, his
face was smooth-shaven like a priest's. Why should a man feel shame for
the hair on his face? Did not God put it there? Yes, I believe in God--I
am not a pagan like many of you English. God is good. He made me an
Ecuadoriano with ten thousand slaves. And when I die I shall go to God.
Yes, the priests are right.

But John Harned. He was a quiet man. He talked always in a low voice,
and he never moved his hands when he talked. One would have thought his
heart was a piece of ice; yet did he have a streak of warm in his blood,
for he followed Maria Valenzuela to Quito. Also, and for all that he
talked low without moving his hands, he was an animal, as you shall
see--the beast primitive, the stupid, ferocious savage of the long ago
that dressed in wild skins and lived in the caves along with the bears
and wolves.

Luis Cervallos is my friend, the best of Ecuadorianos. He owns three
cacao plantations at Naranjito and Chobo. At Milagro is his big sugar
plantation. He has large haciendas at Ambato and Latacunga, and down
the coast is he interested in oil-wells. Also has he spent much money
in planting rubber along the Guayas. He is modern, like the Yankee; and,
like the Yankee, full of business. He has much money, but it is in many
ventures, and ever he needs more money for new ventures and for the old
ones. He has been everywhere and seen everything. When he was a very
young man he was in the Yankee military academy what you call West
Point. There was trouble. He was made to resign. He does not like
Americans. But he did like Maria Valenzuela, who was of his own country.
Also, he needed her money for his ventures and for his gold mine in
Eastern Ecuador where the painted Indians live. I was his friend. It
was my desire that he should marry Maria Valenzuela. Further, much of my
money had I invested in his ventures, more so in his gold mine which was
very rich but which first required the expense of much money before it
would yield forth its riches. If Luis Cervallos married Maria Valenzuela
I should have more money very immediately.

But John Harned followed Maria Valenzuela to Quito, and it was quickly
clear to us--to Luis Cervallos and me that she looked upon John Harned
with great kindness. It is said that a woman will have her will, but
this is a case not in point, for Maria Valenzuela did not have her
will--at least not with John Harned. Perhaps it would all have happened
as it did, even if Luis Cervallos and I had not sat in the box that day
at the bull-ring in Quito. But this I know: we DID sit in the box that
day. And I shall tell you what happened.

The four of us were in the one box, guests of Luis Cervallos. I was next
to the Presidente's box. On the other side was the box of General Jose
Eliceo Salazar. With him were Joaquin Endara and Urcisino Castillo,
both generals, and Colonel Jacinto Fierro and Captain Baltazar de
Echeverria. Only Luis Cervallos had the position and the influence
to get that box next to the Presidente. I know for a fact that the
Presidente himself expressed the desire to the management that Luis
Cervallos should have that box.

The band finished playing the national hymn of Ecuador. The procession
of the toreadors was over. The Presidente nodded to begin. The bugles
blew, and the bull dashed in--you know the way, excited, bewildered, the
darts in its shoulder burning like fire, itself seeking madly whatever
enemy to destroy. The toreadors hid behind their shelters and waited.
Suddenly they appeared forth, the capadores, five of them, from every
side, their colored capes flinging wide. The bull paused at sight of
such a generosity of enemies, unable in his own mind to know which to
attack. Then advanced one of the capadors alone to meet the bull. The
bull was very angry. With its fore-legs it pawed the sand of the arena
till the dust rose all about it. Then it charged, with lowered head,
straight for the lone capador.

It is always of interest, the first charge of the first bull. After a
time it is natural that one should grow tired, trifle, that the keenness
should lose its edge. But that first charge of the first bull! John
Harned was seeing it for the first time, and he could not escape the
excitement--the sight of the man, armed only with a piece of cloth,
and of the bull rushing upon him across the sand with sharp horns,
widespreading.

"See!" cried Maria Valenzuela. "Is it not superb?"

John Harned nodded, but did not look at her. His eyes were sparkling,
and they were only for the bull-ring. The capador stepped to the side,
with a twirl of the cape eluding the bull and spreading the cape on his
own shoulders.

"What do you think?" asked Maria Venzuela. "Is it not
a--what-you-call--sporting proposition--no?"

"It is certainly," said John Harned. "It is very clever."

She clapped her hands with delight. They were little hands. The audience
applauded. The bull turned and came back. Again the capadore eluded him,
throwing the cape on his shoulders, and again the audience applauded.
Three times did this happen. The capadore was very excellent. Then he
retired, and the other capadore played with the bull. After that they
placed the banderillos in the bull, in the shoulders, on each side of
the back-bone, two at a time. Then stepped forward Ordonez, the chief
matador, with the long sword and the scarlet cape. The bugles blew for
the death. He is not so good as Matestini. Still he is good, and with
one thrust he drove the sword to the heart, and the bull doubled his
legs under him and lay down and died. It was a pretty thrust, clean and
sure; and there was much applause, and many of the common people threw
their hats into the ring. Maria Valenzuela clapped her hands with the
rest, and John Harned, whose cold heart was not touched by the event,
looked at her with curiosity.

"You like it?" he asked.

"Always," she said, still clapping her hands.

"From a little girl," said Luis Cervallos. "I remember her first fight.
She was four years old. She sat with her mother, and just like now she
clapped her hands. She is a proper Spanish woman.

"You have seen it," said Maria Valenzuela to John Harned, as they
fastened the mules to the dead bull and dragged it out. "You have seen
the bull-fight and you like it--no? What do you think?

"I think the bull had no chance," he said. "The bull was doomed from
the first. The issue was not in doubt. Every one knew, before the bull
entered the ring, that it was to die. To be a sporting proposition, the
issue must be in doubt. It was one stupid bull who had never fought
a man against five wise men who had fought many bulls. It would be
possibly a little bit fair if it were one man against one bull."

"Or one man against five bulls," said Maria Valenzuela; and we all
laughed, and Luis Ceryallos laughed loudest.

"Yes," said John Harned, "against five bulls, and the man, like the
bulls, never in the bull ring before--a man like yourself, Senor
Crevallos."

"Yet we Spanish like the bull-fight," said Luis Cervallos; and I swear
the devil was whispering then in his ear, telling him to do that which I
shall relate.

"Then must it be a cultivated taste," John Harned made answer. "We kill
bulls by the thousand every day in Chicago, yet no one cares to pay
admittance to see."

"That is butchery," said I; "but this--ah, this is an art. It is
delicate. It is fine. It is rare."

"Not always," said Luis Cervallos. "I have seen clumsy matadors, and I
tell you it is not nice."

He shuddered, and his face betrayed such what-you-call disgust, that I
knew, then, that the devil was whispering and that he was beginning to
play a part.

"Senor Harned may be right," said Luis Cervallos. "It may not be fair
to the bull. For is it not known to all of us that for twenty-four hours
the bull is given no water, and that immediately before the fight he is
permitted to drink his fill?"

"And he comes into the ring heavy with water?" said John Harned quickly;
and I saw that his eyes were very gray and very sharp and very cold.

"It is necessary for the sport," said Luis Cervallos. "Would you have
the bull so strong that he would kill the toreadors?"

"I would that he had a fighting chance," said John Harned, facing the
ring to see the second bull come in.

It was not a good bull. It was frightened. It ran around the ring in
search of a way to get out. The capadors stepped forth and flared their
capes, but he refused to charge upon them.

"It is a stupid bull," said Maria Valenzuela.

"I beg pardon," said John Harned; "but it would seem to me a wise bull.
He knows he must not fight man. See! He smells death there in the ring."

True. The bull, pausing where the last one had died, was smelling the
wet sand and snorting. Again he ran around the ring, with raised head,
looking at the faces of the thousands that hissed him, that threw
orange-peel at him and called him names. But the smell of blood decided
him, and he charged a capador, so without warning that the man just
escaped. He dropped his cape and dodged into the shelter. The bull
struck the wall of the ring with a crash. And John Harned said, in a
quiet voice, as though he talked to himself:

"I will give one thousand sucres to the lazar-house of Quito if a bull
kills a man this day."

"You like bulls?" said Maria Valenzuela with a smile.

"I like such men less," said John Harned. "A toreador is not a brave
man. He surely cannot be a brave man. See, the bull's tongue is already
out. He is tired and he has not yet begun."

"It is the water," said Luis Cervallos.

"Yes, it is the water," said John Harned. "Would it not be safer to
hamstring the bull before he comes on?"

Maria Valenzuela was made angry by this sneer in John Harned's words.
But Luis Cervallos smiled so that only I could see him, and then it
broke upon my mind surely the game he was playing. He and I were to be
banderilleros. The big American bull was there in the box with us. We
were to stick the darts in him till he became angry, and then there
might be no marriage with Maria Valenzuela. It was a good sport. And the
spirit of bull-fighters was in our blood.

The bull was now angry and excited. The capadors had great game with
him. He was very quick, and sometimes he turned with such sharpness
that his hind legs lost their footing and he plowed the sand with his
quarter. But he charged always the flung capes and committed no harm.

"He has no chance," said John Harned. "He is fighting wind."

"He thinks the cape is his enemy," explained Maria Valenzuela. "See how
cleverly the capador deceives him."

"It is his nature to be deceived," said John Harned. "Wherefore he is
doomed to fight wind. The toreadors know it, you know it, I know it--we
all know from the first that he will fight wind. He only does not know
it. It is his stupid beast-nature. He has no chance."

"It is very simple," said Luis Cervallos. "The bull shuts his eyes when
he charges. Therefore--"

"The man steps, out of the way and the bull rushes by," Harned
interrupted.

"Yes," said Luis Cervallos; "that is it. The bull shuts his eyes, and
the man knows it."

"But cows do not shut their eyes," said John Harned. "I know a cow at
home that is a Jersey and gives milk, that would whip the whole gang of
them."

"But the toreadors do not fight cows," said I.

"They are afraid to fight cows," said John Harned.

"Yes," said Luis Cervallos, "they are afraid to fight cows. There would
be no sport in killing toreadors."

"There would be some sport," said John Harned, "if a toreador were
killed once in a while. When I become an old man, and mayhap a cripple,
and should I need to make a living and be unable to do hard work,
then would I become a bull-fighter. It is a light vocation for elderly
gentlemen and pensioners."

"But see!" said Maria Valenzuela, as the bull charged bravely and the
capador eluded it with a fling of his cape. "It requires skill so to
avoid the beast."

"True," said John Harned. "But believe me, it requires a thousand times
more skill to avoid the many and quick punches of a prize-fighter who
keeps his eyes open and strikes with intelligence. Furthermore, this
bull does not want to fight. Behold, he runs away."

It was not a good bull, for again it ran around the ring, seeking to
find a way out.

"Yet these bulls are sometimes the most dangerous," said Luis Cervallos.
"It can never be known what they will do next. They are wise. They are
half cow. The bull-fighters never like them.--See! He has turned!"

Once again, baffled and made angry by the walls of the ring that would
not let him out, the bull was attacking his enemies valiantly.

"His tongue is hanging out," said John Harned. "First, they fill him
with water. Then they tire him out, one man and then another, persuading
him to exhaust himself by fighting wind. While some tire him, others
rest. But the bull they never let rest. Afterward, when he is quite
tired and no longer quick, the matador sticks the sword into him."

The time had now come for the banderillos. Three times one of the
fighters endeavored to place the darts, and three times did he fail.
He but stung the bull and maddened it. The banderillos must go in, you
know, two at a time, into the shoulders, on each side the backbone and
close to it. If but one be placed, it is a failure. The crowd hissed and
called for Ordonez. And then Ordonez did a great thing. Four times
he stood forth, and four times, at the first attempt, he stuck in the
banderillos, so that eight of them, well placed, stood out of the back
of the bull at one time. The crowd went mad, and a rain of hats and
money fell on the sand of the ring.

And just then the bull charged unexpectedly one of the capadors. The man
slipped and lost his head. The bull caught him--fortunately, between his
wide horns. And while the audience watched, breathless and silent, John
Harned stood up and yelled with gladness. Alone, in that hush of all of
us, John Harned yelled. And he yelled for the bull. As you see yourself,
John Harned wanted the man killed. His was a brutal heart. This bad
conduct made those angry that sat in the box of General Salazar, and
they cried out against John Harned. And Urcisino Castillo told him to
his face that he was a dog of a Gringo and other things. Only it was
in Spanish, and John Harned did not understand. He stood and yelled,
perhaps for the time of ten seconds, when the bull was enticed into
charging the other capadors and the man arose unhurt.

"The bull has no chance," John Harned said with sadness as he sat down.
"The man was uninjured. They fooled the bull away from him." Then he
turned to Maria Valenzuela and said: "I beg your pardon. I was excited."

She smiled and in reproof tapped his arm with her fan.

"It is your first bull-fight," she said. "After you have seen more you
will not cry for the death of the man. You Americans, you see, are more
brutal than we. It is because of your prize-fighting. We come only to
see the bull killed."

"But I would the bull had some chance," he answered. "Doubtless, in
time, I shall cease to be annoyed by the men who take advantage of the
bull."

The bugles blew for the death of the bull. Ordonez stood forth with the
sword and the scarlet cloth. But the bull had changed again, and did not
want to fight. Ordonez stamped his foot in the sand, and cried out, and
waved the scarlet cloth. Then the bull charged, but without heart. There
was no weight to the charge. It was a poor thrust. The sword struck
a bone and bent. Ordonez took a fresh sword. The bull, again stung to
fight, charged once more. Five times Ordonez essayed the thrust, and
each time the sword went but part way in or struck bone. The sixth time,
the sword went in to the hilt. But it was a bad thrust. The sword missed
the heart and stuck out half a yard through the ribs on the opposite
side. The audience hissed the matador. I glanced at John Harned. He sat
silent, without movement; but I could see his teeth were set, and his
hands were clenched tight on the railing of the box.

All fight was now out of the bull, and, though it was no vital thrust,
he trotted lamely what of the sword that stuck through him, in one side
and out the other. He ran away from the matador and the capadors, and
circled the edge of the ring, looking up at the many faces.

"He is saying: 'For God's sake let me out of this; I don't want to
fight,'" said John Harned.

That was all. He said no more, but sat and watched, though sometimes
he looked sideways at Maria Valenzuela to see how she took it. She was
angry with the matador. He was awkward, and she had desired a clever
exhibition.

The bull was now very tired, and weak from loss of blood, though far
from dying. He walked slowly around the wall of the ring, seeking a
way out. He would not charge. He had had enough. But he must be killed.
There is a place, in the neck of a bull behind the horns, where the
cord of the spine is unprotected and where a short stab will immediately
kill. Ordonez stepped in front of the bull and lowered his scarlet cloth
to the ground. The bull would not charge. He stood still and smelled the
cloth, lowering his head to do so. Ordonez stabbed between the horns at
the spot in the neck. The bull jerked his head up. The stab had missed.
Then the bull watched the sword. When Ordonez moved the cloth on the
ground, the bull forgot the sword and lowered his head to smell the
cloth. Again Ordonez stabbed, and again he failed. He tried many times.
It was stupid. And John Harned said nothing. At last a stab went home,
and the bull fell to the sand, dead immediately, and the mules were made
fast and he was dragged out.

"The Gringos say it is a cruel sport--no?" said Luis Cervallos. "That it
is not humane. That it is bad for the bull. No?"

"No," said John Harned. "The bull does not count for much. It is bad for
those that look on. It is degrading to those that look on. It teaches
them to delight in animal suffering. It is cowardly for five men to
fight one stupid bull. Therefore those that look on learn to be cowards.
The bull dies, but those that look on live and the lesson is learned.
The bravery of men is not nourished by scenes of cowardice."

Maria Valenzuela said nothing. Neither did she look at him. But she
heard every word and her cheeks were white with anger. She looked out
across the ring and fanned herself, but I saw that her hand trembled.
Nor did John Harned look at her. He went on as though she were not
there. He, too, was angry, coldly angry.

"It is the cowardly sport of a cowardly people," he said.

"Ah," said Luis Cervallos softly, "you think you understand us."

"I understand now the Spanish Inquisition," said John Harned. "It must
have been more delightful than bull-fighting."

Luis Cervallos smiled but said nothing. He glanced at Maria Valenzuela,
and knew that the bull-fight in the box was won. Never would she have
further to do with the Gringo who spoke such words. But neither Luis
Cervallos nor I was prepared for the outcome of the day. I fear we do
not understand the Gringos. How were we to know that John Harned, who
was so coldly angry, should go suddenly mad! But mad he did go, as you
shall see. The bull did not count for much--he said so himself. Then why
should the horse count for so much? That I cannot understand. The mind
of John Harned lacked logic. That is the only explanation.

"It is not usual to have horses in the bull-ring at Quito," said Luis
Cervallos, looking up from the program. "In Spain they always have them.
But to-day, by special permission we shall have them. When the next bull
comes on there will be horses and picadors-you know, the men who carry
lances and ride the horses."

"The bull is doomed from the first," said John Harned. "Are the horses
then likewise doomed!"

"They are blindfolded so that they may not see the bull," said Luis
Cervallos. "I have seen many horses killed. It is a brave sight."

"I have seen the bull slaughtered," said John Harned "I will now see the
horse slaughtered, so that I may understand more fully the fine points
of this noble sport."

"They are old horses," said Luis Cervallos, "that are not good for
anything else."

"I see," said John Harned.

The third bull came on, and soon against it were both capadors and
picadors. One picador took his stand directly below us. I agree, it was
a thin and aged horse he rode, a bag of bones covered with mangy hide.

"It is a marvel that the poor brute can hold up the weight of the
rider," said John Harned. "And now that the horse fights the bull, what
weapons has it?"

"The horse does not fight the bull," said Luis Cervallos.

"Oh," said John Harned, "then is the horse there to be gored? That must
be why it is blindfolded, so that it shall not see the bull coming to
gore it."

"Not quite so," said I. "The lance of the picador is to keep the bull
from goring the horse."

"Then are horses rarely gored?" asked John Harned.

"No," said Luis Cervallos. "I have seen, at Seville, eighteen horses
killed in one day, and the people clamored for more horses."

"Were they blindfolded like this horse?" asked John Harned.

"Yes," said Luis Cervallos.

After that we talked no more, but watched the fight. And John Harned was
going mad all the time, and we did not know. The bull refused to charge
the horse. And the horse stood still, and because it could not see it
did not know that the capadors were trying to make the bull charge upon
it. The capadors teased the bull their capes, and when it charged them
they ran toward the horse and into their shelters. At last the bull was
angry, and it saw the horse before it.

"The horse does not know, the horse does not know," John Harned
whispered to himself, unaware that he voiced his thought aloud.

The bull charged, and of course the horse knew nothing till the picador
failed and the horse found himself impaled on the bull's horns from
beneath. The bull was magnificently strong. The sight of its strength
was splendid to see. It lifted the horse clear into the air; and as the
horse fell to its side on on the ground the picador landed on his feet
and escaped, while the capadors lured the bull away. The horse was
emptied of its essential organs. Yet did it rise to its feet screaming.
It was the scream of the horse that did it, that made John Harned
completely mad; for he, too, started to rise to his feet, I heard
him curse low and deep. He never took his eyes from the horse, which,
screaming, strove to run, but fell down instead and rolled on its back
so that all its four legs were kicking in the air. Then the bull charged
it and gored it again and again until it was dead.

John Harned was now on his feet. His eyes were no longer cold like
steel. They were blue flames. He looked at Maria Valenzuela, and she
looked at him, and in his face was a great loathing. The moment of his
madness was upon him. Everybody was looking, now that the horse was
dead; and John Harned was a large man and easy to be seen.

"Sit down," said Luis Cervallos, "or you will make a fool of yourself."

John Harned replied nothing. He struck out his fist. He smote Luis
Cervallos in the face so that he fell like a dead man across the chairs
and did not rise again. He saw nothing of what followed. But I saw much.
Urcisino Castillo, leaning forward from the next box, with his cane
struck John Harned full across the face. And John Harned smote him with
his fist so that in falling he overthrew General Salazar. John Harned
was now in what-you-call Berserker rage--no? The beast primitive in him
was loose and roaring--the beast primitive of the holes and caves of the
long ago.

"You came for a bull-fight," I heard him say, "And by God I'll show you
a man-fight!"

It was a fight. The soldiers guarding the Presidente's box leaped
across, but from one of them he took a rifle and beat them on their
heads with it. From the other box Colonel Jacinto Fierro was shooting at
him with a revolver. The first shot killed a soldier. This I know for
a fact. I saw it. But the second shot struck John Harned in the side.
Whereupon he swore, and with a lunge drove the bayonet of his rifle into
Colonel Jacinto Fierro's body. It was horrible to behold. The Americans
and the English are a brutal race. They sneer at our bull-fighting, yet
do they delight in the shedding of blood. More men were killed that day
because of John Harned than were ever killed in all the history of the
bull-ring of Quito, yes, and of Guayaquil and all Ecuador.

It was the scream of the horse that did it, yet why did not John Harned
go mad when the bull was killed? A beast is a beast, be it bull or
horse. John Harned was mad. There is no other explanation. He was
blood-mad, a beast himself. I leave it to your judgment. Which is
worse--the goring of the horse by the bull, or the goring of Colonel
Jacinto Fierro by the bayonet in the hands of John Harned! And John
Harned gored others with that bayonet. He was full of devils. He fought
with many bullets in him, and he was hard to kill. And Maria Valenzuela
was a brave woman. Unlike the other women, she did not cry out nor
faint. She sat still in her box, gazing out across the bull-ring. Her
face was white and she fanned herself, but she never looked around.

From all sides came the soldiers and officers and the common people
bravely to subdue the mad Gringo. It is true--the cry went up from
the crowd to kill all the Gringos. It is an old cry in Latin-American
countries, what of the dislike for the Gringos and their uncouth ways.
It is true, the cry went up. But the brave Ecuadorianos killed only
John Harned, and first he killed seven of them. Besides, there were many
hurt. I have seen many bull-fights, but never have I seen anything so
abominable as the scene in the boxes when the fight was over. It was
like a field of battle. The dead lay around everywhere, while the
wounded sobbed and groaned and some of them died. One man, whom John
Harned had thrust through the belly with the bayonet, clutched at
himself with both his hands and screamed. I tell you for a fact it was
more terrible than the screaming of a thousand horses.

No, Maria Valenzuela did not marry Luis Cervallos. I am sorry for that.
He was my friend, and much of my money was invested in his ventures. It
was five weeks before the surgeons took the bandages from his face. And
there is a scar there to this day, on the cheek, under the eye. Yet
John Harned struck him but once and struck him only with his naked
fist. Maria Valenzuela is in Austria now. It is said she is to marry an
Arch-Duke or some high nobleman. I do not know. I think she liked John
Harned before he followed her to Quito to see the bull-fight. But why
the horse? That is what I desire to know. Why should he watch the bull
and say that it did not count, and then go immediately and most horribly
mad because a horse screamed? There is no understanding the Gringos.
They are barbarians.




WHEN THE WORLD WAS YOUNG

HE was a very quiet, self-possessed sort of man, sitting a moment on top
of the wall to sound the damp darkness for warnings of the dangers it
might conceal. But the plummet of his hearing brought nothing to him
save the moaning of wind through invisible trees and the rustling of
leaves on swaying branches. A heavy fog drifted and drove before the
wind, and though he could not see this fog, the wet of it blew upon his
face, and the wall on which he sat was wet.

Without noise he had climbed to the top of the wall from the outside,
and without noise he dropped to the ground on the inside. From his
pocket he drew an electric night-stick, but he did not use it. Dark as
the way was, he was not anxious for light. Carrying the night-stick in
his hand, his finger on the button, he advanced through the darkness.
The ground was velvety and springy to his feet, being carpeted with dead
pine-needles and leaves and mold which evidently had been undisturbed
for years. Leaves and branches brushed against his body, but so dark was
it that he could not avoid them. Soon he walked with his hand stretched
out gropingly before him, and more than once the hand fetched up against
the solid trunks of massive trees. All about him he knew were these
trees; he sensed the loom of them everywhere; and he experienced a
strange feeling of microscopic smallness in the midst of great bulks
leaning toward him to crush him. Beyond, he knew, was the house, and he
expected to find some trail or winding path that would lead easily to
it.

Once, he found himself trapped. On every side he groped against trees
and branches, or blundered into thickets of underbrush, until there
seemed no way out. Then he turned on his light, circumspectly, directing
its rays to the ground at his feet. Slowly and carefully he moved
it about him, the white brightness showing in sharp detail all the
obstacles to his progress. He saw, an opening between huge-trunked
trees, and advanced through it, putting out the light and treading
on dry footing as yet protected from the drip of the fog by the dense
foliage overhead. His sense of direction was good, and he knew he was
going toward the house.

And then the thing happened--the thing unthinkable and unexpected. His
descending foot came down upon something that was soft and alive, and
that arose with a snort under the weight of his body. He sprang clear,
and crouched for another spring, anywhere, tense and expectant, keyed
for the onslaught of the unknown. He waited a moment, wondering what
manner of animal it was that had arisen from under his foot and that now
made no sound nor movement and that must be crouching and waiting just
as tensely and expectantly as he. The strain became unbearable. Holding
the night-stick before him, he pressed the button, saw, and screamed
aloud in terror. He was prepared for anything, from a frightened calf or
fawn to a belligerent lion, but he was not prepared for what he saw. In
that instant his tiny searchlight, sharp and white, had shown him what a
thousand years would not enable him to forget--a man, huge and blond,
yellow-haired and yellow-bearded, naked except for soft-tanned moccasins
and what seemed a goat-skin about his middle. Arms and legs were bare,
as were his shoulders and most of his chest. The skin was smooth and
hairless, but browned by sun and wind, while under it heavy muscles were
knotted like fat snakes. Still, this alone, unexpected as it well was,
was not what had made the man scream out. What had caused his terror was
the unspeakable ferocity of the face, the wild-animal glare of the blue
eyes scarcely dazzled by the light, the pine-needles matted and clinging
in the beard and hair, and the whole formidable body crouched and in the
act of springing at him. Practically in the instant he saw all this, and
while his scream still rang, the thing leaped, he flung his night-stick
full at it, and threw himself to the ground. He felt its feet and shins
strike against his ribs, and he bounded up and away while the thing
itself hurled onward in a heavy crashing fall into the underbrush.

As the noise of the fall ceased, the man stopped and on hands and knees
waited. He could hear the thing moving about, searching for him, and he
was afraid to advertise his location by attempting further flight. He
knew that inevitably he would crackle the underbrush and be pursued.
Once he drew out his revolver, then changed his mind. He had recovered
his composure and hoped to get away without noise. Several times he
heard the thing beating up the thickets for him, and there were moments
when it, too, remained still and listened. This gave an idea to the man.
One of his hands was resting on a chunk of dead wood. Carefully, first
feeling about him in the darkness to know that the full swing of his arm
was clear, he raised the chunk of wood and threw it. It was not a large
piece, and it went far, landing noisily in a bush. He heard the thing
bound into the bush, and at the same time himself crawled steadily away.
And on hands and knees, slowly and cautiously, he crawled on, till his
knees were wet on the soggy mold, When he listened he heard naught but
the moaning wind and the drip-drip of the fog from the branches. Never
abating his caution, he stood erect and went on to the stone wall, over
which he climbed and dropped down to the road outside.

Feeling his way in a clump of bushes, he drew out a bicycle and prepared
to mount. He was in the act of driving the gear around with his foot for
the purpose of getting the opposite pedal in position, when he heard the
thud of a heavy body that landed lightly and evidently on its feet.
He did not wait for more, but ran, with hands on the handles of his
bicycle, until he was able to vault astride the saddle, catch the
pedals, and start a spurt. Behind he could hear the quick thud-thud
of feet on the dust of the road, but he drew away from it and lost it.
Unfortunately, he had started away from the direction of town and was
heading higher up into the hills. He knew that on this particular road
there were no cross roads. The only way back was past that terror,
and he could not steel himself to face it. At the end of half an hour,
finding himself on an ever increasing grade, he dismounted. For still
greater safety, leaving the wheel by the roadside, he climbed through a
fence into what he decided was a hillside pasture, spread a newspaper on
the ground, and sat down.

"Gosh!" he said aloud, mopping the sweat and fog from his face.

And "Gosh!" he said once again, while rolling a cigarette and as he
pondered the problem of getting back.

But he made no attempt to go back. He was resolved not to face that
road in the dark, and with head bowed on knees, he dozed, waiting for
daylight.

How long afterward he did not know, he was awakened by the yapping bark
of a young coyote. As he looked about and located it on the brow of the
hill behind him, he noted the change that had come over the face of the
night. The fog was gone; the stars and moon were out; even the wind had
died down. It had transformed into a balmy California summer night.
He tried to doze again, but the yap of the coyote disturbed him. Half
asleep, he heard a wild and eery chant. Looking about him, he noticed
that the coyote had ceased its noise and was running away along the
crest of the hill, and behind it, in full pursuit, no longer chanting,
ran the naked creature he had encountered in the garden. It was a young
coyote, and it was being overtaken when the chase passed from view. The
man trembled as with a chill as he started to his feet, clambered over
the fence, and mounted his wheel. But it was his chance and he knew it.
The terror was no longer between him and Mill Valley.

He sped at a breakneck rate down the hill, but in the turn at the
bottom, in the deep shadows, he encountered a chuck-hole and pitched
headlong over the handle bar.

"It's sure not my night," he muttered, as he examined the broken fork of
the machine.

Shouldering the useless wheel, he trudged on. In time he came to the
stone wall, and, half disbelieving his experience, he sought in the road
for tracks, and found them--moccasin tracks, large ones, deep-bitten
into the dust at the toes. It was while bending over them, examining,
that again he heard the eery chant. He had seen the thing pursue the
coyote, and he knew he had no chance on a straight run. He did not
attempt it, contenting himself with hiding in the shadows on the off
side of the road.

And again he saw the thing that was like a naked man, running swiftly
and lightly and singing as it ran. Opposite him it paused, and his heart
stood still. But instead of coming toward his hiding-place, it leaped
into the air, caught the branch of a roadside tree, and swung swiftly
upward, from limb to limb, like an ape. It swung across the wall, and a
dozen feet above the top, into the branches of another tree, and dropped
out of sight to the ground. The man waited a few wondering minutes, then
started on.

II

Dave Slotter leaned belligerently against the desk that barred the way
to the private office of James Ward, senior partner of the firm of Ward,
Knowles & Co. Dave was angry. Every one in the outer office had looked
him over suspiciously, and the man who faced him was excessively
suspicious.

"You just tell Mr. Ward it's important," he urged.

"I tell you he is dictating and cannot be disturbed," was the answer.
"Come to-morrow."

"To-morrow will be too late. You just trot along and tell Mr. Ward it's
a matter of life and death."

The secretary hesitated and Dave seized the advantage.

"You just tell him I was across the bay in Mill Valley last night, and
that I want to put him wise to something."

"What name?" was the query.

"Never mind the name. He don't know me."

When Dave was shown into the private office, he was still in the
belligerent frame of mind, but when he saw a large fair man whirl in
a revolving chair from dictating to a stenographer to face him, Dave's
demeanor abruptly changed. He did not know why it changed, and he was
secretly angry with himself.

"You are Mr. Ward?" Dave asked with a fatuousness that still further
irritated him. He had never intended it at all.

"Yes," came the answer.

"And who are you?"

"Harry Bancroft," Dave lied. "You don't know me, and my name don't
matter."

"You sent in word that you were in Mill Valley last night?"

"You live there, don't you?" Dave countered, looking suspiciously at the
stenographer.

"Yes. What do you mean to see me about? I am very busy."

"I'd like to see you alone, sir."

Mr. Ward gave him a quick, penetrating look, hesitated, then made up his
mind.

"That will do for a few minutes, Miss Potter."

The girl arose, gathered her notes together, and passed out. Dave looked
at Mr. James Ward wonderingly, until that gentleman broke his train of
inchoate thought.

"Well?"

"I was over in Mill Valley last night," Dave began confusedly.

"I've heard that before. What do you want?"

And Dave proceeded in the face of a growing conviction that was
unbelievable. "I was at your house, or in the grounds, I mean."

"What were you doing there?"

"I came to break in," Dave answered in all frankness.

"I heard you lived all alone with a Chinaman for cook, and it looked
good to me. Only I didn't break in. Something happened that prevented.
That's why I'm here. I come to warn you. I found a wild man loose in
your grounds--a regular devil. He could pull a guy like me to pieces.
He gave me the run of my life. He don't wear any clothes to speak of, he
climbs trees like a monkey, and he runs like a deer. I saw him chasing a
coyote, and the last I saw of it, by God, he was gaining on it."

Dave paused and looked for the effect that would follow his words. But
no effect came. James Ward was quietly curious, and that was all.

"Very remarkable, very remarkable," he murmured. "A wild man, you say.
Why have you come to tell me?"

"To warn you of your danger. I'm something of a hard proposition myself,
but I don't believe in killing people... that is, unnecessarily. I
realized that you was in danger. I thought I'd warn you. Honest, that's
the game. Of course, if you wanted to give me anything for my trouble,
I'd take it. That was in my mind, too. But I don't care whether you give
me anything or not. I've warned you any way, and done my duty."

Mr. Ward meditated and drummed on the surface of his desk. Dave noticed
they were large, powerful hands, withal well-cared for despite their
dark sunburn. Also, he noted what had already caught his eye before--a
tiny strip of flesh-colored courtplaster on the forehead over one eye.
And still the thought that forced itself into his mind was unbelievable.

Mr. Ward took a wallet from his inside coat pocket, drew out a
greenback, and passed it to Dave, who noted as he pocketed it that it
was for twenty dollars.

"Thank you," said Mr. Ward, indicating that the interview was at an end.

"I shall have the matter investigated. A wild man running loose IS
dangerous."

But so quiet a man was Mr. Ward, that Dave's courage returned. Besides,
a new theory had suggested itself. The wild man was evidently Mr. Ward's
brother, a lunatic privately confined. Dave had heard of such things.
Perhaps Mr. Ward wanted it kept quiet. That was why he had given him the
twenty dollars.

"Say," Dave began, "now I come to think of it that wild man looked a lot
like you--"

That was as far as Dave got, for at that moment he witnessed a
transformation and found himself gazing into the same unspeakably
ferocious blue eyes of the night before, at the same clutching
talon-like hands, and at the same formidable bulk in the act of
springing upon him. But this time Dave had no night-stick to throw, and
he was caught by the biceps of both arms in a grip so terrific that it
made him groan with pain. He saw the large white teeth exposed, for all
the world as a dog's about to bite. Mr. Ward's beard brushed his face
as the teeth went in for the grip on his throat. But the bite was not
given. Instead, Dave felt the other's body stiffen as with an iron
restraint, and then he was flung aside, without effort but with such
force that only the wall stopped his momentum and dropped him gasping to
the floor.

"What do you mean by coming here and trying to blackmail me?" Mr. Ward
was snarling at him. "Here, give me back that money."

Dave passed the bill back without a word.

"I thought you came here with good intentions. I know you now. Let me
see and hear no more of you, or I'll put you in prison where you belong.
Do you understand?"

"Yes, sir," Dave gasped.

"Then go."

And Dave went, without further word, both his biceps aching intolerably
from the bruise of that tremendous grip. As his hand rested on the door
knob, he was stopped.

"You were lucky," Mr. Ward was saying, and Dave noted that his face and
eyes were cruel and gloating and proud.

"You were lucky. Had I wanted, I could have torn your muscles out of
your arms and thrown them in the waste basket there."

"Yes, sir," said Dave; and absolute conviction vibrated in his voice.

He opened the door and passed out. The secretary looked at him
interrogatively.

"Gosh!" was all Dave vouchsafed, and with this utterance passed out of
the offices and the story.

III

James G. Ward was forty years of age, a successful business man, and
very unhappy. For forty years he had vainly tried to solve a problem
that was really himself and that with increasing years became more
and more a woeful affliction. In himself he was two men, and,
chronologically speaking, these men were several thousand years or so
apart. He had studied the question of dual personality probably more
profoundly than any half dozen of the leading specialists in that
intricate and mysterious psychological field. In himself he was a
different case from any that had been recorded. Even the most fanciful
flights of the fiction-writers had not quite hit upon him. He was not
a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, nor was he like the unfortunate young man in
Kipling's "Greatest Story in the World." His two personalities were so
mixed that they were practically aware of themselves and of each other
all the time.

His other self he had located as a savage and a barbarian living under
the primitive conditions of several thousand years before. But which
self was he, and which was the other, he could never tell. For he was
both selves, and both selves all the time. Very rarely indeed did it
happen that one self did not know what the other was doing. Another
thing was that he had no visions nor memories of the past in which that
early self had lived. That early self lived in the present; but while
it lived in the present, it was under the compulsion to live the way of
life that must have been in that distant past.

In his childhood he had been a problem to his father and mother, and to
the family doctors, though never had they come within a thousand miles
of hitting upon the clue to his erratic, conduct. Thus, they could not
understand his excessive somnolence in the forenoon, nor his excessive
activity at night. When they found him wandering along the hallways
at night, or climbing over giddy roofs, or running in the hills, they
decided he was a somnambulist. In reality he was wide-eyed awake and
merely under the nightroaming compulsion of his early self. Questioned
by an obtuse medico, he once told the truth and suffered the ignominy of
having the revelation contemptuously labeled and dismissed as "dreams."

The point was, that as twilight and evening came on he became wakeful.
The four walls of a room were an irk and a restraint. He heard a
thousand voices whispering to him through the darkness. The night
called to him, for he was, for that period of the twenty-four hours,
essentially a night-prowler. But nobody understood, and never again did
he attempt to explain. They classified him as a sleep-walker and took
precautions accordingly--precautions that very often were futile. As his
childhood advanced, he grew more cunning, so that the major portion of
all his nights were spent in the open at realizing his other self. As
a result, he slept in the forenoons. Morning studies and schools were
impossible, and it was discovered that only in the afternoons, under
private teachers, could he be taught anything. Thus was his modern self
educated and developed.

But a problem, as a child, he ever remained. He was known as a little
demon, of insensate cruelty and viciousness. The family medicos
privately adjudged him a mental monstrosity and degenerate. Such few
boy companions as he had, hailed him as a wonder, though they were all
afraid of him. He could outclimb, outswim, outrun, outdevil any of
them; while none dared fight with him. He was too terribly strong, madly
furious.

When nine years of age he ran away to the hills, where he flourished,
night-prowling, for seven weeks before he was discovered and brought
home. The marvel was how he had managed to subsist and keep in condition
during that time. They did not know, and he never told them, of the
rabbits he had killed, of the quail, young and old, he had captured
and devoured, of the farmers' chicken-roosts he had raided, nor of the
cave-lair he had made and carpeted with dry leaves and grasses and in
which he had slept in warmth and comfort through the forenoons of many
days.

At college he was notorious for his sleepiness and stupidity during the
morning lectures and for his brilliance in the afternoon. By collateral
reading and by borrowing the notebook of his fellow students he managed
to scrape through the detestable morning courses, while his afternoon
courses were triumphs. In football he proved a giant and a terror, and,
in almost every form of track athletics, save for strange Berserker
rages that were sometimes displayed, he could be depended upon to win.
But his fellows were afraid to box with him, and he signalized his last
wrestling bout by sinking his teeth into the shoulder of his opponent.

After college, his father, in despair, sent him among the cow-punchers
of a Wyoming ranch. Three months later the doughty cowmen confessed he
was too much for them and telegraphed his father to come and take the
wild man away. Also, when the father arrived to take him away, the
cowmen allowed that they would vastly prefer chumming with howling
cannibals, gibbering lunatics, cavorting gorillas, grizzly bears, and
man-eating tigers than with this particular Young college product with
hair parted in the middle.

There was one exception to the lack of memory of the life of his early
self, and that was language. By some quirk of atavism, a certain portion
of that early self's language had come down to him as a racial memory.
In moments of happiness, exaltation, or battle, he was prone to burst
out in wild barbaric songs or chants. It was by this means that he
located in time and space that strayed half of him who should have been
dead and dust for thousands of years. He sang, once, and deliberately,
several of the ancient chants in the presence of Professor Wertz, who
gave courses in old Saxon and who was a philogist of repute and passion.
At the first one, the professor pricked up his ears and demanded to
know what mongrel tongue or hog-German it was. When the second chant was
rendered, the professor was highly excited. James Ward then concluded
the performance by giving a song that always irresistibly rushed to his
lips when he was engaged in fierce struggling or fighting. Then it was
that Professor Wertz proclaimed it no hog-German, but early German, or
early Teuton, of a date that must far precede anything that had ever
been discovered and handed down by the scholars. So early was it that
it was beyond him; yet it was filled with haunting reminiscences of
word-forms he knew and which his trained intuition told him were true
and real. He demanded the source of the songs, and asked to borrow the
precious book that contained them. Also, he demanded to know why
young Ward had always posed as being profoundly ignorant of the German
language. And Ward could neither explain his ignorance nor lend the
book. Whereupon, after pleadings and entreaties that extended through
weeks, Professor Wert took a dislike to the young man, believed him
a liar, and classified him as a man of monstrous selfishness for not
giving him a glimpse of this wonderful screed that was older than the
oldest any philologist had ever known or dreamed.

But little good did it do this much-mixed young man to know that half of
him was late American and the other half early Teuton. Nevertheless, the
late American in him was no weakling, and he (if he were a he and had
a shred of existence outside of these two) compelled an adjustment or
compromise between his one self that was a nightprowling savage that
kept his other self sleepy of mornings, and that other self that was
cultured and refined and that wanted to be normal and live and love and
prosecute business like other people. The afternoons and early evenings
he gave to the one, the nights to the other; the forenoons and parts of
the nights were devoted to sleep for the twain. But in the mornings he
slept in bed like a civilized man. In the night time he slept like a
wild animal, as he had slept Dave Slotter stepped on him in the woods.

Persuading his father to advance the capital, he went into business
and keen and successful business he made of it, devoting his afternoons
whole-souled to it, while his partner devoted the mornings. The early
evenings he spent socially, but, as the hour grew to nine or ten, an
irresistible restlessness overcame him and he disappeared from the
haunts of men until the next afternoon. Friends and acquaintances
thought that he spent much of his time in sport. And they were right,
though they never would have dreamed of the nature of the sport, even if
they had seen him running coyotes in night-chases over the hills of Mill
Valley. Neither were the schooner captains believed when they reported
seeing, on cold winter mornings, a man swimming in the tide-rips of
Raccoon Straits or in the swift currents between Goat island and Angel
Island miles from shore.

In the bungalow at Mill Valley he lived alone, save for Lee Sing, the
Chinese cook and factotum, who knew much about the strangeness of his
master, who was paid well for saying nothing, and who never did say
anything. After the satisfaction of his nights, a morning's sleep, and a
breakfast of Lee Sing's, James Ward crossed the bay to San Francisco on
a midday ferryboat and went to the club and on to his office, as normal
and conventional a man of business as could be found in the city. But as
the evening lengthened, the night called to him. There came a quickening
of all his perceptions and a restlessness. His hearing was suddenly
acute; the myriad night-noises told him a luring and familiar story;
and, if alone, he would begin to pace up and down the narrow room like
any caged animal from the wild.

Once, he ventured to fall in love. He never permitted himself that
diversion again. He was afraid. And for many a day the young lady,
scared at least out of a portion of her young ladyhood, bore on her
arms and shoulders and wrists divers black-and-blue bruises--tokens of
caresses which he had bestowed in all fond gentleness but too late
at night. There was the mistake. Had he ventured love-making in the
afternoon, all would have been well, for it would have been as the quiet
gentleman that he would have made love--but at night it was the uncouth,
wife-stealing savage of the dark German forests. Out of his wisdom, he
decided that afternoon love-making could be prosecuted successfully; but
out of the same wisdom he was convinced that marriage as would prove
a ghastly failure. He found it appalling to imagine being married and
encountering his wife after dark.

So he had eschewed all love-making, regulated his dual life, cleaned up
a million in business, fought shy of match-making mamas and bright-eyed
and eager young ladies of various ages, met Lilian Gersdale and made
it a rigid observance never to see her later than eight o'clock in the
evening, run of nights after his coyotes, and slept in forest lairs--and
through it all had kept his secret safe save Lee Sing... and now,
Dave Slotter. It was the latter's discovery of both his selves that
frightened him. In spite of the counter fright he had given the burglar,
the latter might talk. And even if he did not, sooner or later he would
be found out by some one else.

Thus it was that James Ward made a fresh and heroic effort to control
the Teutonic barbarian that was half of him. So well did he make it
a point to see Lilian in the afternoons, that the time came when
she accepted him for better or worse, and when he prayed privily and
fervently that it was not for worse. During this period no prize-fighter
ever trained more harshly and faithfully for a contest than he trained
to subdue the wild savage in him. Among other things, he strove to
exhaust himself during the day, so that sleep would render him deaf to
the call of the night. He took a vacation from the office and went on
long hunting trips, following the deer through the most inaccessible and
rugged country he could find--and always in the daytime. Night found him
indoors and tired. At home he installed a score of exercise machines,
and where other men might go through a particular movement ten times, he
went hundreds. Also, as a compromise, he built a sleeping porch on the
second story. Here he at least breathed the blessed night air. Double
screens prevented him from escaping into the woods, and each night Lee
Sing locked him in and each morning let him out.

The time came, in the month of August, when he engaged additional
servants to assist Lee Sing and dared a house party in his Mill Valley
bungalow. Lilian, her mother and brother, and half a dozen mutual
friends, were the guests. For two days and nights all went well. And on
the third night, playing bridge till eleven o'clock, he had reason to be
proud of himself. His restlessness fully hid, but as luck would have it,
Lilian Gersdale was his opponent on his right. She was a frail delicate
flower of a woman, and in his night-mood her very frailty incensed
him. Not that he loved her less, but that he felt almost irresistibly
impelled to reach out and paw and maul her. Especially was this true
when she was engaged in playing a winning hand against him.

He had one of the deer-hounds brought in and, when it seemed he must fly
to pieces with the tension, a caressing hand laid on the animal brought
him relief. These contacts with the hairy coat gave him instant easement
and enabled him to play out the evening. Nor did anyone guess the
while terrible struggle their host was making, the while he laughed so
carelessly and played so keenly and deliberately.

When they separated for the night, he saw to it that he parted from
Lilian in the presence or the others. Once on his sleeping porch
and safely locked in, he doubled and tripled and even quadrupled his
exercises until, exhausted, he lay down on the couch to woo sleep and to
ponder two problems that especially troubled him. One was this matter
of exercise. It was a paradox. The more he exercised in this excessive
fashion, the stronger he became. While it was true that he thus quite
tired out his night-running Teutonic self, it seemed that he was merely
setting back the fatal day when his strength would be too much for him
and overpower him, and then it would be a strength more terrible than
he had yet known. The other problem was that of his marriage and of the
stratagems he must employ in order to avoid his wife after dark. And
thus, fruitlessly pondering, he fell asleep.

Now, where the huge grizzly bear came from that night was long a
mystery, while the people of the Springs Brothers' Circus, showing at
Sausalito, searched long and vainly for "Big Ben, the Biggest Grizzly
in Captivity." But Big Ben escaped, and, out of the mazes of half a
thousand bungalows and country estates, selected the grounds of James J.
Ward for visitation. The self first Mr. Ward knew was when he found him
on his feet, quivering and tense, a surge of battle in his breast and
on his lips the old war-chant. From without came a wild baying and
bellowing of the hounds. And sharp as a knife-thrust through the
pandemonium came the agony of a stricken dog--his dog, he knew.

Not stopping for slippers, pajama-clad, he burst through the door Lee
Sing had so carefully locked, and sped down the stairs and out into
the night. As his naked feet struck the graveled driveway, he stopped
abruptly, reached under the steps to a hiding-place he knew well, and
pulled forth a huge knotty club--his old companion on many a mad night
adventure on the hills. The frantic hullabaloo of the dogs was coming
nearer, and, swinging the club, he sprang straight into the thickets to
meet it.

The aroused household assembled on the wide veranda. Somebody turned
on the electric lights, but they could see nothing but one another's
frightened faces. Beyond the brightly illuminated driveway the trees
formed a wall of impenetrable blackness. Yet somewhere in that blackness
a terrible struggle was going on. There was an infernal outcry of
animals, a great snarling and growling, the sound of blows being struck
and a smashing and crashing of underbrush by heavy bodies.

The tide of battle swept out from among the trees and upon the driveway
just beneath the onlookers. Then they saw. Mrs. Gersdale cried out
and clung fainting to her son. Lilian, clutching the railing so
spasmodically that a bruising hurt was left in her finger-ends for
days, gazed horror-stricken at a yellow-haired, wild-eyed giant whom she
recognized as the man who was to be her husband. He was swinging a great
club, and fighting furiously and calmly with a shaggy monster that was
bigger than any bear she had ever seen. One rip of the beast's claws had
dragged away Ward's pajama-coat and streaked his flesh with blood.

While most of Lilian Gersdale's fright was for the man beloved, there
was a large portion of it due to the man himself. Never had she dreamed
so formidable and magnificent a savage lurked under the starched shirt
and conventional garb of her betrothed. And never had she had any
conception of how a man battled. Such a battle was certainly not modern;
nor was she there beholding a modern man, though she did not know it.
For this was not Mr. James J. Ward, the San Francisco business man, but
one, unnamed and unknown, a crude, rude savage creature who, by some
freak of chance, lived again after thrice a thousand years.

The hounds, ever maintaining their mad uproar, circled about the fight,
or dashed in and out, distracting the bear. When the animal turned to
meet such flanking assaults, the man leaped in and the club came down.
Angered afresh by every such blow, the bear would rush, and the man,
leaping and skipping, avoiding the dogs, went backwards or circled
to one side or the other. Whereupon the dogs, taking advantage of the
opening, would again spring in and draw the animal's wrath to them.

The end came suddenly. Whirling, the grizzly caught a hound with a
wide sweeping cuff that sent the brute, its ribs caved in and its back
broken, hurtling twenty feet. Then the human brute went mad. A foaming
rage flecked the lips that parted with a wild inarticulate cry, as it
sprang in, swung the club mightily in both hands, and brought it down
full on the head of the uprearing grizzly. Not even the skull of a
grizzly could withstand the crushing force of such a blow, and the
animal went down to meet the worrying of the hounds. And through their
scurrying leaped the man, squarely upon the body, where, in the white
electric light, resting on his club, he chanted a triumph in an unknown
tongue--a song so ancient that Professor Wertz would have given ten
years of his life for it.

His guests rushed to possess him and acclaim him, but James Ward,
suddenly looking out of the eyes of the early Teuton, saw the fair frail
Twentieth Century girl he loved, and felt something snap in his brain.
He staggered weakly toward her, dropped the club, and nearly fell.
Something had gone wrong with him. Inside his brain was an intolerable
agony. It seemed as if the soul of him were flying asunder. Following
the excited gaze of the others, he glanced back and saw the carcass of
the bear. The sight filled him with fear. He uttered a cry and would
have fled, had they not restrained him and led him into the bungalow.

*****

James J. Ward is still at the head of the firm of Ward, Knowles & Co.
But he no longer lives in the country; nor does he run of nights after
the coyotes under the moon. The early Teuton in him died the night of
the Mill Valley fight with the bear. James J. Ward is now wholly
James J. Ward, and he shares no part of his being with any vagabond
anachronism from the younger world. And so wholly is James J. Ward
modern, that he knows in all its bitter fullness the curse of civilized
fear. He is now afraid of the dark, and night in the forest is to him a
thing of abysmal terror. His city house is of the spick and span order,
and he evinces a great interest in burglarproof devices. His home is
a tangle of electric wires, and after bed-time a guest can scarcely
breathe without setting off an alarm. Also, he had invented a
combination keyless door-lock that travelers may carry in their vest
pockets and apply immediately and successfully under all circumstances.
But his wife does not deem him a coward. She knows better. And, like
any hero, he is content to rest on his laurels. His bravery is never
questioned by those friends who are aware of the Mill Valley episode.




THE BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT

CARTER WATSON, a current magazine under his arm, strolled slowly along,
gazing about him curiously. Twenty years had elapsed since he had been
on this particular street, and the changes were great and stupefying.
This Western city of three hundred thousand souls had contained but
thirty thousand, when, as a boy, he had been wont to ramble along
its streets. In those days the street he was now on had been a quiet
residence street in the respectable workingclass quarter. On this late
afternoon he found that it had been submerged by a vast and vicious
tenderloin. Chinese and Japanese shops and dens abounded, all confusedly
intermingled with low white resorts and boozing dens. This quiet street
of his youth had become the toughest quarter of the city.

He looked at his watch. It was half-past five. It was the slack time of
the day in such a region, as he well knew, yet he was curious to see. In
all his score of years of wandering and studying social conditions over
the world, he had carried with him the memory of his old town as a sweet
and wholesome place. The metamorphosis he now beheld was startling. He
certainly must continue his stroll and glimpse the infamy to which his
town had descended.

Another thing: Carter Watson had a keen social and civic consciousness.
Independently wealthy, he had been loath to dissipate his energies
in the pink teas and freak dinners of society, while actresses,
race-horses, and kindred diversions had left him cold. He had the
ethical bee in his bonnet and was a reformer of no mean pretension,
though his work had been mainly in the line of contributions to the
heavier reviews and quarterlies and to the publication over his name
of brightly, cleverly written books on the working classes and the
slum-dwellers. Among the twenty-seven to his credit occurred titles such
as, "If Christ Came to New Orleans," "The Worked-out Worker," "Tenement
Reform in Berlin," "The Rural Slums of England," "The people of the East
Side," "Reform Versus Revolution," "The University Settlement as a Hot
Bed of Radicalism" and "The Cave Man of Civilization."

But Carter Watson was neither morbid nor fanatic. He did not lose his
head over the horrors he encountered, studied, and exposed. No hair
brained enthusiasm branded him. His humor saved him, as did his wide
experience and his conservative philosophic temperament. Nor did he
have any patience with lightning change reform theories. As he saw it,
society would grow better only through the painfully slow and arduously
painful processes of evolution. There were no short cuts, no sudden
regenerations. The betterment of mankind must be worked out in agony and
misery just as all past social betterments had been worked out.

But on this late summer afternoon, Carter Watson was curious. As he
moved along he paused before a gaudy drinking place. The sign above
read, "The Vendome." There were two entrances. One evidently led to the
bar. This he did not explore. The other was a narrow hallway.
Passing through this he found himself in a huge room, filled with
chair-encircled tables and quite deserted. In the dim light he made out
a piano in the distance. Making a mental note that he would come back
some time and study the class of persons that must sit and drink at
those multitudinous tables, he proceeded to circumnavigate the room.

Now, at the rear, a short hallway led off to a small kitchen, and here,
at a table, alone, sat Patsy Horan, proprietor of the Vendome, consuming
a hasty supper ere the evening rush of business. Also, Patsy Horan
was angry with the world. He had got out of the wrong side of bed that
morning, and nothing had gone right all day. Had his barkeepers been
asked, they would have described his mental condition as a grouch. But
Carter Watson did not know this. As he passed the little hallway, Patsy
Horan's sullen eyes lighted on the magazine he carried under his arm.
Patsy did not know Carter Watson, nor did he know that what he carried
under his arm was a magazine. Patsy, out of the depths of his grouch,
decided that this stranger was one of those pests who marred and scarred
the walls of his back rooms by tacking up or pasting up advertisements.
The color on the front cover of the magazine convinced him that it was
such an advertisement. Thus the trouble began. Knife and fork in hand,
Patsy leaped for Carter Watson.

"Out wid yeh!" Patsy bellowed. "I know yer game!"

Carter Watson was startled. The man had come upon him like the eruption
of a jack-in-the-box.

"A defacin' me walls," cried Patsy, at the same time emitting a string
of vivid and vile, rather than virile, epithets of opprobrium.

"If I have given any offense I did not mean to--"

But that was as far as the visitor got. Patsy interrupted.

"Get out wid yeh; yeh talk too much wid yer mouth," quoted Patsy,
emphasizing his remarks with flourishes of the knife and fork.

Carter Watson caught a quick vision of that eating-fork inserted
uncomfortably between his ribs, knew that it would be rash to talk
further with his mouth, and promptly turned to go. The sight of his
meekly retreating back must have further enraged Patsy Horan, for that
worthy, dropping the table implements, sprang upon him.

Patsy weighed one hundred and eighty pounds. So did Watson. In this they
were equal. But Patsy was a rushing, rough-and-tumble saloon-fighter,
while Watson was a boxer. In this the latter had the advantage, for
Patsy came in wide open, swinging his right in a perilous sweep. All
Watson had to do was to straight-left him and escape. But Watson had
another advantage. His boxing, and his experience in the slums and
ghettos of the world, had taught him restraint.

He pivoted on his feet, and, instead of striking, ducked the other's
swinging blow and went into a clinch. But Patsy, charging like a bull,
had the momentum of his rush, while Watson, whirling to meet him, had no
momentum. As a result, the pair of them went down, with all their three
hundred and sixty pounds of weight, in a long crashing fall, Watson
underneath. He lay with his head touching the rear wall of the large
room. The street was a hundred and fifty feet away, and he did some
quick thinking. His first thought was to avoid trouble. He had no wish
to get into the papers of this, his childhood town, where many of his
relatives and family friends still lived.

So it was that he locked his arms around the man on top of him, held him
close, and waited for the help to come that must come in response to the
crash of the fall. The help came--that is, six men ran in from the bar
and formed about in a semi-circle.

"Take him off, fellows," Watson said. "I haven't struck him, and I don't
want any fight."

But the semi-circle remained silent. Watson held on and waited. Patsy,
after various vain efforts to inflict damage, made an overture.

"Leggo o' me an' I'll get off o' yeh," said he.

Watson let go, but when Patsy scrambled to his feet he stood over his
recumbent foe, ready to strike.

"Get up," Patsy commanded.

His voice was stern and implacable, like the voice of God calling to
judgment, and Watson knew there was no mercy there.

"Stand back and I'll get up," he countered.

"If yer a gentleman, get up," quoth Patsy, his pale blue eyes aflame
with wrath, his fist ready for a crushing blow.

At the same moment he drew his foot back to kick the other in the face.
Watson blocked the kick with his crossed arms and sprang to his feet so
quickly that he was in a clinch with his antagonist before the latter
could strike. Holding him, Watson spoke to the onlookers:

"Take him away from me, fellows. You see I am not striking him. I don't
want to fight. I want to get out of here."

The circle did not move nor speak. Its silence was ominous and sent a
chill to Watson's heart.

Patsy made an effort to throw him, which culminated in his putting Patsy
on his back. Tearing loose from him, Watson sprang to his feet and made
for the door. But the circle of men was interposed a wall. He noticed
the white, pasty faces, the kind that never see the sun, and knew that
the men who barred his way were the nightprowlers and preying beasts
of the city jungle. By them he was thrust back upon the pursuing,
bull-rushing Patsy.

Again it was a clinch, in which, in momentary safety, Watson appealed
to the gang. And again his words fell on deaf ears. Then it was that
he knew of many similar knew fear. For he had known of many similar
situations, in low dens like this, when solitary men were man-handled,
their ribs and features caved in, themselves beaten and kicked to death.
And he knew, further, that if he were to escape he must neither strike
his assailant nor any of the men who opposed him.

Yet in him was righteous indignation. Under no circumstances could
seven to one be fair. Also, he was angry, and there stirred in him
the fighting beast that is in all men. But he remembered his wife and
children, his unfinished book, the ten thousand rolling acres of the
up-country ranch he loved so well. He even saw in flashing visions the
blue of the sky, the golden sun pouring down on his flower-spangled
meadows, the lazy cattle knee-deep in the brooks, and the flash of trout
in the riffles. Life was good-too good for him to risk it for a moment's
sway of the beast. In short, Carter Watson was cool and scared.

His opponent, locked by his masterly clinch, was striving to throw him.
Again Watson put him on the floor, broke away, and was thrust back by
the pasty-faced circle to duck Patsy's swinging right and effect another
clinch. This happened many times. And Watson grew even cooler, while
the baffled Patsy, unable to inflict punishment, raged wildly and more
wildly. He took to batting with his head in the clinches. The first
time, he landed his forehead flush on Watson's nose. After that, the
latter, in the clinches, buried his face in Patsy's breast. But the
enraged Patsy batted on, striking his own eye and nose and cheek on the
top of the other's head. The more he was thus injured, the more and the
harder did Patsy bat.

This one-sided contest continued for twelve or fifteen minutes. Watson
never struck a blow, and strove only to escape. Sometimes, in the free
moments, circling about among the tables as he tried to win the door,
the pasty-faced men gripped his coat-tails and flung him back at the
swinging right of the on-rushing Patsy. Time upon time, and times
without end, he clinched and put Patsy on his back, each time first
whirling him around and putting him down in the direction of the door
and gaining toward that goal by the length of the fall.

In the end, hatless, disheveled, with streaming nose and one eye closed,
Watson won to the sidewalk and into the arms of a policeman.

"Arrest that man," Watson panted.

"Hello, Patsy," said the policeman. "What's the mix-up?"

"Hello, Charley," was the answer. "This guy comes in--"

"Arrest that man, officer," Watson repeated.

"G'wan! Beat it!" said Patsy.

"Beat it!" added the policeman. "If you don't, I'll pull you in."

"Not unless you arrest that man. He has committed a violent and
unprovoked assault on me."

"Is it so, Patsy?" was the officer's query.

"Nah. Lemme tell you, Charley, an' I got the witnesses to prove it, so
help me God. I was settin' in me kitchen eatin' a bowl of soup, when
this guy comes in an' gets gay wid me. I never seen him in me born days
before. He was drunk--"

"Look at me, officer," protested the indignant sociologist. "Am I
drunk?"

The officer looked at him with sullen, menacing eyes and nodded to Patsy
to continue.

"This guy gets gay wid me. 'I'm Tim McGrath,' says he, 'an' I can do the
like to you,' says he. 'Put up yer hands.' I smiles, an' wid that, biff
biff, he lands me twice an' spills me soup. Look at me eye. I'm fair
murdered."

"What are you going to do, officer?" Watson demanded.

"Go on, beat it," was the answer, "or I'll pull you sure."

The civic righteousness of Carter Watson flamed up.

"Mr. Officer, I protest--"

But at that moment the policeman grabbed his arm with a savage jerk that
nearly overthrew him.

"Come on, you're pulled."

"Arrest him, too," Watson demanded.

"Nix on that play," was the reply.

"What did you assault him for, him a peacefully eatin' his soup?"

II

Carter Watson was genuinely angry. Not only had he been wantonly
assaulted, badly battered, and arrested, but the morning papers without
exception came out with lurid accounts of his drunken brawl with the
proprietor of the notorious Vendome. Not one accurate or truthful line
was published. Patsy Horan and his satellites described the battle in
detail. The one incontestable thing was that Carter Watson had been
drunk. Thrice he had been thrown out of the place and into the gutter,
and thrice he had come back, breathing blood and fire and announcing
that he was going to clean out the place. "EMINENT SOCIOLOGIST JAGGED
AND JUGGED," was the first head-line he read, on the front page,
accompanied by a large portrait of himself. Other headlines were:
"CARTER WATSON ASPIRED TO CHAMPIONSHIP HONORS"; "CARTER WATSON GETS
HIS"; "NOTED SOCIOLOGIST ATTEMPTS TO CLEAN OUT A TENDERLOIN CAFE"; and
"CARTER WATSON KNOCKED OUT BY PATSY HORAN IN THREE ROUNDS."

At the police court, next morning, under bail, appeared Carter Watson
to answer the complaint of the People Versus Carter Watson, for
the latter's assault and battery on one Patsy Horan. But first, the
Prosecuting Attorney, who was paid to prosecute all offenders against
the People, drew him aside and talked with him privately.

"Why not let it drop!" said the Prosecuting Attorney. "I tell you what
you do, Mr. Watson: Shake hands with Mr. Horan and make it up, and we'll
drop the case right here. A word to the Judge, and the case against you
will be dismissed."

"But I don't want it dismissed," was the answer. "Your office being what
it is, you should be prosecuting me instead of asking me to make up with
this--this fellow."

"Oh, I'll prosecute you all right," retorted the Prosecuting Attorney.

"Also you will have to prosecute this Patsy Horan," Watson advised; "for
I shall now have him arrested for assault and battery."

"You'd better shake and make up," the Prosecuting Attorney repeated, and
this time there was almost a threat in his voice.

The trials of both men were set for a week later, on the same morning,
in Police Judge Witberg's court.

"You have no chance," Watson was told by an old friend of his boyhood,
the retired manager of the biggest paper in the city. "Everybody knows
you were beaten up by this man. His reputation is most unsavory. But it
won't help you in the least. Both cases will be dismissed. This will be
because you are you. Any ordinary man would be convicted."

"But I do not understand," objected the perplexed sociologist. "Without
warning I was attacked by this man; and badly beaten. I did not strike a
blow. I--"

"That has nothing to do with it," the other cut him off.

"Then what is there that has anything to do with it?"

"I'll tell you. You are now up against the local police and political
machine. Who are you? You are not even a legal resident in this town.
You live up in the country. You haven't a vote of your own here. Much
less do you swing any votes. This dive proprietor swings a string of
votes in his precincts--a mighty long string."

"Do you mean to tell me that this Judge Witberg will violate the
sacredness of his office and oath by letting this brute off?" Watson
demanded.

"Watch him," was the grim reply. "Oh, he'll do it nicely enough. He will
give an extra-legal, extra-judicial decision, abounding in every word in
the dictionary that stands for fairness and right."

"But there are the newspapers," Watson cried.

"They are not fighting the administration at present. They'll give it to
you hard. You see what they have already done to you."

"Then these snips of boys on the police detail won't write the truth?"

"They will write something so near like the truth that the public will
believe it. They write their stories under instruction, you know. They
have their orders to twist and color, and there won't be much left of
you when they get done. Better drop the whole thing right now. You are
in bad."

"But the trials are set."

"Give the word and they'll drop them now. A man can't fight a machine
unless he has a machine behind him."

III

But Carter Watson was stubborn. He was convinced that the machine would
beat him, but all his days he had sought social experience, and this was
certainly something new.

The morning of the trial the Prosecuting Attorney made another attempt
to patch up the affair.

"If you feel that way, I should like to get a lawyer to prosecute the
case," said Watson.

"No, you don't," said the Prosecuting Attorney. "I am paid by the People
to prosecute, and prosecute I will. But let me tell you. You have no
chance. We shall lump both cases into one, and you watch out."

Judge Witberg looked good to Watson. A fairly young man, short,
comfortably stout, smooth-shaven and with an intelligent face, he seemed
a very nice man indeed. This good impression was added to by the smiling
lips and the wrinkles of laughter in the corners of his black eyes.
Looking at him and studying him, Watson felt almost sure that his old
friend's prognostication was wrong.

But Watson was soon to learn. Patsy Horan and two of his satellites
testified to a most colossal aggregation of perjuries. Watson could not
have believed it possible without having experienced it. They denied
the existence of the other four men. And of the two that testified, one
claimed to have been in the kitchen, a witness to Watson's unprovoked
assault on Patsy, while the other, remaining in the bar, had witnessed
Watson's second and third rushes into the place as he attempted to
annihilate the unoffending Patsy. The vile language ascribed to Watson
was so voluminously and unspeakably vile, that he felt they were
injuring their own case. It was so impossible that he should utter such
things. But when they described the brutal blows he had rained on poor
Patsy's face, and the chair he demolished when he vainly attempted to
kick Patsy, Watson waxed secretly hilarious and at the same time sad.
The trial was a farce, but such lowness of life was depressing to
contemplate when he considered the long upward climb humanity must make.

Watson could not recognize himself, nor could his worst enemy have
recognized him, in the swashbuckling, rough-housing picture that was
painted of him. But, as in all cases of complicated perjury, rifts and
contradictions in the various stories appeared. The Judge somehow failed
to notice them, while the Prosecuting Attorney and Patsy's attorney
shied off from them gracefully. Watson had not bothered to get a lawyer
for himself, and he was now glad that he had not.

Still, he retained a semblance of faith in Judge Witberg when he went
himself on the stand and started to tell his story.

"I was strolling casually along the street, your Honor," Watson began,
but was interrupted by the Judge.

"We are not here to consider your previous actions," bellowed Judge
Witberg. "Who struck the first blow?"

"Your Honor," Watson pleaded, "I have no witnesses of the actual fray,
and the truth of my story can only be brought out by telling the story
fully--"

Again he was interrupted.

"We do not care to publish any magazines here," Judge Witberg roared,
looking at him so fiercely and malevolently that Watson could scarcely
bring himself to believe that this was same man he had studied a few
minutes previously.

"Who struck the first blow?" Patsy's attorney asked.

The Prosecuting Attorney interposed, demanding to know which of the two
cases lumped together was, and by what right Patsy's lawyer, at that
stage of the proceedings, should take the witness. Patsy's attorney
fought back. Judge Witberg interfered, professing no knowledge of any
two cases being lumped together. All this had to be explained. Battle
royal raged, terminating in both attorneys apologizing to the Court and
to each other. And so it went, and to Watson it had the seeming of a
group of pickpockets ruffling and bustling an honest man as they took
his purse. The machine was working, that was all.

"Why did you enter this place of unsavory reputations?" was asked him.

"It has been my custom for many years, as a student of economics and
sociology, to acquaint myself--"

But this was as far as Watson got.

"We want none of your ologies here," snarled Judge Witberg. "It is a
plain question. Answer it plainly. Is it true or not true that you were
drunk? That is the gist of the question."

When Watson attempted to tell how Patsy had injured his face in his
attempts to bat with his head, Watson was openly scouted and flouted,
and Judge Witberg again took him in hand.

"Are you aware of the solemnity of the oath you took to testify to
nothing but the truth on this witness stand?" the Judge demanded. "This
is a fairy story you are telling. It is not reasonable that a man would
so injure himself, and continue to injure himself, by striking the soft
and sensitive parts of his face against your head. You are a sensible
man. It is unreasonable, is it not?"

"Men are unreasonable when they are angry," Watson answered meekly.

Then it was that Judge Witberg was deeply outraged and righteously
wrathful.

"What right have you to say that?" he cried. "It is gratuitous. It has
no bearing on the case. You are here as a witness, sir, of events that
have transpired. The Court does not wish to hear any expressions of
opinion from you at all."

"I but answered your question, your Honor," Watson protested humbly.

"You did nothing of the sort," was the next blast. "And let me warn you,
sir, let me warn you, that you are laying yourself liable to contempt by
such insolence. And I will have you know that we know how to observe the
law and the rules of courtesy down here in this little courtroom. I am
ashamed of you."

And, while the next punctilious legal wrangle between the attorneys
interrupted his tale of what happened in the Vendome, Carter Watson,
without bitterness, amused and at the same time sad, saw rise before him
the machine, large and small, that dominated his country, the unpunished
and shameless grafts of a thousand cities perpetrated by the spidery
and vermin-like creatures of the machines. Here it was before him, a
courtroom and a judge, bowed down in subservience by the machine to a
dive-keeper who swung a string of votes. Petty and sordid as it was, it
was one face of the many-faced machine that loomed colossally, in every
city and state, in a thousand guises overshadowing the land.

A familiar phrase rang in his ears: "It is to laugh." At the height of
the wrangle, he giggled, once, aloud, and earned a sullen frown from
Judge Witberg. Worse, a myriad times, he decided, were these bullying
lawyers and this bullying judge then the bucko mates in first quality
hell-ships, who not only did their own bullying but protected themselves
as well. These petty rapscallions, on the other hand, sought protection
behind the majesty of the law. They struck, but no one was permitted to
strike back, for behind them were the prison cells and the clubs of the
stupid policemen--paid and professional fighters and beaters-up of
men. Yet he was not bitter. The grossness and the sliminess of it was
forgotten in the simple grotesqueness of it, and he had the saving sense
of humor.

Nevertheless, hectored and heckled though he was, he managed in the end
to give a simple, straightforward version of the affair, and, despite
a belligerent cross-examination, his story was not shaken in any
particular. Quite different it was from the perjuries that had shouted
aloud from the perjuries of Patsy and his two witnesses.

Both Patsy's attorney and the Prosecuting Attorney rested their
cases, letting everything go before the Court without argument. Watson
protested against this, but was silenced when the Prosecuting Attorney
told him that Public Prosecutor and knew his business.

"Patrick Horan has testified that he was in danger of his life and that
he was compelled to defend himself," Judge Witberg's verdict began. "Mr.
Watson has testified to the same thing. Each has sworn that the other
struck the first blow; each has sworn that the other made an unprovoked
assault on him. It is an axiom of the law that the defendant should
be given the benefit of the doubt. A very reasonable doubt exists.
Therefore, in the case of the People Versus Carter Watson the benefit
of the doubt is given to said Carter Watson and he is herewith ordered
discharged from custody. The same reasoning applies to the case of the
People Versus Patrick Horan. He is given the benefit of the doubt and
discharged from custody. My recommendation is that both defendants shake
hands and make up."

In the afternoon papers the first headline that caught Watson's eye was:
"CARTER WATSON ACQUITTED." In the second paper it was: "CARTER WATSON
ESCAPES A FINE." But what capped everything was the one beginning:
"CARTER WATSON A GOOD FELLOW." In the text he read how Judge Witberg had
advised both fighters to shake hands, which they promptly did. Further,
he read:

"'Let's have a nip on it,' said Patsy Horan.

"'Sure,' said Carter Watson.

"And, arm in arm, they ambled for the nearest saloon."

IV

Now, from the whole adventure, Watson carried away no bitterness. It was
a social experience of a new order, and it led to the writing of another
book, which he entitled, "POLICE COURT PROCEDURE: A Tentative Analysis."

One summer morning a year later, on his ranch, he left his horse and
himself clambered on through a miniature canyon to inspect some rock
ferns he had planted the previous winter. Emerging from the upper end
of the canyon, he came out on one of his flower-spangled meadows, a
delightful isolated spot, screened from the world by low hills and
clumps of trees. And here he found a man, evidently on a stroll from the
summer hotel down at the little town a mile away. They met face to face
and the recognition was mutual. It was Judge Witberg. Also, it was
a clear case of trespass, for Watson had trespass signs upon his
boundaries, though he never enforced them.

Judge Witberg held out his hand, which Watson refused to see.

"Politics is a dirty trade, isn't it, Judge?" he remarked. "Oh, yes,
I see your hand, but I don't care to take it. The papers said I shook
hands with Patsy Horan after the trial. You know I did not, but let me
tell you that I'd a thousand times rather shake hands with him and his
vile following of curs, than with you."

Judge Witberg was painfully flustered, and as he hemmed and hawed and
essayed to speak, Watson, looking at him, was struck by a sudden whim,
and he determined on a grim and facetious antic.

"I should scarcely expect any animus from a man of your acquirements and
knowledge of the world," the Judge was saying.

"Animus?" Watson replied. "Certainly not. I haven't such a thing in my
nature. And to prove it, let me show you something curious, something
you have never seen before." Casting about him, Watson picked up a rough
stone the size of his fist. "See this. Watch me."

So saying, Carter Watson tapped himself a sharp blow on the cheek. The
stone laid the flesh open to the bone and the blood spurted forth.

"The stone was too sharp," he announced to the astounded police judge,
who thought he had gone mad.

"I must bruise it a trifle. There is nothing like being realistic in
such matters."

Whereupon Carter Watson found a smooth stone and with it pounded his
cheek nicely several times.

"Ah," he cooed. "That will turn beautifully green and black in a few
hours. It will be most convincing."

"You are insane," Judge Witberg quavered.

"Don't use such vile language to me," said Watson. "You see my bruised
and bleeding face? You did that, with that right hand of yours. You hit
me twice--biff, biff. It is a brutal and unprovoked assault. I am in
danger of my life. I must protect myself."

Judge Witberg backed away in alarm before the menacing fists of the
other.

"If you strike me I'll have you arrested," Judge Witberg threatened.

"That is what I told Patsy," was the answer. "And do you know what he
did when I told him that?"

"No."

"That!"

And at the same moment Watson's right fist landed flush on Judge
Witberg's nose, putting that legal gentleman over on his back on the
grass.

"Get up!" commanded Watson. "If you are a gentleman, get up--that's what
Patsy told me, you know."

Judge Witberg declined to rise, and was dragged to his feet by the
coat-collar, only to have one eye blacked and be put on his back again.
After that it was a red Indian massacre. Judge Witberg was humanely and
scientifically beaten up. His checks were boxed, his cars cuffed, and
his face was rubbed in the turf. And all the time Watson exposited
the way Patsy Horan had done it. Occasionally, and very carefully, the
facetious sociologist administered a real bruising blow. Once, dragging
the poor Judge to his feet, he deliberately bumped his own nose on the
gentleman's head. The nose promptly bled.

"See that!" cried Watson, stepping back and deftly shedding his blood
all down his own shirt front. "You did it. With your fist you did it. It
is awful. I am fair murdered. I must again defend myself."

And once more Judge Witberg impacted his features on a fist and was sent
to grass.

"I will have you arrested," he sobbed as he lay.

"That's what Patsy said."

"A brutal---sniff, sniff,--and unprovoked--sniff, sniff--assault."

"That's what Patsy said."

"I will surely have you arrested."

"Speaking slangily, not if I can beat you to it."

And with that, Carter Watson departed down the canyon, mounted his
horse, and rode to town.

An hour later, as Judge Witberg limped up the grounds to his hotel, he
was arrested by a village constable on a charge of assault and battery
preferred by Carter Watson.

V

"Your Honor," Watson said next day to the village Justice, a well to
do farmer and graduate, thirty years before, from a cow college, "since
this Sol Witberg has seen fit to charge me with battery, following upon
my charge of battery against him, I would suggest that both cases
be lumped together. The testimony and the facts are the same in both
cases."

To this the Justice agreed, and the double case proceeded. Watson, as
prosecuting witness, first took the stand and told his story.

"I was picking flowers," he testified. "Picking flowers on my own land,
never dreaming of danger. Suddenly this man rushed upon me from behind
the trees. 'I am the Dodo,' he says, 'and I can do you to a frazzle.
Put up your hands.' I smiled, but with that, biff, biff, he struck
me, knocking me down and spilling my flowers. The language he used was
frightful. It was an unprovoked and brutal assault. Look at my cheek.
Look at my nose--I could not understand it. He must have been drunk.
Before I recovered from my surprise he had administered this beating.
I was in danger of my life and was compelled to defend himself. That
is all, Your Honor, though I must say, in conclusion, that I cannot
get over my perplexity. Why did he say he was the Dodo? Why did he so
wantonly attack me?"

And thus was Sol Witberg given a liberal education in the art of
perjury. Often, from his high seat, he had listened indulgently to
police court perjuries in cooked-up cases; but for the first time
perjury was directed against him, and he no longer sat above the court,
with the bailiffs, the Policemen's clubs, and the prison cells behind
him.

"Your Honor," he cried, "never have I heard such a pack of lies told by
so bare-faced a liar--!"

Watson here sprang to his feet.

"Your Honor, I protest. It is for your Honor to decide truth or
falsehood. The witness is on the stand to testify to actual events that
have transpired. His personal opinion upon things in general, and upon
me, has no bearing on the case whatever."

The Justice scratched his head and waxed phlegmatically indignant.

"The point is well taken," he decided. "I am surprised at you, Mr.
Witberg, claiming to be a judge and skilled in the practice of the law,
and yet being guilty of such unlawyerlike conduct. Your manner, sir, and
your methods, remind me of a shyster. This is a simple case of assault
and battery. We are here to determine who struck the first blow, and we
are not interested in your estimates of Mr. Watson's personal character.
Proceed with your story."

Sol Witberg would have bitten his bruised and swollen lip in chagrin,
had it not hurt so much. But he contained himself and told a simple,
straightforward, truthful story.

"Your Honor," Watson said, "I would suggest that you ask him what he was
doing on my premises."

"A very good question. What were you doing, sir, on Mr. Watson's
premises?"

"I did not know they were his premises."

"It was a trespass, your Honor," Watson cried. "The warnings are posted
conspicuously."

"I saw no warnings," said Sol Witberg.

"I have seen them myself," snapped the Justice. "They are very
conspicuous. And I would warn you, sir, that if you palter with
the truth in such little matters you may darken your more important
statements with suspicion. Why did you strike Mr. Watson?"

"Your Honor, as I have testified, I did not strike a blow."

The Justice looked at Carter Watson's bruised and swollen visage, and
turned to glare at Sol Witberg.

"Look at that man's cheek!" he thundered. "If you did not strike a blow
how comes it that he is so disfigured and injured?"

"As I testified--"

"Be careful," the Justice warned.

"I will be careful, sir. I will say nothing but the truth. He struck
himself with a rock. He struck himself with two different rocks."

"Does it stand to reason that a man, any man not a lunatic, would so
injure himself, and continue to injure himself, by striking the soft and
sensitive parts of his face with a stone?" Carter Watson demanded

"It sounds like a fairy story," was the Justice's comment.

"Mr. Witberg, had you been drinking?"

"No, sir."

"Do you never drink?"

"On occasion."

The Justice meditated on this answer with an air of astute profundity.

Watson took advantage of the opportunity to wink at Sol Witberg, but
that much-abused gentleman saw nothing humorous in the situation.

"A very peculiar case, a very peculiar case," the Justice announced,
as he began his verdict. "The evidence of the two parties is flatly
contradictory. There are no witnesses outside the two principals. Each
claims the other committed the assault, and I have no legal way of
determining the truth. But I have my private opinion, Mr. Witberg, and
I would recommend that henceforth you keep off of Mr. Watson's premises
and keep away from this section of the country--"

"This is an outrage!" Sol Witberg blurted out.

"Sit down, sir!" was the Justice's thundered command. "If you interrupt
the Court in this manner again, I shall fine you for contempt. And I
warn you I shall fine you heavily--you, a judge yourself, who should be
conversant with the courtesy and dignity of courts. I shall now give my
verdict:

"It is a rule of law that the defendant shall be given the benefit of
the doubt. As I have said, and I repeat, there is no legal way for me
to determine who struck the first blow. Therefore, and much to my
regret,"--here he paused and glared at Sol Witberg--"in each of these
cases I am compelled to give the defendant the benefit of the doubt.
Gentlemen, you are both dismissed."

"Let us have a nip on it," Watson said to Witberg, as they left the
courtroom; but that outraged person refused to lock arms and amble to
the nearest saloon.




WINGED BLACKMAIL

PETER WINN lay back comfortably in a library chair, with closed eyes,
deep in the cogitation of a scheme of campaign destined in the near
future to make a certain coterie of hostile financiers sit up. The
central idea had come to him the night before, and he was now reveling
in the planning of the remoter, minor details. By obtaining control of a
certain up-country bank, two general stores, and several logging camps,
he could come into control of a certain dinky jerkwater line which shall
here be nameless, but which, in his hands, would prove the key to a
vastly larger situation involving more main-line mileage almost than
there were spikes in the aforesaid dinky jerkwater. It was so simple
that he had almost laughed aloud when it came to him. No wonder those
astute and ancient enemies of his had passed it by.

The library door opened, and a slender, middle-aged man, weak-eyed and
eye glassed, entered. In his hands was an envelope and an open letter.
As Peter Winn's secretary it was his task to weed out, sort, and
classify his employer's mail.

"This came in the morning post," he ventured apologetically and with
the hint of a titter. "Of course it doesn't amount to anything, but I
thought you would like to see it."

"Read it," Peter Winn commanded, without opening his eyes.

The secretary cleared his throat.

"It is dated July seventeenth, but is without address. Postmark San
Francisco. It is also quite illiterate. The spelling is atrocious. Here
it is:

"Mr. Peter Winn, SIR: I send you respectfully by express a pigeon worth
good money. She's a loo-loo--"

"What is a loo-loo?" Peter Winn interrupted.

The secretary tittered.

"I'm sure I don't know, except that it must be a superlative of some
sort. The letter continues:

"Please freight it with a couple of thousand-dollar bills and let it go.
If you do I wont never annoy you no more. If you dont you will be sorry.

"That is all. It is unsigned. I thought it would amuse you."

"Has the pigeon come?" Peter Winn demanded.

"I'm sure I never thought to enquire."

"Then do so."

In five minutes the secretary was back.

"Yes, sir. It came this morning."

"Then bring it in."

The secretary was inclined to take the affair as a practical joke, but
Peter Winn, after an examination of the pigeon, thought otherwise.

"Look at it," he said, stroking and handling it. "See the length of the
body and that elongated neck. A proper carrier. I doubt if I've ever
seen a finer specimen. Powerfully winged and muscled. As our unknown
correspondent remarked, she is a loo-loo. It's a temptation to keep
her."

The secretary tittered.

"Why not? Surely you will not let it go back to the writer of that
letter."

Peter Winn shook his head.

"I'll answer. No man can threaten me, even anonymously or in foolery."

On a slip of paper he wrote the succinct message, "Go to hell," signed
it, and placed it in the carrying apparatus with which the bird had been
thoughtfully supplied.

"Now we'll let her loose. Where's my son? I'd like him to see the
flight."

"He's down in the workshop. He slept there last night, and had his
breakfast sent down this morning."

"He'll break his neck yet," Peter Winn remarked, half-fiercely,
half-proudly, as he led the way to the veranda.

Standing at the head of the broad steps, he tossed the pretty creature
outward and upward. She caught herself with a quick beat of wings,
fluttered about undecidedly for a space, then rose in the air.

Again, high up, there seemed indecision; then, apparently getting her
bearings, she headed east, over the oak-trees that dotted the park-like
grounds.

"Beautiful, beautiful," Peter Winn murmured. "I almost wish I had her
back."

But Peter Winn was a very busy man, with such large plans in his head
and with so many reins in his hands that he quickly forgot the incident.
Three nights later the left wing of his country house was blown up. It
was not a heavy explosion, and nobody was hurt, though the wing itself
was ruined. Most of the windows of the rest of the house were broken,
and there was a deal of general damage. By the first ferry boat of the
morning half a dozen San Francisco detectives arrived, and several hours
later the secretary, in high excitement, erupted on Peter Winn.

"It's come!" the secretary gasped, the sweat beading his forehead and
his eyes bulging behind their glasses.

"What has come?" Peter demanded. "It--the--the loo-loo bird."

Then the financier understood.

"Have you gone over the mail yet?"

"I was just going over it, sir."

"Then continue, and see if you can find another letter from our
mysterious friend, the pigeon fancier."

The letter came to light. It read:

Mr. Peter Winn, HONORABLE SIR: Now dont be a fool. If youd came through,
your shack would not have blew up--I beg to inform you respectfully,
am sending same pigeon. Take good care of same, thank you. Put five one
thousand dollar bills on her and let her go. Dont feed her. Dont try to
follow bird. She is wise to the way now and makes better time. If you
dont come through, watch out.

Peter Winn was genuinely angry. This time he indited no message for the
pigeon to carry. Instead, he called in the detectives, and, under their
advice, weighted the pigeon heavily with shot. Her previous flight
having been eastward toward the bay, the fastest motor-boat in Tiburon
was commissioned to take up the chase if it led out over the water.

But too much shot had been put on the carrier, and she was exhausted
before the shore was reached. Then the mistake was made of putting too
little shot on her, and she rose high in the air, got her bearings and
started eastward across San Francisco Bay. She flew straight over Angel
Island, and here the motor-boat lost her, for it had to go around the
island.

That night, armed guards patrolled the grounds. But there was no
explosion. Yet, in the early morning Peter Winn learned by telephone
that his sister's home in Alameda had been burned to the ground.

Two days later the pigeon was back again, coming this time by freight in
what had seemed a barrel of potatoes. Also came another letter:

Mr. Peter Winn, RESPECTABLE SIR: It was me that fixed yr sisters house.
You have raised hell, aint you. Send ten thousand now. Going up all the
time. Dont put any more handicap weights on that bird. You sure cant
follow her, and its cruelty to animals.

Peter Winn was ready to acknowledge himself beaten. The detectives
were powerless, and Peter did not know where next the man would
strike--perhaps at the lives of those near and dear to him. He even
telephoned to San Francisco for ten thousand dollars in bills of large
denomination. But Peter had a son, Peter Winn, Junior, with the
same firm-set jaw as his fathers, and the same knitted, brooding
determination in his eyes. He was only twenty-six, but he was all man, a
secret terror and delight to the financier, who alternated between pride
in his son's aeroplane feats and fear for an untimely and terrible end.

"Hold on, father, don't send that money," said Peter Winn, Junior.
"Number Eight is ready, and I know I've at last got that reefing down
fine. It will work, and it will revolutionize flying. Speed--that's
what's needed, and so are the large sustaining surfaces for getting
started and for altitude. I've got them both. Once I'm up I reef down.
There it is. The smaller the sustaining surface, the higher the speed.
That was the law discovered by Langley. And I've applied it. I can rise
when the air is calm and full of holes, and I can rise when its boiling,
and by my control of my plane areas I can come pretty close to making
any speed I want. Especially with that new Sangster-Endholm engine."

"You'll come pretty close to breaking your neck one of these days," was
his father's encouraging remark.

"Dad, I'll tell you what I'll come pretty close to-ninety miles an
hour--Yes, and a hundred. Now listen! I was going to make a trial
tomorrow. But it won't take two hours to start today. I'll tackle it
this afternoon. Keep that money. Give me the pigeon and I'll follow her
to her loft where ever it is. Hold on, let me talk to the mechanics."

He called up the workshop, and in crisp, terse sentences gave his orders
in a way that went to the older man's heart. Truly, his one son was a
chip off the old block, and Peter Winn had no meek notions concerning
the intrinsic value of said old block.

Timed to the minute, the young man, two hours later, was ready for the
start. In a holster at his hip, for instant use, cocked and with the
safety on, was a large-caliber automatic pistol. With a final inspection
and overhauling he took his seat in the aeroplane. He started the
engine, and with a wild burr of gas explosions the beautiful fabric
darted down the launching ways and lifted into the air. Circling, as he
rose, to the west, he wheeled about and jockeyed and maneuvered for the
real start of the race.

This start depended on the pigeon. Peter Winn held it. Nor was it
weighted with shot this time. Instead, half a yard of bright ribbon was
firmly attached to its leg--this the more easily to enable its flight
being followed. Peter Winn released it, and it arose easily enough
despite the slight drag of the ribbon. There was no uncertainty about
its movements. This was the third time it had made particular homing
passage, and it knew the course.

At an altitude of several hundred feet it straightened out and went due
east. The aeroplane swerved into a straight course from its last curve
and followed. The race was on. Peter Winn, looking up, saw that the
pigeon was outdistancing the machine. Then he saw something else. The
aeroplane suddenly and instantly became smaller. It had reefed. Its
high-speed plane-design was now revealed. Instead of the generous
spread of surface with which it had taken the air, it was now a lean and
hawklike monoplane balanced on long and exceedingly narrow wings.

*****

When young Winn reefed down so suddenly, he received a surprise. It
was his first trial of the new device, and while he was prepared for
increased speed he was not prepared for such an astonishing increase. It
was better than he dreamed, and, before he knew it, he was hard upon
the pigeon. That little creature, frightened by this, the most monstrous
hawk it had ever seen, immediately darted upward, after the manner of
pigeons that strive always to rise above a hawk.

In great curves the monoplane followed upward, higher and higher into
the blue. It was difficult, from underneath to see the pigeon, and young
Winn dared not lose it from his sight. He even shook out his reefs in
order to rise more quickly. Up, up they went, until the pigeon, true
to its instinct, dropped and struck at what it thought to be the back of
its pursuing enemy. Once was enough, for, evidently finding no life in
the smooth cloth surface of the machine, it ceased soaring and
straightened out on its eastward course.

A carrier pigeon on a passage can achieve a high rate of speed, and
Winn reefed again. And again, to his satisfaction, he found that he was
beating the pigeon. But this time he quickly shook out a portion of his
reefed sustaining surface and slowed down in time. From then on he knew
he had the chase safely in hand, and from then on a chant rose to his
lips which he continued to sing at intervals, and unconsciously, for the
rest of the passage. It was: "Going some; going some; what did I tell
you!--going some."

Even so, it was not all plain sailing. The air is an unstable medium at
best, and quite without warning, at an acute angle, he entered an aerial
tide which he recognized as the gulf stream of wind that poured through
the drafty-mouthed Golden Gate. His right wing caught it first--a
sudden, sharp puff that lifted and tilted the monoplane and threatened
to capsize it. But he rode with a sensitive "loose curb," and quickly,
but not too quickly, he shifted the angles of his wing-tips, depressed
the front horizontal rudder, and swung over the rear vertical rudder to
meet the tilting thrust of the wind. As the machine came back to an even
keel, and he knew that he was now wholly in the invisible stream, he
readjusted the wing-tips, rapidly away from him during the several
moments of his discomfiture.

The pigeon drove straight on for the Alameda County shore, and it
was near this shore that Winn had another experience. He fell into an
air-hole. He had fallen into air-holes before, in previous flights, but
this was a far larger one than he had ever encountered. With his eyes
strained on the ribbon attached to the pigeon, by that fluttering bit of
color he marked his fall. Down he went, at the pit of his stomach that
old sink sensation which he had known as a boy he first negotiated
quick-starting elevators. But Winn, among other secrets of aviation, had
learned that to go up it was sometimes necessary first to go down.
The air had refused to hold him. Instead of struggling futilely and
perilously against this lack of sustension, he yielded to it. With
steady head and hand, he depressed the forward horizontal rudder--just
recklessly enough and not a fraction more--and the monoplane dived head
foremost and sharply down the void. It was falling with the keenness of
a knife-blade. Every instant the speed accelerated frightfully. Thus
he accumulated the momentum that would save him. But few instants were
required, when, abruptly shifting the double horizontal rudders forward
and astern, he shot upward on the tense and straining plane and out of
the pit.

At an altitude of five hundred feet, the pigeon drove on over the town
of Berkeley and lifted its flight to the Contra Costa hills. Young Winn
noted the campus and buildings of the University of California--his
university--as he rose after the pigeon.

Once more, on these Contra Costa hills, he early came to grief. The
pigeon was now flying low, and where a grove of eucalyptus presented a
solid front to the wind, the bird was suddenly sent fluttering wildly
upward for a distance of a hundred feet. Winn knew what it meant. It had
been caught in an air-surf that beat upward hundreds of feet where
the fresh west wind smote the upstanding wall of the grove. He reefed
hastily to the uttermost, and at the same time depressed the angle of
his flight to meet that upward surge. Nevertheless, the monoplane was
tossed fully three hundred feet before the danger was left astern.

Two or more ranges of hills the pigeon crossed, and then Winn saw it
dropping down to a landing where a small cabin stood in a hillside
clearing. He blessed that clearing. Not only was it good for alighting,
but, on account of the steepness of the slope, it was just the thing for
rising again into the air.

A man, reading a newspaper, had just started up at the sight of the
returning pigeon, when he heard the burr of Winn's engine and saw the
huge monoplane, with all surfaces set, drop down upon him, stop suddenly
on an air-cushion manufactured on the spur of the moment by a shift of
the horizontal rudders, glide a few yards, strike ground, and come to
rest not a score of feet away from him. But when he saw a young man,
calmly sitting in the machine and leveling a pistol at him, the man
turned to run. Before he could make the corner of the cabin, a bullet
through the leg brought him down in a sprawling fall.

"What do you want!" he demanded sullenly, as the other stood over him.

"I want to take you for a ride in my new machine," Winn answered.
"Believe me, she is a loo-loo."

The man did not argue long, for this strange visitor had most convincing
ways. Under Winn's instructions, covered all the time by the pistol,
the man improvised a tourniquet and applied it to his wounded leg. Winn
helped him to a seat in the machine, then went to the pigeon-loft and
took possession of the bird with the ribbon still fast to its leg.

A very tractable prisoner, the man proved. Once up in the air, he sat
close, in an ecstasy of fear. An adept at winged blackmail, he had no
aptitude for wings himself, and when he gazed down at the flying land
and water far beneath him, he did not feel moved to attack his captor,
now defenseless, both hands occupied with flight.

Instead, the only way the man felt moved was to sit closer.

*****

Peter Winn, Senior, scanning the heavens with powerful glasses, saw
the monoplane leap into view and grow large over the rugged backbone
of Angel Island. Several minutes later he cried out to the waiting
detectives that the machine carried a passenger. Dropping swiftly and
piling up an abrupt air-cushion, the monoplane landed.

"That reefing device is a winner!" young Winn cried, as he climbed out.
"Did you see me at the start? I almost ran over the pigeon. Going some,
dad! Going some! What did I tell you? Going some!"

"But who is that with you?" his father demanded.

The young man looked back at his prisoner and remembered.

"Why, that's the pigeon-fancier," he said. "I guess the officers can
take care of him."

Peter Winn gripped his son's hand in grim silence, and fondled the
pigeon which his son had passed to him. Again he fondled the pretty
creature. Then he spoke.

"Exhibit A, for the People," he said.




BUNCHES OF KNUCKLES

ARRANGEMENTS quite extensive had been made for the celebration of
Christmas on the yacht Samoset. Not having been in any civilized port
for months, the stock of provisions boasted few delicacies; yet Minnie
Duncan had managed to devise real feasts for cabin and forecastle.

"Listen, Boyd," she told her husband. "Here are the menus. For the cabin,
raw bonita native style, turtle soup, omelette a la Samoset--"

"What the dickens?" Boyd Duncan interrupted.

"Well, if you must know, I found a tin of mushrooms and a package of
egg-powder which had fallen down behind the locker, and there are other
things as well that will go into it. But don't interrupt. Boiled yam,
fried taro, alligator pear salad--there, you've got me all mixed, Then
I found a last delectable half-pound of dried squid. There will be baked
beans Mexican, if I can hammer it into Toyama's head; also, baked papaia
with Marquesan honey, and, lastly, a wonderful pie the secret of which
Toyama refuses to divulge."

"I wonder if it is possible to concoct a punch or a cocktail out of
trade rum?" Duncan muttered gloomily.

"Oh! I forgot! Come with me."

His wife caught his hand and led him through the small connecting door
to her tiny stateroom. Still holding his hand, she fished in the depths
of a hat-locker and brought forth a pint bottle of champagne.

"The dinner is complete!" he cried.

"Wait."

She fished again, and was rewarded with a silver-mounted whisky flask.
She held it to the light of a port-hole, and the liquor showed a quarter
of the distance from the bottom.

"I've been saving it for weeks," she explained. "And there's enough for
you and Captain Dettmar."

"Two mighty small drinks," Duncan complained.

"There would have been more, but I gave a drink to Lorenzo when he was
sick."

Duncan growled, "Might have given him rum," facetiously.

"The nasty stuff! For a sick man? Don't be greedy, Boyd. And I'm glad
there isn't any more, for Captain Dettmar's sake. Drinking always makes
him irritable. And now for the men's dinner. Soda crackers, sweet cakes,
candy--"

"Substantial, I must say."

"Do hush. Rice, and curry, yam, taro, bonita, of course, a big cake
Toyama is making, young pig--"

"Oh, I say," he protested.

"It is all right, Boyd. We'll be in Attu-Attu in three days. Besides,
it's my pig. That old chief what-ever-his-name distinctly presented it
to me. You saw him yourself. And then two tins of bullamacow. That's
their dinner. And now about the presents. Shall we wait until tomorrow,
or give them this evening?"

"Christmas Eve, by all means," was the man's judgment. "We'll call all
hands at eight bells; I'll give them a tot of rum all around, and then
you give the presents. Come on up on deck. It's stifling down here. I
hope Lorenzo has better luck with the dynamo; without the fans there
won't be much sleeping to-night if we're driven below."

They passed through the small main-cabin, climbed a steep companion
ladder, and emerged on deck. The sun was setting, and the promise was
for a clear tropic night. The Samoset, with fore- and main-sail winged
out on either side, was slipping a lazy four-knots through the smooth
sea. Through the engine-room skylight came a sound of hammering. They
strolled aft to where Captain Dettmar, one foot on the rail, was
oiling the gear of the patent log. At the wheel stood a tall South Sea
Islander, clad in white undershirt and scarlet hip-cloth.

Boyd Duncan was an original. At least that was the belief of his
friends. Of comfortable fortune, with no need to do anything but take
his comfort, he elected to travel about the world in outlandish and
most uncomfortable ways. Incidentally, he had ideas about coral-reefs,
disagreed profoundly with Darwin on that subject, had voiced his opinion
in several monographs and one book, and was now back at his hobby,
cruising the South Seas in a tiny, thirty-ton yacht and studying
reef-formations.

His wife, Minnie Duncan, was also declared an original, inasmuch as she
joyfully shared his vagabond wanderings. Among other things, in the six
exciting years of their marriage she had climbed Chimborazo with him,
made a three-thousand-mile winter journey with dogs and sleds in Alaska,
ridden a horse from Canada to Mexico, cruised the Mediterranean in a
ten-ton yawl, and canoed from Germany to the Black Sea across the
heart of Europe. They were a royal pair of wanderlusters, he, big and
broad-shouldered, she a small, brunette, and happy woman, whose one
hundred and fifteen pounds were all grit and endurance, and withal,
pleasing to look upon.

The Samoset had been a trading schooner, when Duncan bought her in San
Francisco and made alterations. Her interior was wholly rebuilt, so that
the hold became main-cabin and staterooms, while abaft amidships were
installed engines, a dynamo, an ice machine, storage batteries, and,
far in the stern, gasoline tanks. Necessarily, she carried a small crew.
Boyd, Minnie, and Captain Dettmar were the only whites on board, though
Lorenzo, the small and greasy engineer, laid a part claim to white,
being a Portuguese half-caste. A Japanese served as cook, and a Chinese
as cabin boy. Four white sailors had constituted the original crew
for'ard, but one by one they had yielded to the charms of palm-waving
South Sea isles and been replaced by islanders. Thus, one of the dusky
sailors hailed from Easter Island, a second from the Carolines, a third
from the Paumotus, while the fourth was a gigantic Samoan. At sea, Boyd
Duncan, himself a navigator, stood a mate's watch with Captain Dettmar,
and both of them took a wheel or lookout occasionally. On a pinch,
Minnie herself could take a wheel, and it was on pinches that she proved
herself more dependable at steering than did the native sailors.

At eight bells, all hands assembled at the wheel, and Boyd Duncan
appeared with a black bottle and a mug. The rum he served out himself,
half a mug of it to each man. They gulped the stuff down with many
facial expressions of delight, followed by loud lip-smackings of
approval, though the liquor was raw enough and corrosive enough to burn
their mucous membranes. All drank except Lee Goom, the abstemious
cabin boy. This rite accomplished, they waited for the next, the
present-giving. Generously molded on Polynesian lines, huge-bodied and
heavy-muscled, they were nevertheless like so many children, laughing
merrily at little things, their eager black eyes flashing in the lantern
light as their big bodies swayed to the heave and roll of the ship.

Calling each by name, Minnie gave the presents out, accompanying each
presentation with some happy remark that added to the glee. There
were trade watches, clasp knives, amazing assortments of fish-hooks
in packages, plug tobacco, matches, and gorgeous strips of cotton for
loincloths all around. That Boyd Duncan was liked by them was evidenced
by the roars of laughter with which they greeted his slightest joking
allusion.

Captain Dettmar, white-faced, smiling only when his employer chanced to
glance at him, leaned against the wheel-box, looking on. Twice, he left
the group and went below, remaining there but a minute each time. Later,
in the main cabin, when Lorenzo, Lee Goom and Toyama received their
presents, he disappeared into his stateroom twice again. For of all
times, the devil that slumbered in Captain Dettmar's soul chose this
particular time of good cheer to awaken. Perhaps it was not entirely the
devil's fault, for Captain Dettmar, privily cherishing a quart of whisky
for many weeks, had selected Christmas Eve for broaching it.

It was still early in the evening--two bells had just gone--when Duncan
and his wife stood by the cabin companionway, gazing to windward and
canvassing the possibility of spreading their beds on deck. A small,
dark blot of cloud, slowly forming on the horizon, carried the threat
of a rain-squall, and it was this they were discussing when Captain
Dettmar, coming from aft and about to go below, glanced at them with
sudden suspicion. He paused, his face working spasmodically. Then he
spoke:

"You are talking about me."

His voice was hoarse, and there was an excited vibration in it. Minnie
Duncan started, then glanced at her husband's immobile face, took the
cue, and remained silent.

"I say you were talking about me," Captain Dettmar repeated, this time
with almost a snarl.

He did not lurch nor betray the liquor on him in any way save by the
convulsive working of his face.

"Minnie, you'd better go down," Duncan said gently. "Tell Lee Goom we'll
sleep below. It won't be long before that squall is drenching things."

She took the hint and left, delaying just long enough to give one
anxious glance at the dim faces of the two men.

Duncan puffed at his cigar and waited till his wife's voice, in talk
with the cabin-boy, came up through the open skylight.

"Well?" Duncan demanded in a low voice, but sharply.

"I said you were talking about me. I say it again. Oh, I haven't been
blind. Day after day I've seen the two of you talking about me. Why
don't you come out and say it to my face! I know you know. And I know
your mind's made up to discharge me at Attu-Attu."

"I am sorry you are making such a mess of everything," was Duncan's
quiet reply.

But Captain Dettmar's mind was set on trouble.

"You know you are going to discharge me. You think you are too good to
associate with the likes of me--you and your wife."

"Kindly keep her out of this," Duncan warned. "What do you want?"

"I want to know what you are going to do!"

"Discharge you, after this, at Attu-Attu."

"You intended to, all along."

"On the contrary. It is your present conduct that compels me."

"You can't give me that sort of talk."

"I can't retain a captain who calls me a liar."

Captain Dettmar for the moment was taken aback. His face and lips
worked, but he could say nothing. Duncan coolly pulled at his cigar and
glanced aft at the rising cloud of squall.

"Lee Goom brought the mail aboard at Tahiti," Captain Dettmar began.

"We were hove short then and leaving. You didn't look at your letters
until we were outside, and then it was too late. That's why you didn't
discharge me at Tahiti. Oh, I know. I saw the long envelope when Lee
Goom came over the side. It was from the Governor of California, printed
on the corner for any one to see. You'd been working behind my back.
Some beachcomber in Honolulu had whispered to you, and you'd written to
the Governor to find out. And that was his answer Lee Goom carried
out to you. Why didn't you come to me like a man! No, you must play
underhand with me, knowing that this billet was the one chance for me to
get on my feet again. And as soon as you read the Governor's letter your
mind was made up to get rid of me. I've seen it on your face ever since
for all these months.. I've seen the two of you, polite as hell to me
all the time, and getting away in corners and talking about me and that
affair in 'Frisco."

"Are you done?" Duncan asked, his voice low, and tense. "Quite done?"

Captain Dettmar made no answer.

"Then I'll tell you a few things. It was precisely because of that
affair in 'Frisco that I did not discharge you in Tahiti. God knows you
gave me sufficient provocation. I thought that if ever a man needed a
chance to rehabilitate himself, you were that man. Had there been no
black mark against you, I would have discharged you when I learned how
you were robbing me."

Captain Dettmar showed surprise, started to interrupt, then changed his
mind.

"There was that matter of the deck-calking, the bronze rudder-irons, the
overhauling of the engine, the new spinnaker boom, the new davits, and
the repairs to the whale-boat. You OKd the shipyard bill. It was four
thousand one hundred and twenty-two francs. By the regular shipyard
charges it ought not to have been a centime over twenty-five hundred
francs-"

"If you take the word of those alongshore sharks against mine--' the
other began thickly.

"Save yourself the trouble of further lying," Duncan went on coldly.
"I looked it up. I got Flaubin before the Governor himself, and the old
rascal confessed to sixteen hundred overcharge. Said you'd stuck him up
for it. Twelve hundred went to you, and his share was four hundred and
the job. Don't interrupt. I've got his affidavit below. Then was when I
would have put you ashore, except for the cloud you were under. You had
to have this one chance or go clean to hell. I gave you the chance. And
what have you got to say about it?"

"What did the Governor say?" Captain Dettmar demanded truculently.

"Which governor?"

"Of California. Did he lie to you like all the rest?"

"I'll tell you what he said. He said that you had been convicted on
circumstantial evidence; that was why you had got life imprisonment
instead of hanging; that you had always stoutly maintained your
innocence; that you were the black sheep of the Maryland Dettmars; that
they moved heaven and earth for your pardon; that your prison conduct
was most exemplary; that he was prosecuting attorney at the time you
were convicted; that after you had served seven years he yielded to your
family's plea and pardoned you; and that in his own mind existed a doubt
that you had killed McSweeny."

There was a pause, during which Duncan went on studying the rising
squall, while Captain Dettmar's face worked terribly.

"Well, the Governor was wrong," he announced, with a short laugh. "I did
kill McSweeny. I did get the watchman drunk that night. I beat McSweeny
to death in his bunk. I used the iron belaying pin that appeared in the
evidence. He never had a chance. I beat him to a jelly. Do you want the
details?"

Duncan looked at him in the curious way one looks at any monstrosity,
but made no reply.

"Oh, I'm not afraid to tell you," Captain Dettmar blustered on. "There
are no witnesses. Besides, I am a free man now. I am pardoned, and by
God they can never put me back in that hole again. I broke McSweeny's
jaw with the first blow. He was lying on his back asleep. He said, 'My
God, Jim! My God!' It was funny to see his broken jaw wabble as he said
it. Then I smashed him... I say, do you want the rest of the details?"

"Is that all you have to say?" was the answer.

"Isn't it enough?" Captain Dettmar retorted.

"It is enough."

"What are you going to do about it?"

"Put you ashore at Attu-Attu."

"And in the meantime?"

"In the meantime..." Duncan paused. An increase of weight in the wind
rippled his hair. The stars overhead vanished, and the Samoset swung
four points off her course in the careless steersman's hands. "In the
meantime throw your halyards down on deck and look to your wheel. I'll
call the men."

The next moment the squall burst upon them. Captain Dettmar, springing
aft, lifted the coiled mainsail halyards from their pins and threw them,
ready to run, on the deck. The three islanders swarmed from the tiny
forecastle, two of them leaping to the halyards and holding by a single
turn, while the third fastened down the engineroom, companion and
swung the ventilators around. Below, Lee Goom and Toyama were lowering
skylight covers and screwing up deadeyes. Duncan pulled shut the cover
of the companion scuttle, and held on, waiting, the first drops of rain
pelting his face, while the Samoset leaped violently ahead, at the same
time heeling first to starboard then to port as the gusty pressures
caught her winged-out sails.

All waited. But there was no need to lower away on the run. The
power went out of the wind, and the tropic rain poured a deluge over
everything. Then it was, the danger past, and as the Kanakas began to
coil the halyards back on the pins, that Boyd Duncan went below.

"All right," he called in cheerily to his wife. "Only a puff."

"And Captain Dettmar?" she queried.

"Has been drinking, that is all. I shall get rid of him at Attu-Attu."

But before Duncan climbed into his bunk, he strapped around himself,
against the skin and under his pajama coat, a heavy automatic pistol.

He fell asleep almost immediately, for his was the gift of perfect
relaxation. He did things tensely, in the way savages do, but the
instant the need passed he relaxed, mind and body. So it was that he
slept, while the rain still poured on deck and the yacht plunged and
rolled in the brief, sharp sea caused by the squall.

He awoke with a feeling of suffocation and heaviness. The electric fans
had stopped, and the air was thick and stifling. Mentally cursing
all Lorenzos and storage batteries, he heard his wife moving in the
adjoining stateroom and pass out into the main cabin. Evidently heading
for the fresher air on deck, he thought, and decided it was a good
example to imitate. Putting on his slippers and tucking a pillow and a
blanket under his arm, he followed her. As he was about to emerge from
the companionway, the ship's clock in the cabin began to strike and he
stopped to listen. Four bells sounded. It was two in the morning. From
without came the creaking of the gaff-jaw against the mast. The Samoset
rolled and righted on a sea, and in the light breeze her canvas gave
forth a hollow thrum.

He was just putting his foot out on the damp deck when he heard his
wife scream. It was a startled frightened scream that ended in a splash
overside. He leaped out and ran aft. In the dim starlight he could make
out her head and shoulders disappearing astern in the lazy wake.

"What was it?" Captain Dettmar, who was at the wheel, asked.

"Mrs. Duncan," was Duncan's reply, as he tore the life-buoy from its
hook and flung it aft. "Jibe over to starboard and come up on the wind!"
he commanded.

And then Boyd Duncan made a mistake. He dived overboard.

When he came up, he glimpsed the blue-light on the buoy, which had
ignited automatically when it struck the water. He swam for it, and
found Minnie had reached it first.

"Hello," he said. "Just trying to keep cool?"

"Oh, Boyd!" was her answer, and one wet hand reached out and touched
his.

The blue light, through deterioration or damage, flickered out. As they
lifted on the smooth crest of a wave, Duncan turned to look where the
Samoset made a vague blur in the darkness. No lights showed, but there
was noise of confusion. He could hear Captain Dettmar's shouting above
the cries of the others.

"I must say he's taking his time," Duncan grumbled. "Why doesn't he
jibe? There she goes now."

They could hear the rattle of the boom tackle blocks as the sail was
eased across.

"That was the mainsail," he muttered. "Jibed to port when I told him
starboard."

Again they lifted on a wave, and again and again, ere they could make
out the distant green of the Samoset's starboard light. But instead of
remaining stationary, in token that the yacht was coming toward them, it
began moving across their field of vision. Duncan swore.

"What's the lubber holding over there for!" he demanded. "He's got his
compass. He knows our bearing."

But the green light, which was all they could see, and which they could
see only when they were on top of a wave, moved steadily away from them,
withal it was working up to windward, and grew dim and dimmer. Duncan
called out loudly and repeatedly, and each time, in the intervals, they
could hear, very faintly, the voice of Captain Dettmar shouting orders.

"How can he hear me with such a racket?" Duncan complained.

"He's doing it so the crew won't hear you," was Minnie's answer.

There was something in the quiet way she said it that caught her
husband's attention.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that he is not trying to pick us up," she went on in the same
composed voice. "He threw me overboard."

"You are not making a mistake?"

"How could I? I was at the main rigging, looking to see if any more
rain threatened. He must have left the wheel and crept behind me. I was
holding on to a stay with one hand. He gripped my hand free from behind
and threw me over. It's too bad you didn't know, or else you would have
staid aboard."

Duncan groaned, but said nothing for several minutes. The green light
changed the direction of its course.

"She's gone about," he announced. "You are right. He's deliberately
working around us and to windward. Up wind they can never hear me. But
here goes."

He called at minute intervals for a long time. The green light
disappeared, being replaced by the red, showing that the yacht had gone
about again.

"Minnie," he said finally, "it pains me to tell you, but you married a
fool. Only a fool would have gone overboard as I did."

"What chance have we of being picked up... by some other vessel, I
mean?" she asked.

"About one in ten thousand, or ten thousand million. Not a steamer route
nor trade route crosses this stretch of ocean. And there aren't any
whalers knocking about the South Seas. There might be a stray trading
schooner running across from Tutuwanga. But I happen to know that island
is visited only once a year. A chance in a million is ours."

"And we'll play that chance," she rejoined stoutly.

"You ARE a joy!" His hand lifted hers to his lips. "And Aunt Elizabeth
always wondered what I saw in you. Of course we'll play that chance. And
we'll win it, too. To happen otherwise would be unthinkable. Here goes."

He slipped the heavy pistol from his belt and let it sink into the sea.
The belt, however, he retained.

"Now you get inside the buoy and get some sleep. Duck under."

She ducked obediently, and came up inside the floating circle. He
fastened the straps for her, then, with the pistol belt, buckled himself
across one shoulder to the outside of the buoy.

"We're good for all day to-morrow," he said. "Thank God the water's
warm. It won't be a hardship for the first twenty-hour hours, anyway.
And if we're not picked up by nightfall, we've just got to hang on for
another day, that's all."

For half an hour they maintained silence, Duncan, his head resting on
the arm that was on the buoy, seemed asleep.

"Boyd?" Minnie said softly.

"Thought you were asleep," he growled.

"Boyd, if we don't come through this--"

"Stow that!" he broke in ungallantly. "Of course we're coming through.
There is isn't a doubt of it. Somewhere on this ocean is a ship that's
heading right for us. You wait and see. Just the same I wish my brain
were equipped with wireless. Now I'm going to sleep, if you don't."

But for once, sleep baffled him. An hour later he heard Minnie stir and
knew she was awake.

"Say, do you know what I've been thinking!" she asked.

"No; what?"

"That I'll wish you a Merry Christmas."

"By George, I never thought of it. Of course it's Christmas Day. We'll
have many more of them, too. And do you know what I've been thinking?
What a confounded shame we're done out of our Christmas dinner. Wait
till I lay hands on Dettmar. I'll take it out of him. And it won't be
with an iron belaying pin either, Just two bunches of naked knuckles,
that's all."

Despite his facetiousness, Boyd Duncan had little hope. He knew well
enough the meaning of one chance in a million, and was calmly certain
that his wife and he had entered upon their last few living hours--hours
that were inevitably bound to be black and terrible with tragedy.

The tropic sun rose in a cloudless sky. Nothing was to be seen. The
Samoset was beyond the sea-rim. As the sun rose higher, Duncan ripped
his pajama trousers in halves and fashioned them into two rude turbans.
Soaked in sea-water they offset the heat-rays.

"When I think of that dinner, I'm really angry," he complained, as he
noted an anxious expression threatening to set on his wife's face. "And
I want you to be with me when I settle with Dettmar. I've always been
opposed to women witnessing scenes of blood, but this is different. It
will be a beating."

"I hope I don't break my knuckles on him," he added, after a pause.

Midday came and went, and they floated on, the center of a narrow
sea-circle. A gentle breath of the dying trade-wind fanned them, and
they rose and fell monotonously on the smooth swells of a perfect summer
sea. Once, a gunie spied them, and for half an hour circled about them
with majestic sweeps. And, once, a huge rayfish, measuring a score of
feet across the tips, passed within a few yards.

By sunset, Minnie began to rave, softly, babblingly, like a child.
Duncan's face grew haggard as he watched and listened, while in his
mind he revolved plans of how best to end the hours of agony that were
coming. And, so planning, as they rose on a larger swell than usual,
he swept the circle of the sea with his eyes, and saw, what made him cry
out.

"Minnie!" She did not answer, and he shouted her name again in her ear,
with all the voice he could command. Her eyes opened, in them fluttered
commingled consciousness and delirium. He slapped her hands and wrists
till the sting of the blows roused her.

"There she is, the chance in a million!" he cried.

"A steamer at that, heading straight for us! By George, it's a cruiser!
I have it!--the Annapolis, returning with those astronomers from
Tutuwanga."

*****

United States Consul Lingford was a fussy, elderly gentleman, and in
the two years of his service at Attu-Attu had never encountered so
unprecedented a case as that laid before him by Boyd Duncan. The
latter, with his wife, had been landed there by the Annapolis, which had
promptly gone on with its cargo of astronomers to Fiji.

"It was cold-blooded, deliberate attempt to murder," said Consul
Lingford. "The law shall take its course. I don't know how precisely
to deal with this Captain Dettmar, but if he comes to Attu-Attu, depend
upon it he shall be dealt with, he--ah--shall be dealt with. In the
meantime, I shall read up the law. And now, won't you and your good lady
stop for lunch!"

As Duncan accepted the invitation, Minnie, who had been glancing out
of the window at the harbor, suddenly leaned forward and touched her
husband's arm. He followed her gaze, and saw the Samoset, flag at half
mast, rounding up and dropping anchor scarcely a hundred yards away.

"There's my boat now," Duncan said to the Consul. "And there's the
launch over the side, and Captain Dettmar dropping into it. If I don't
miss my guess, he's coming to report our deaths to you."

The launch landed on the white beach, and leaving Lorenzo tinkering with
the engine, Captain Dettmar strode across the beach and up the path to
the Consulate.

"Let him make his report," Duncan said. "We'll just step into this next
room and listen."

And through the partly open door, he and his wife heard Captain Dettmar,
with tears in his voice, describe the loss of his owners.

"I jibed over and went back across the very spot," he concluded. "There
was not a sign of them. I called and called, but there was never an
answer. I tacked back and forth and wore for two solid hours, then hove
to till daybreak, and cruised back and forth all day, two men at the
mastheads. It is terrible. I am heartbroken. Mr. Duncan was a splendid
man, and I shall never..."

But he never completed the sentence, for at that moment his splendid
employer strode out upon him, leaving Minnie standing in the doorway.
Captain Dettmar's white face blanched even whiter.

"I did my best to pick you up, sir," he began.

Boyd Duncan's answer was couched in terms of bunched knuckles, two
bunches of them, that landed right and left on Captain Dettmar's face.

Captain Dettmar staggered backward, recovered, and rushed with swinging
arms at his employer, only to be met with a blow squarely between the
eyes. This time the Captain went down, bearing the typewriter under him
as he crashed to the floor.

"This is not permissible," Consul Lingford spluttered. "I beg of you, I
beg of you, to desist."

"I'll pay the damages to office furniture," Duncan answered, and at the
same time landing more bunched knuckles on the eyes and nose of Dettmar.

Consul Lingford bobbed around in the turmoil like a wet hen, while his
office furniture went to ruin. Once, he caught Duncan by the arm, but
was flung back, gasping, half-across the room. Another time he appealed
to Minnie.

"Mrs. Duncan, won't you, please, please, restrain your husband?"

But she, white-faced and trembling, resolutely shook her head and
watched the fray with all her eyes.

"It is outrageous," Consul Lingford cried, dodging the hurtling bodies
of the two men. "It is an affront to the Government, to the United
States Government. Nor will it be overlooked, I warn you. Oh, do pray
desist, Mr. Duncan. You will kill the man. I beg of you. I beg, I
beg..."

But the crash of a tall vase filled with crimson hibiscus blossoms left
him speechless.

The time came when Captain Dettmar could no longer get up. He got as far
as hands and knees, struggled vainly to rise further, then collapsed.
Duncan stirred the groaning wreck with his foot.

"He's all right," he announced. "I've only given him what he has given
many a sailor and worse."

"Great heavens, sir!" Consul Lingford exploded, staring horror-stricken
at the man whom he had invited to lunch.

Duncan giggled involuntarily, then controlled himself.

"I apologize, Mr. Lingford, I most heartily apologize. I fear I was
slightly carried away by my feelings."

Consul Lingford gulped and sawed the air speechlessly with his arms.

"Slightly, sir? Slightly?" he managed to articulate.

"Boyd," Minnie called softly from the doorway.

He turned and looked.

"You ARE a joy," she said.

"And now, Mr. Lingford, I am done with him," Duncan said. "I turn over
what is left to you and the law."

"That?" Consul Lingford queried, in accent of horror.

"That," Boyd Duncan replied, looking ruefully at his battered knuckles.




WAR

HE was a young man, not more than twenty-four or five, and he might have
sat his horse with the careless grace of his youth had he not been
so catlike and tense. His black eyes roved everywhere, catching the
movements of twigs and branches where small birds hopped, questing ever
onward through the changing vistas of trees and brush, and returning
always to the clumps of undergrowth on either side. And as he watched,
so did he listen, though he rode on in silence, save for the boom of
heavy guns from far to the west. This had been sounding monotonously
in his ears for hours, and only its cessation could have aroused his
notice. For he had business closer to hand. Across his saddle-bow was
balanced a carbine.

So tensely was he strung, that a bunch of quail, exploding into flight
from under his horse's nose, startled him to such an extent that
automatically, instantly, he had reined in and fetched the carbine
halfway to his shoulder. He grinned sheepishly, recovered himself, and
rode on. So tense was he, so bent upon the work he had to do, that the
sweat stung his eyes unwiped, and unheeded rolled down his nose and
spattered his saddle pommel. The band of his cavalryman's hat was
fresh-stained with sweat. The roan horse under him was likewise wet. It
was high noon of a breathless day of heat. Even the birds and squirrels
did not dare the sun, but sheltered in shady hiding places among the
trees.

Man and horse were littered with leaves and dusted with yellow pollen,
for the open was ventured no more than was compulsory. They kept to the
brush and trees, and invariably the man halted and peered out before
crossing a dry glade or naked stretch of upland pasturage. He worked
always to the north, though his way was devious, and it was from the
north that he seemed most to apprehend that for which he was looking.
He was no coward, but his courage was only that of the average civilized
man, and he was looking to live, not die.

Up a small hillside he followed a cowpath through such dense scrub that
he was forced to dismount and lead his horse. But when the path swung
around to the west, he abandoned it and headed to the north again along
the oak-covered top of the ridge.

The ridge ended in a steep descent-so steep that he zigzagged back and
forth across the face of the slope, sliding and stumbling among the dead
leaves and matted vines and keeping a watchful eye on the horse above
that threatened to fall down upon him. The sweat ran from him, and the
pollen-dust, settling pungently in mouth and nostrils, increased
his thirst. Try as he would, nevertheless the descent was noisy, and
frequently he stopped, panting in the dry heat and listening for any
warning from beneath.

At the bottom he came out on a flat, so densely forested that he could
not make out its extent. Here the character of the woods changed, and he
was able to remount. Instead of the twisted hillside oaks, tall straight
trees, big-trunked and prosperous, rose from the damp fat soil. Only
here and there were thickets, easily avoided, while he encountered
winding, park-like glades where the cattle had pastured in the days
before war had run them off.

His progress was more rapid now, as he came down into the valley, and at
the end of half an hour he halted at an ancient rail fence on the edge
of a clearing. He did not like the openness of it, yet his path lay
across to the fringe of trees that marked the banks of the stream.
It was a mere quarter of a mile across that open, but the thought of
venturing out in it was repugnant. A rifle, a score of them, a thousand,
might lurk in that fringe by the stream.

Twice he essayed to start, and twice he paused. He was appalled by his
own loneliness. The pulse of war that beat from the West suggested the
companionship of battling thousands; here was naught but silence, and
himself, and possible death-dealing bullets from a myriad ambushes. And
yet his task was to find what he feared to find. He must on, and on,
till somewhere, some time, he encountered another man, or other men,
from the other side, scouting, as he was scouting, to make report, as he
must make report, of having come in touch.

Changing his mind, he skirted inside the woods for a distance, and again
peeped forth. This time, in the middle of the clearing, he saw a
small farmhouse. There were no signs of life. No smoke curled from the
chimney, not a barnyard fowl clucked and strutted. The kitchen door
stood open, and he gazed so long and hard into the black aperture that
it seemed almost that a farmer's wife must emerge at any moment.

He licked the pollen and dust from his dry lips, stiffened himself, mind
and body, and rode out into the blazing sunshine. Nothing stirred. He
went on past the house, and approached the wall of trees and bushes by
the river's bank. One thought persisted maddeningly. It was of the crash
into his body of a high-velocity bullet. It made him feel very fragile
and defenseless, and he crouched lower in the saddle.

Tethering his horse in the edge of the wood, he continued a hundred
yards on foot till he came to the stream. Twenty feet wide it was,
without perceptible current, cool and inviting, and he was very thirsty.
But he waited inside his screen of leafage, his eyes fixed on the screen
on the opposite side. To make the wait endurable, he sat down, his
carbine resting on his knees. The minutes passed, and slowly his
tenseness relaxed. At last he decided there was no danger; but just as
he prepared to part the bushes and bend down to the water, a movement
among the opposite bushes caught his eye.

It might be a bird. But he waited. Again there was an agitation of the
bushes, and then, so suddenly that it almost startled a cry from him,
the bushes parted and a face peered out. It was a face covered with
several weeks' growth of ginger-colored beard. The eyes were blue and
wide apart, with laughter-wrinkles in the comers that showed despite the
tired and anxious expression of the whole face.

All this he could see with microscopic clearness, for the distance was
no more than twenty feet. And all this he saw in such brief time, that
he saw it as he lifted his carbine to his shoulder. He glanced along the
sights, and knew that he was gazing upon a man who was as good as dead.
It was impossible to miss at such point blank range.

But he did not shoot. Slowly he lowered the carbine and watched. A
hand, clutching a water-bottle, became visible and the ginger beard bent
downward to fill the bottle. He could hear the gurgle of the water. Then
arm and bottle and ginger beard disappeared behind the closing bushes.
A long time he waited, when, with thirst unslaked, he crept back to his
horse, rode slowly across the sun-washed clearing, and passed into the
shelter of the woods beyond.

II

Another day, hot and breathless. A deserted farmhouse, large, with many
outbuildings and an orchard, standing in a clearing. From the Woods, on
a roan horse, carbine across pommel, rode the young man with the quick
black eyes. He breathed with relief as he gained the house. That a fight
had taken place here earlier in the season was evident. Clips and empty
cartridges, tarnished with verdigris, lay on the ground, which, while
wet, had been torn up by the hoofs of horses. Hard by the kitchen garden
were graves, tagged and numbered. From the oak tree by the kitchen door,
in tattered, weatherbeaten garments, hung the bodies of two men. The
faces, shriveled and defaced, bore no likeness to the faces of men. The
roan horse snorted beneath them, and the rider caressed and soothed it
and tied it farther away.

Entering the house, he found the interior a wreck. He trod on empty
cartridges as he walked from room to room to reconnoiter from the
windows. Men had camped and slept everywhere, and on the floor of one
room he came upon stains unmistakable where the wounded had been laid
down.

Again outside, he led the horse around behind the barn and invaded the
orchard. A dozen trees were burdened with ripe apples. He filled his
pockets, eating while he picked. Then a thought came to him, and he
glanced at the sun, calculating the time of his return to camp. He
pulled off his shirt, tying the sleeves and making a bag. This he
proceeded to fill with apples.

As he was about to mount his horse, the animal suddenly pricked up its
ears. The man, too, listened, and heard, faintly, the thud of hoofs on
soft earth. He crept to the corner of the barn and peered out. A dozen
mounted men, strung out loosely, approaching from the opposite side of
the clearing, were only a matter of a hundred yards or so away. They
rode on to the house. Some dismounted, while others remained in the
saddle as an earnest that their stay would be short. They seemed to
be holding a council, for he could hear them talking excitedly in the
detested tongue of the alien invader. The time passed, but they seemed
unable to reach a decision. He put the carbine away in its boot,
mounted, and waited impatiently, balancing the shirt of apples on the
pommel.

He heard footsteps approaching, and drove his spurs so fiercely into the
roan as to force a surprised groan from the animal as it leaped forward.
At the corner of the barn he saw the intruder, a mere boy of nineteen or
twenty for all of his uniform jump back to escape being run down. At
the same moment the roan swerved and its rider caught a glimpse of the
aroused men by the house. Some were springing from their horses, and
he could see the rifles going to their shoulders. He passed the kitchen
door and the dried corpses swinging in the shade, compelling his foes to
run around the front of the house. A rifle cracked, and a second, but he
was going fast, leaning forward, low in the saddle, one hand clutching
the shirt of apples, the other guiding the horse.

The top bar of the fence was four feet high, but he knew his roan and
leaped it at full career to the accompaniment of several scattered
shots. Eight hundred yards straight away were the woods, and the roan
was covering the distance with mighty strides. Every man was now firing.
pumping their guns so rapidly that he no longer heard individual shots.
A bullet went through his hat, but he was unaware, though he did know
when another tore through the apples on the pommel. And he winced and
ducked even lower when a third bullet, fired low, struck a stone between
his horse's legs and ricochetted off through the air, buzzing and
humming like some incredible insect.

The shots died down as the magazines were emptied, until, quickly, there
was no more shooting. The young man was elated. Through that astonishing
fusillade he had come unscathed. He glanced back. Yes, they had emptied
their magazines. He could see several reloading. Others were running
back behind the house for their horses. As he looked, two already
mounted, came back into view around the corner, riding hard. And at the
same moment, he saw the man with the unmistakable ginger beard kneel
down on the ground, level his gun, and coolly take his time for the long
shot.

The young man threw his spurs into the horse, crouched very low, and
swerved in his flight in order to distract the other's aim. And still
the shot did not come. With each jump of the horse, the woods sprang
nearer. They were only two hundred yards away and still the shot was
delayed.

And then he heard it, the last thing he was to hear, for he was dead ere
he hit the ground in the long crashing fall from the saddle. And they,
watching at the house, saw him fall, saw his body bounce when it struck
the earth, and saw the burst of red-cheeked apples that rolled about
him. They laughed at the unexpected eruption of apples, and clapped
their hands in applause of the long shot by the man with the ginger
beard.




UNDER THE DECK AWNINGS

"CAN any man--a gentleman, I mean--call a woman a pig?"

The little man flung this challenge forth to the whole group, then
leaned back in his deck chair, sipping lemonade with an air commingled
of certitude and watchful belligerence. Nobody made answer. They were
used to the little man and his sudden passions and high elevations.

"I repeat, it was in my presence that he said a certain lady, whom none
of you knows, was a pig. He did not say swine. He grossly said that she
was a pig. And I hold that no man who is a man could possibly make such
a remark about any woman."

Dr. Dawson puffed stolidly at his black pipe. Matthews, with knees
hunched up and clasped by his arms, was absorbed in the flight of a
gunie. Sweet, finishing his Scotch and soda, was questing about with his
eyes for a deck steward.

"I ask you, Mr. Treloar, can any man call any woman a pig?"

Treloar, who happened to be sitting next to him, was startled by the
abruptness of the attack, and wondered what grounds he had ever given
the little man to believe that he could call a woman a pig.

"I should say," he began his hesitant answer, "that it--er--depends on
the--er--the lady."

The little man was aghast.

"You mean...?" he quavered.

"That I have seen female humans who were as bad as pigs--and worse."

There was a long pained silence. The little man seemed withered by the
coarse brutality of the reply. In his face was unutterable hurt and woe.

"You have told of a man who made a not nice remark and you have
classified him," Treloar said in cold, even tones. "I shall now tell
you about a woman--I beg your pardon--a lady, and when I have finished
I shall ask you to classify her. Miss Caruthers I shall call her,
principally for the reason that it is not her name. It was on a P. & O.
boat, and it occurred neither more nor less than several years ago.

"Miss Caruthers was charming. No; that is not the word. She was amazing.
She was a young woman, and a lady. Her father was a certain high
official whose name, if I mentioned it, would be immediately recognized
by all of you. She was with her mother and two maids at the time, going
out to join the old gentleman wherever you like to wish in the East.

"She, and pardon me for repeating, was amazing. It is the one adequate
word. Even the most minor adjectives applicable to her are bound to be
sheer superlatives. There was nothing she could not do better than any
woman and than most men. Sing, play--bah!--as some rhetorician once
said of old Nap, competition fled from her. Swim! She could have made
a fortune and a name as a public performer. She was one of those rare
women who can strip off all the frills of dress, and in simple swimming
suit be more satisfying beautiful. Dress! She was an artist.

"But her swimming. Physically, she was the perfect woman--you know
what I mean, not in the gross, muscular way of acrobats, but in all the
delicacy of line and fragility of frame and texture. And combined with
this, strength. How she could do it was the marvel. You know the wonder
of a woman's arm--the fore arm, I mean; the sweet fading away from
rounded biceps and hint of muscle, down through small elbow and firm
soft swell to the wrist, small, unthinkably small and round and strong.
This was hers. And yet, to see her swimming the sharp quick English
overhand stroke, and getting somewhere with it, too, was--well, I
understand anatomy and athletics and such things, and yet it was a
mystery to me how she could do it.

"She could stay under water for two minutes. I have timed her. No man
on board, except Dennitson, could capture as many coins as she with a
single dive. On the forward main-deck was a big canvas tank with six
feet of sea-water. We used to toss small coins into it. I have seen her
dive from the bridge deck--no mean feat in itself--into that six-feet
of water, and fetch up no less than forty-seven coins, scattered
willy-nilly over the whole bottom of the tank. Dennitson, a quiet young
Englishman, never exceeded her in this, though he made it a point always
to tie her score.

"She was a sea-woman, true. But she was a land-woman, a
horsewoman--a--she was the universal woman. To see her, all softness of
soft dress, surrounded by half a dozen eager men, languidly careless of
them all or flashing brightness and wit on them and at them and through
them, one would fancy she was good for nothing else in the world.
At such moments I have compelled myself to remember her score of
forty-seven coins from the bottom of the swimming tank. But that was
she, the everlasting, wonder of a woman who did all things well.

"She fascinated every betrousered human around her. She had me--and I
don't mind confessing it--she bad me to heel along with the rest. Young
puppies and old gray dogs who ought to have known better--oh, they all
came up and crawled around her skirts and whined and fawned when she
whistled. They were all guilty, from young Ardmore, a pink cherub of
nineteen outward bound for some clerkship in the Consular Service, to
old Captain Bentley, grizzled and sea-worn, and as emotional, to look
at, as a Chinese joss. There was a nice middle-aged chap, Perkins, I
believe, who forgot his wife was on board until Miss Caruthers sent him
to the right about and back where he belonged.

"Men were wax in her hands. She melted them, or softly molded them, or
incinerated them, as she pleased. There wasn't a steward, even, grand
and remote as she was, who, at her bidding, would have hesitated to
souse the Old Man himself with a plate of soup. You have all seen such
women--a sort of world's desire to all men. As a man-conqueror she was
supreme. She was a whip-lash, a sting and a flame, an electric spark.
Oh, believe me, at times there were flashes of will that scorched
through her beauty and seduction and smote a victim into blank and
shivering idiocy and fear.

"And don't fail to mark, in the light of what is to come, that she was
a prideful woman. Pride of race, pride of caste, pride of sex, pride of
power--she had it all, a pride strange and wilful and terrible.

"She ran the ship, she ran the voyage, she ran everything, and she ran
Dennitson. That he had outdistanced the pack even the least wise of us
admitted. That she liked him, and that this feeling was growing, there
was not a doubt. I am certain that she looked on him with kinder eyes
than she had ever looked with on man before. We still worshiped, and
were always hanging about waiting to be whistled up, though we knew that
Dennitson was laps and laps ahead of us. What might have happened we
shall never know, for we came to Colombo and something else happened.

"You know Colombo, and how the native boys dive for coins in the
shark-infested bay. Of course, it is only among the ground sharks and
fish sharks that they venture. It is almost uncanny the way they know
sharks and can sense the presence of a real killer--a tiger shark, for
instance, or a gray nurse strayed up from Australian waters. Let such a
shark appear, and, long before the passengers can guess, every mother's
son of them is out of the water in a wild scramble for safety.

"It was after tiffin, and Miss Caruthers was holding her usual court
under the deck-awnings. Old Captain Bentley had just been whistled
up, and had granted her what he never granted before... nor
since--permission for the boys to come up on the promenade deck. You
see, Miss Caruthers was a swimmer, and she was interested. She took up
a collection of all our small change, and herself tossed it overside,
singly and in handfuls, arranging the terms of the contests, chiding a
miss, giving extra rewards to clever wins, in short, managing the whole
exhibition.

"She was especially keen on their jumping. You know, jumping feet-first
from a height, it is very difficult to hold the body perpendicularly
while in the air. The center of gravity of the male body is high, and
the tendency is to overtopple. But the little beggars employed a method
which she declared was new to her and which she desired to learn.
Leaping from the davits of the boat-deck above, they plunged downward,
their faces and shoulders bowed forward, looking at the water. And only
at the last moment did they abruptly straighten up and enter the water
erect and true.

"It was a pretty sight. Their diving was not so good, though there was
one of them who was excellent at it, as he was in all the other stunts.
Some white man must have taught him, for he made the proper swan dive
and did it as beautifully as I have ever seen it. You know, headfirst
into the water, from a great height, the problem is to enter the water
at the perfect angle. Miss the angle and it means at the least a twisted
back and injury for life. Also, it has meant death for many a bungler.
But this boy could do it--seventy feet I know he cleared in one dive
from the rigging--clenched hands on chest, head thrown back, sailing
more like a bird, upward and out, and out and down, body flat on the air
so that if it struck the surface in that position it would be split in
half like a herring. But the moment before the water is reached, the
head drops forward, the hands go out and lock the arms in an arch in
advance of the head, and the body curves gracefully downward and enters
the water just right.

"This the boy did, again and again, to the delight of all of us, but
particularly of Miss Caruthers. He could not have been a moment over
twelve or thirteen, yet he was by far the cleverest of the gang. He was
the favorite of his crowd, and its leader. Though there were a number
older than he, they acknowledged his chieftaincy. He was a beautiful
boy, a lithe young god in breathing bronze, eyes wide apart, intelligent
and daring, a bubble, a mote, a beautiful flash and sparkle of life. You
have seen wonderful glorious creatures--animals, anything, a leopard,
a horse-restless, eager, too much alive ever to be still, silken of
muscle, each slightest movement a benediction of grace, every action
wild, untrammeled, and over all spilling out that intense vitality, that
sheen and luster of living light. The boy had it. Life poured out of him
almost in an effulgence. His skin glowed with it. It burned in his eyes.
I swear I could almost hear it crackle from him. Looking at him, it was
as if a whiff of ozone came to one's nostrils--so fresh and young was
he, so resplendent with health, so wildly wild.

"This was the boy. And it was he who gave the alarm in the midst of the
sport. The boys made a dash of it for the gangway platform, swimming the
fastest strokes they knew, pellmell, floundering and splashing, fright
in their faces, clambering out with jumps and surges, any way to get
out, lending one another a hand to safety, till all were strung along
the gangway and peering down into the water.

"'What is the matter?' asked Miss Caruthers.

"'A shark, I fancy,' Captain Bentley answered. 'Lucky little beggars
that he didn't get one of them.'

"'Are they afraid of sharks?' she asked.

"'Aren't you?' he asked back."

She shuddered, looked overside at the water, and made a move.

"'Not for the world would I venture where a shark might be,' she said,
and shuddered again. 'They are horrible! Horrible!'

"The boys came up on the promenade deck, clustering close to the rail
and worshiping Miss Caruthers who had flung them such a wealth of
backsheesh. The performance being over, Captain Bentley motioned to them
to clear out. But she stopped him.

"'One moment, please, Captain. I have always understood that the natives
are not afraid of sharks.'

"She beckoned the boy of the swan dive nearer to her, and signed to
him to dive over again. He shook his head, and along with all his crew
behind him laughed as if it were a good joke.

"'Shark,' he volunteered, pointing to the water.

"'No,' she said. 'There is no shark.'

"But he nodded his head positively, and the boys behind him nodded with
equal positiveness.

"'No, no, no,' she cried. And then to us, 'Who'll lend me a half-crown
and a sovereign!'

"Immediately the half dozen of us were presenting her with crowns and
sovereigns, and she accepted the two coins from young Ardmore.

"She held up the half-crown for the boys to see. But there was no eager
rush to the rail preparatory to leaping. They stood there grinning
sheepishly. She offered the coin to each one individually, and each,
as his turn came, rubbed his foot against his calf, shook his head,
and grinned. Then she tossed the half-crown overboard. With wistful,
regretful faces they watched its silver flight through the air, but not
one moved to follow it.

"'Don't do it with the sovereign,' Dennitson said to her in a low voice.

"She took no notice, but held up the gold coin before the eyes of the
boy of the swan dive.

"'Don't,' said Captain Bentley. 'I wouldn't throw a sick cat overside
with a shark around.'

"But she laughed, bent on her purpose, and continued to dazzle the boy.

"'Don't tempt him,' Dennitson urged. 'It is a fortune to him, and he
might go over after it.'

"'Wouldn't YOU?' she flared at him. 'If I threw it?'"

This last more softly.

Dennitson shook his head.

"'Your price is high,' she said. 'For how many sovereigns would you go?'

"'There are not enough coined to get me overside,' was his answer.

"She debated a moment, the boy forgotten in her tilt with Dennitson.

"'For me?' she said very softly.

"'To save your life--yes. But not otherwise.'

"She turned back to the boy. Again she held the coin before his eyes,
dazzling him with the vastness of its value. Then she made as to toss
it out, and, involuntarily, he made a half-movement toward the rail,
but was checked by sharp cries of reproof from his companions. There was
anger in their voices as well.

"'I know it is only fooling,' Dennitson said. 'Carry it as far as you
like, but for heaven's sake don't throw it.'

"Whether it was that strange wilfulness of hers, or whether she doubted
the boy could be persuaded, there is no telling. It was unexpected to
all of us. Out from the shade of the awning the coin flashed golden
in the blaze of sunshine and fell toward the sea in a glittering arch.
Before a hand could stay him, the boy was over the rail and curving
beautifully downward after the coin. Both were in the air at the same
time. It was a pretty sight. The sovereign cut the water sharply, and at
the very spot, almost at the same instant, with scarcely a splash, the
boy entered.

"From the quicker-eyed black boys watching, came an exclamation. We were
all at the railing. Don't tell me it is necessary for a shark to turn on
its back. That one did not. In the clear water, from the height we were
above it, we saw everything. The shark was a big brute, and with one
drive he cut the boy squarely in half.

"There was a murmur or something from among us--who made it I did not
know; it might have been I. And then there was silence. Miss Caruthers
was the first to speak. Her face was deathly white.

"'I never dreamed,' she said, and laughed a short, hysterical laugh.

"All her pride was at work to give her control. She turned weakly toward
Dennitson, and then, on from one to another of us. In her eyes was a
terrible sickness, and her lips were trembling. We were brutes--oh, I
know it, now that I look back upon it. But we did nothing.

"'Mr. Dennitson,' she said, 'Tom, won't you take me below!'

"He never changed the direction of his gaze, which was the bleakest I
have ever seen in a man's face, nor did he move an eyelid. He took a
cigarette from his case and lighted it. Captain Bentley made a nasty
sound in his throat and spat overboard. That was all; that and the
silence.

"She turned away and started to walk firmly down the deck. Twenty feet
away, she swayed and thrust a hand against the wall to save herself. And
so she went on, supporting herself against the cabins and walking very
slowly." Treloar ceased. He turned his head and favored the little man
with a look of cold inquiry.

"Well," he said finally. "Classify her."

The little man gulped and swallowed.

"I have nothing to say," he said. "I have nothing whatever to say."




TO KILL A MAN

THOUGH dim night-lights burned, she moved familiarly through the big
rooms and wide halls, seeking vainly the half-finished book of verse she
had mislaid and only now remembered. When she turned on the lights in
the drawing-room, she disclosed herself clad in a sweeping negligee gown
of soft rose-colored stuff, throat and shoulders smothered in lace. Her
rings were still on her fingers, her massed yellow hair had not yet been
taken down. She was delicately, gracefully beautiful, with slender,
oval face, red lips, a faint color in the cheeks, and blue eyes of the
chameleon sort that at will stare wide with the innocence of childhood,
go hard and gray and brilliantly cold, or flame up in hot wilfulness and
mastery.

She turned the lights off and passed out and down the hall toward the
morning room. At the entrance she paused and listened. From farther on
had come, not a noise, but an impression of movement. She could have
sworn she had not heard anything, yet something had been different.
The atmosphere of night quietude had been disturbed. She wondered what
servant could be prowling about. Not the butler, who was notorious
for retiring early save on special occasion. Nor could it be her maid,
whom she had permitted to go that evening.

Passing on to the dining-room, she found the door closed. Why she opened
it and went on in, she did not know, except for the feeling that the
disturbing factor, whatever it might be, was there. The room was in
darkness, and she felt her way to the button and pressed. As the blaze
of light flashed on, she stepped back and cried out. It was a mere "Oh!"
and it was not loud.


Facing her, alongside the button, flat against the wall, was a man. In
his hand, pointed toward her, was a revolver. She noticed, even in
the shock of seeing him, that the weapon was black and exceedingly
long-barreled. She knew black and exceedingly long it for what it was, a
Colt's. He was a medium-sized man, roughly clad, brown-eyed, and swarthy
with sunburn. He seemed very cool. There was no wabble to the revolver
and it was directed toward her stomach, not from an outstretched arm,
but from the hip, against which the forearm rested.

"Oh," she said. "I beg your pardon. You startled me. What do you want?"

"I reckon I want to get out," he answered, with a humorous twitch to
the lips. "I've kind of lost my way in this here shebang, and if you'll
kindly show me the door I'll cause no trouble and sure vamoose."

"But what are you doing here?" she demanded, her voice touched with the
sharpness of one used to authority.

"Plain robbing, Miss, that's all. I came snooping around to see what I
could gather up. I thought you wan't to home, seein' as I saw you pull
out with your old man in an auto. I reckon that must a ben your pa, and
you're Miss Setliffe."

Mrs. Setliffe saw his mistake, appreciated the naive compliment, and
decided not to undeceive him.

"How do you know I am Miss Setliffe?" she asked.

"This is old Setliffe's house, ain't it?"

She nodded.

"I didn't know he had a daughter, but I reckon you must be her. And now,
if it ain't botherin' you too much, I'd sure be obliged if you'd show me
the way out."

"But why should I? You are a robber, a burglar."

"If I wan't an ornery shorthorn at the business, I'd be accumulatin'
them rings on your fingers instead of being polite," he retorted.

"I come to make a raise outa old Setliffe, and not to be robbing
women-folks. If you get outa the way, I reckon I can find my own way
out."

Mrs. Setliffe was a keen woman, and she felt that from such a man there
was little to fear. That he was not a typical criminal, she was certain.
From his speech she knew he was not of the cities, and she seemed to
sense the wider, homelier air of large spaces.

"Suppose I screamed?" she queried curiously. "Suppose I made an outcry
for help? You couldn't shoot me?... a woman?"

She noted the fleeting bafflement in his brown eyes. He answered slowly
and thoughtfully, as if working out a difficult problem. "I reckon,
then, I'd have to choke you and maul you some bad."

"A woman?"

"I'd sure have to," he answered, and she saw his mouth set grimly.

"You're only a soft woman, but you see, Miss, I can't afford to go to
jail. No, Miss, I sure can't. There's a friend of mine waitin' for
me out West. He's in a hole, and I've got to help him out." The mouth
shaped even more grimly. "I guess I could choke you without hurting you
much to speak of."

Her eyes took on a baby stare of innocent incredulity as she watched
him.

"I never met a burglar before," she assured him, "and I can't begin to
tell you how interested I am."

"I'm not a burglar, Miss. Not a real one," he hastened to add as she
looked her amused unbelief. "It looks like it, me being here in your
house. But it's the first time I ever tackled such a job. I needed the
money bad. Besides, I kind of look on it like collecting what's coming
to me."

"I don't understand," she smiled encouragingly. "You came here to rob,
and to rob is to take what is not yours."

"Yes, and no, in this here particular case. But I reckon I'd better be
going now."

He started for the door of the dining-room, but she interposed, and a
very beautiful obstacle she made of herself. His left hand went out
as if to grip her, then hesitated. He was patently awed by her soft
womanhood.

"There!" she cried triumphantly. "I knew you wouldn't."

The man was embarrassed.

"I ain't never manhandled a woman yet," he explained, "and it don't come
easy. But I sure will, if you set to screaming."

"Won't you stay a few minutes and talk?" she urged. "I'm so interested.
I should like to hear you explain how burglary is collecting what is
coming to you."

He looked at her admiringly.

"I always thought women-folks were scairt of robbers," he confessed.
"But you don't seem none."

She laughed gaily.

"There are robbers and robbers, you know. I am not afraid of you,
because I am confident you are not the sort of creature that would harm
a woman. Come, talk with me a while. Nobody will disturb us. I am all
alone. My--father caught the night train to New York. The servants are
all asleep. I should like to give you something to eat--women always
prepare midnight suppers for the burglars they catch, at least they
do in the magazine stories. But I don't know where to find the food.
Perhaps you will have something to drink?"

He hesitated, and did not reply; but she could see the admiration for
her growing in his eyes.

"You're not afraid?" she queried. "I won't poison you, I promise. I'll
drink with you to show you it is all right."

"You sure are a surprise package of all right," he declared, for the
first time lowering the weapon and letting it hang at his side. "No one
don't need to tell me ever again that women-folks in cities is afraid.
You ain't much--just a little soft pretty thing. But you've sure got the
spunk. And you're trustful on top of it. There ain't many women, or men
either, who'd treat a man with a gun the way you're treating me."

She smiled her pleasure in the compliment, and her face, was very
earnest as she said:

"That is because I like your appearance. You are too decent-looking a
man to be a robber. You oughtn't to do such things. If you are in bad
luck you should go to work. Come, put away that nasty revolver and let
us talk it over. The thing for you to do is to work."

"Not in this burg," he commented bitterly. "I've walked two inches off
the bottom of my legs trying to find a job. Honest, I was a fine large
man once... before I started looking for a job."

The merry laughter with which she greeted his sally obviously pleased
him, and she was quick to note and take advantage of it. She moved
directly away from the door and toward the sideboard.

"Come, you must tell me all about it while I get that drink for you.
What will it be? Whisky?"

"Yes, ma'am," he said, as he followed her, though he still carried
the big revolver at his side, and though he glanced reluctantly at the
unguarded open door.

She filled a glass for him at the sideboard.

"I promised to drink with you," she said hesitatingly. "But I don't like
whisky. I... I prefer sherry."

She lifted the sherry bottle tentatively for his consent.

"Sure," he answered, with a nod. "Whisky's a man's drink. I never like
to see women at it. Wine's more their stuff."

She raised her glass to his, her eyes meltingly sympathetic.

"Here's to finding you a good position--"

But she broke off at sight of the expression of surprised disgust on his
face. The glass, barely touched, was removed from his wry lips.

"What is the matter!" she asked anxiously. "Don't you like it? Have I
made a mistake?"

"It's sure funny whisky. Tastes like it got burned and smoked in the
making."

"Oh! How silly of me! I gave you Scotch. Of course you are accustomed to
rye. Let me change it."

She was almost solicitiously maternal, as she replaced the glass with
another and sought and found the proper bottle.

"Better?" she asked.

"Yes, ma'am. No smoke in it. It's sure the real good stuff. I ain't had
a drink in a week. Kind of slick, that; oily, you know; not made in a
chemical factory."

"You are a drinking man?" It was half a question, half a challenge.

"No, ma'am, not to speak of. I HAVE rared up and ripsnorted at spells,
but most unfrequent. But there is times when a good stiff jolt lands on
the right spot kerchunk, and this is sure one of them. And now, thanking
you for your kindness, ma'am, I'll just be a pulling along."

But Mrs. Setliffe did not want to lose her burglar. She was too poised a
woman to possess much romance, but there was a thrill about the present
situation that delighted her. Besides, she knew there was no danger. The
man, despite his jaw and the steady brown eyes, was eminently tractable.
Also, farther back in her consciousness glimmered the thought of an
audience of admiring friends. It was too bad not to have that audience.

"You haven't explained how burglary, in your case, is merely collecting
what is your own," she said. "Come, sit down, and tell me about it here
at the table."

She maneuvered for her own seat, and placed him across the corner from
her. His alertness had not deserted him, as she noted, and his eyes
roved sharply about, returning always with smoldering admiration to
hers, but never resting long. And she noted likewise that while she
spoke he was intent on listening for other sounds than those of her
voice. Nor had he relinquished the revolver, which lay at the corner of
the table between them, the butt close to his right hand.

But he was in a new habitat which he did not know. This man from the
West, cunning in woodcraft and plainscraft, with eyes and ears open,
tense and suspicious, did not know that under the table, close to her
foot, was the push button of an electric bell. He had never heard of
such a contrivance, and his keenness and wariness went for naught.

"It's like this, Miss," he began, in response to her urging. "Old
Setliffe done me up in a little deal once. It was raw, but it worked.
Anything will work full and legal when it's got few hundred million
behind it. I'm not squealin', and I ain't taking a slam at your pa.
He don't know me from Adam, and I reckon he don't know he done me outa
anything. He's too big, thinking and dealing in millions, to ever hear
of a small potato like me. He's an operator. He's got all kinds of
experts thinking and planning and working for him, some of them, I hear,
getting more cash salary than the President of the United States. I'm
only one of thousands that have been done up by your pa, that's all.

"You see, ma'am, I had a little hole in the ground--a dinky, hydraulic,
one-horse outfit of a mine. And when the Setliffe crowd shook down
Idaho, and reorganized the smelter trust, and roped in the rest of the
landscape, and put through the big hydraulic scheme at Twin Pines, why
I sure got squeezed. I never had a run for my money. I was scratched
off the card before the first heat. And so, to-night, being broke and my
friend needing me bad, I just dropped around to make a raise outa your
pa. Seeing as I needed it, it kinda was coming to me."

"Granting all that you say is so," she said, "nevertheless it does not
make house-breaking any the less house-breaking. You couldn't make such
a defense in a court of law."

"I know that," he confessed meekly. "What's right ain't always legal.
And that's why I am so uncomfortable a-settin' here and talking with
you. Not that I ain't enjoying your company--I sure do enjoy it--but I
just can't afford to be caught. I know what they'd do to me in this here
city. There was a young fellow that got fifty years only last week for
holding a man up on the street for two dollars and eighty-five cents. I
read about it in the paper. When times is hard and they ain't no work,
men get desperate. And then the other men who've got something to be
robbed of get desperate, too, and they just sure soak it to the other
fellows. If I got caught, I reckon I wouldn't get a mite less than ten
years. That's why I'm hankering to be on my way."

"No; wait." She lifted a detaining hand, at the same time removing her
foot from the bell, which she had been pressing intermittently. "You
haven't told me your name yet."

He hesitated.

"Call me Dave."

"Then... Dave," she laughed with pretty confusion. "Something must be
done for you. You are a young man, and you are just at the beginning
of a bad start. If you begin by attempting to collect what you think is
coming to you, later on you will be collecting what you are perfectly
sure isn't coming to you. And you know what the end will be. Instead of
this, we must find something honorable for you to do."

"I need the money, and I need it now," he replied doggedly. "It's not
for myself, but for that friend I told you about. He's in a peck of
trouble, and he's got to get his lift now or not at all."

"I can find you a position," she said quickly. "And--yes, the very
thing!--I'll lend you the money you want to send to your friend. This
you can pay back out of your salary."

"About three hundred would do," he said slowly. "Three hundred would
pull him through. I'd work my fingers off for a year for that, and my
keep, and a few cents to buy Bull Durham with."

"Ah! You smoke! I never thought of it."

Her hand went out over the revolver toward his hand, as she pointed to
the tell-tale yellow stain on his fingers. At the same time her eyes
measured the nearness of her own hand and of his to the weapon. She
ached to grip it in one swift movement. She was sure she could do
it, and yet she was not sure; and so it was that she refrained as she
withdrew her hand.

"Won't you smoke?" she invited.

"I'm 'most dying to."

"Then do so. I don't mind. I really like it--cigarettes, I mean."

With his left band he dipped into his side pocket, brought out a
loose wheat-straw paper and shifted it to his right hand close by the
revolver. Again he dipped, transferring to the paper a pinch of brown,
flaky tobacco. Then he proceeded, both hands just over the revolver, to
roll the cigarette.

"From the way you hover close to that nasty weapon, you seem to be
afraid of me," she challenged.

"Not exactly afraid of you, ma'am, but, under the circumstances, just a
mite timid."

"But I've not been afraid of you."

"You've got nothing to lose."

"My life," she retorted.

"That's right," he acknowledged promptly, "and you ain't been scairt of
me. Mebbe I am over anxious."

"I wouldn't cause you any harm."

Even as she spoke, her slipper felt for the bell and pressed it. At the
same time her eyes were earnest with a plea of honesty.

"You are a judge of men. I know it. And of women. Surely, when I am
trying to persuade you from a criminal life and to get you honest work
to do....?"

He was immediately contrite.

"I sure beg your pardon, ma'am," he said. "I reckon my nervousness ain't
complimentary."

As he spoke, he drew his right hand from the table, and after lighting
the cigarette, dropped it by his side.

"Thank you for your confidence," she breathed softly, resolutely keeping
her eyes from measuring the distance to the revolver, and keeping her
foot pressed firmly on the bell.

"About that three hundred," he began. "I can telegraph it West to-night.
And I'll agree to work a year for it and my keep."

"You will earn more than that. I can promise seventy-five dollars a
month at the least. Do you know horses?"

His face lighted up and his eyes sparkled.

"Then go to work for me--or for my father, rather, though I engage all
the servants. I need a second coachman--"

"And wear a uniform?" he interrupted sharply, the sneer of the free-born
West in his voice and on his lips.

She smiled tolerantly.

"Evidently that won't do. Let me think. Yes. Can you break and handle
colts?"

He nodded.

"We have a stock farm, and there's room for just such a man as you. Will
you take it?"

"Will I, ma'am?" His voice was rich with gratitude and enthusiasm. "Show
me to it. I'll dig right in to-morrow. And I can sure promise you one
thing, ma'am. You'll never be sorry for lending Hughie Luke a hand in
his trouble--"

"I thought you said to call you Dave," she chided forgivingly.

"I did, ma'am. I did. And I sure beg your pardon. It was just plain
bluff. My real name is Hughie Luke. And if you'll give me the address
of that stock farm of yours, and the railroad fare, I head for it first
thing in the morning."

Throughout the conversation she had never relaxed her attempts on the
bell. She had pressed it in every alarming way--three shorts and a long,
two and a long, and five. She had tried long series of shorts, and,
once, she had held the button down for a solid three minutes. And she
had been divided between objurgation of the stupid, heavy-sleeping
butler and doubt if the bell were in order.

"I am so glad," she said; "so glad that you are willing. There won't be
much to arrange. But you will first have to trust me while I go upstairs
for my purse."

She saw the doubt flicker momentarily in his eyes, and added hastily,
"But you see I am trusting you with the three hundred dollars."

"I believe you, ma'am," he came back gallantly. "Though I just can't
help this nervousness."

"Shall I go and get it?"

But before she could receive consent, a slight muffled jar from the
distance came to her ear. She knew it for the swing-door of the butler's
pantry. But so slight was it--more a faint vibration than a sound--that
she would not have heard had not her ears been keyed and listening for
it. Yet the man had heard. He was startled in his composed way.

"What was that?" he demanded.

For answer, her left hand flashed out to the revolver and brought it
back. She had had the start of him, and she needed it, for the next
instant his hand leaped up from his side, clutching emptiness where the
revolver had been.

"Sit down!" she commanded sharply, in a voice new to him. "Don't move.
Keep your hands on the table."

She had taken a lesson from him. Instead of holding the heavy weapon
extended, the butt of it and her forearm rested on the table, the muzzle
pointed, not at his head, but his chest. And he, looking coolly and
obeying her commands, knew there was no chance of the kick-up of the
recoil producing a miss. Also, he saw that the revolver did not wabble,
nor the hand shake, and he was thoroughly conversant with the size of
hole the soft-nosed bullets could make. He had eyes, not for her, but
for the hammer, which had risen under the pressure of her forefinger on
the trigger.

"I reckon I'd best warn you that that there trigger-pull is filed
dreadful fine. Don't press too hard, or I'll have a hole in me the size
of a walnut."

She slacked the hammer partly down.

"That's better," he commented. "You'd best put it down all the way. You
see how easy it works. If you want to, a quick light pull will jiffy her
up and back and make a pretty mess all over your nice floor."

A door opened behind him, and he heard somebody enter the room. But he
did not turn his bead. He was looking at her, and he found it the face
of another woman--hard, cold, pitiless yet brilliant in its beauty. The
eyes, too, were hard, though blazing with a cold light.

"Thomas," she commanded, "go to the telephone and call the police. Why
were you so long in answering?"

"I came as soon as I heard the bell, madam," was the answer.

The robber never took his eyes from hers, nor did she from his, but
at mention of the bell she noticed that his eyes were puzzled for the
moment.

"Beg your pardon," said the butler from behind, "but wouldn't it be
better for me to get a weapon and arouse the servants?"

"No; ring for the police. I can hold this man. Go and do it--quickly."

The butler slippered out of the room, and the man and the woman sat on,
gazing into each other's eyes. To her it was an experience keen with
enjoyment, and in her mind was the gossip of her crowd, and she saw
notes in the society weeklies of the beautiful young Mrs. Setliffe
capturing an armed robber single-handed. It would create a sensation,
she was sure.

"When you get that sentence you mentioned," she said coldly, "you will
have time to meditate upon what a fool you have been, taking other
persons' property and threatening women with revolvers. You will have
time to learn your lesson thoroughly. Now tell the truth. You haven't
any friend in trouble. All that you told me was lies."

He did not reply. Though his eyes were upon her, they seemed blank. In
truth, for the instant she was veiled to him, and what he saw was the
wide sunwashed spaces of the West, where men and women were bigger than
the rotten denizens, as he had encountered them, of the thrice rotten
cities of the East.

"Go on. Why don't you speak? Why don't you lie some more? Why don't you
beg to be let off?"

"I might," he answered, licking his dry lips. "I might ask to be let off
if..."

"If what?" she demanded peremptorily, as he paused.

"I was trying to think of a word you reminded me of. As I was saying, I
might if you was a decent woman."

Her face paled.

"Be careful," she warned.

"You don't dast kill me," he sneered. "The world's a pretty low down
place to have a thing like you prowling around in it, but it ain't so
plumb low down, I reckon, as to let you put a hole in me. You're sure
bad, but the trouble with you is that you're weak in your badness. It
ain't much to kill a man, but you ain't got it in you. There's where you
lose out."

"Be careful of what you say," she repeated. "Or else, I warn you, it
will go hard with you. It can be seen to whether your sentence is light
or heavy."

"Something's the matter with God," he remarked irrelevantly, "to be
letting you around loose. It's clean beyond me what he's up to, playing
such-like tricks on poor humanity. Now if I was God--"

His further opinion was interrupted by the entrance of the butler.

"Something is wrong with the telephone, madam," he announced. "The wires
are crossed or something, because I can't get Central."

"Go and call one of the servants," she ordered. "Send him out for an
officer, and then return here."

Again the pair was left alone.

"Will you kindly answer one question, ma'am?" the man said. "That
servant fellow said something about a bell. I watched you like a cat,
and you sure rung no bell."

"It was under the table, you poor fool. I pressed it with my foot."

"Thank you, ma'am. I reckoned I'd seen your kind before, and now I sure
know I have. I spoke to you true and trusting, and all the time you was
lying like hell to me."

She laughed mockingly.

"Go on. Say what you wish. It is very interesting."

"You made eyes at me, looking soft and kind, playing up all the time the
fact that you wore skirts instead of pants--and all the time with your
foot on the bell under the table. Well, there's some consolation. I'd
sooner be poor Hughie Luke, doing his ten years, than be in your skin.
Ma'am, hell is full of women like you."

There was silence for a space, in which the man, never taking his eyes
from her, studying her, was making up his mind.

"Go on," she urged. "Say something."

"Yes, ma'am, I'll say something. I'll sure say something. Do you know
what I'm going to do? I'm going to get right up from this chair and walk
out that door. I'd take the gun from you, only you might turn foolish
and let it go off. You can have the gun. It's a good one. As I was
saying, I am going right out that door. And you ain't going to pull that
gun off either. It takes guts to shoot a man, and you sure ain't got
them. Now get ready and see if you can pull that trigger. I ain't going
to harm you. I'm going out that door, and I'm starting."

Keeping his eyes fixed on her, he pushed back the chair and slowly stood
erect. The hammer rose halfway. She watched it. So did he.

"Pull harder," he advised. "It ain't half up yet. Go on and pull it and
kill a man. That's what I said, kill a man, spatter his brains out on
the floor, or slap a hole into him the size of your fist. That's what
killing a man means."

The hammer lowered jerkily but gently. The man turned his back and
walked slowly to the door. She swung the revolver around so that it bore
on his back. Twice again the hammer came up halfway and was reluctantly
eased down.

At the door the man turned for a moment before passing on. A sneer was
on his lips. He spoke to her in a low voice, almost drawling, but in
it was the quintessence of all loathing, as he called her a name
unspeakable and vile.




THE MEXICAN

NOBODY knew his history--they of the Junta least of all. He was their
"little mystery," their "big patriot," and in his way he worked as
hard for the coming Mexican Revolution as did they. They were tardy in
recognizing this, for not one of the Junta liked him. The day he first
drifted into their crowded, busy rooms, they all suspected him of being
a spy--one of the bought tools of the Diaz secret service. Too many of
the comrades were in civil an military prisons scattered over the United
States, and others of them, in irons, were even then being taken across
the border to be lined up against adobe walls and shot.

At the first sight the boy did not impress them favorably. Boy he was,
not more than eighteen and not over large for his years. He announced
that he was Felipe Rivera, and that it was his wish to work for the
Revolution. That was all--not a wasted word, no further explanation. He
stood waiting. There was no smile on his lips, no geniality in his eyes.
Big dashing Paulino Vera felt an inward shudder. Here was something
forbidding, terrible, inscrutable. There was something venomous and
snakelike in the boy's black eyes. They burned like cold fire, as with
a vast, concentrated bitterness. He flashed them from the faces of
the conspirators to the typewriter which little Mrs. Sethby was
industriously operating. His eyes rested on hers but an instant--she
had chanced to look up--and she, too, sensed the nameless something that
made her pause. She was compelled to read back in order to regain the
swing of the letter she was writing.

Paulino Vera looked questioningly at Arrellano and Ramos, and
questioningly they looked back and to each other. The indecision of
doubt brooded in their eyes. This slender boy was the Unknown, vested
with all the menace of the Unknown. He was unrecognizable, something
quite beyond the ken of honest, ordinary revolutionists whose fiercest
hatred for Diaz and his tyranny after all was only that of honest and
ordinary patriots. Here was something else, they knew not what. But
Vera, always the most impulsive, the quickest to act, stepped into the
breach.

"Very well," he said coldly. "You say you want to work for the
Revolution. Take off your coat. Hang it over there. I will show you,
come--where are the buckets and cloths. The floor is dirty. You will
begin by scrubbing it, and by scrubbing the floors of the other rooms.
The spittoons need to be cleaned. Then there are the windows."

"Is it for the Revolution?" the boy asked.

"It is for the Revolution," Vera answered.

Rivera looked cold suspicion at all of them, then proceeded to take off
his coat.

"It is well," he said.

And nothing more. Day after day he came to his work--sweeping,
scrubbing, cleaning. He emptied the ashes from the stoves, brought up
the coal and kindling, and lighted the fires before the most energetic
one of them was at his desk.

"Can I sleep here?" he asked once.

Ah, ha! So that was it--the hand of Diaz showing through! To sleep in
the rooms of the Junta meant access to their secrets, to the lists of
names, to the addresses of comrades down on Mexican soil. The request
was denied, and Rivera never spoke of it again. He slept they knew not
where, and ate they knew not where nor how. Once, Arrellano offered him
a couple of dollars. Rivera declined the money with a shake of the head.
When Vera joined in and tried to press it upon him, he said:

"I am working for the Revolution."

It takes money to raise a modern revolution, and always the Junta was
pressed. The members starved and toiled, and the longest day was none
too long, and yet there were times when it appeared as if the Revolution
stood or fell on no more than the matter of a few dollars. Once, the
first time, when the rent of the house was two months behind and the
landlord was threatening dispossession, it was Felipe Rivera, the
scrub-boy in the poor, cheap clothes, worn and threadbare, who laid
sixty dollars in gold on May Sethby's desk. There were other times.
Three hundred letters, clicked out on the busy typewriters (appeals for
assistance, for sanctions from the organized labor groups, requests for
square news deals to the editors of newspapers, protests against the
high-handed treatment of revolutionists by the United States courts),
lay unmailed, awaiting postage. Vera's watch had disappeared--the
old-fashioned gold repeater that had been his father's. Likewise had
gone the plain gold band from May Setbby's third finger. Things were
desperate. Ramos and Arrellano pulled their long mustaches in despair.
The letters must go off, and the Post Office allowed no credit to
purchasers of stamps. Then it was that Rivera put on his hat and
went out. When he came back he laid a thousand two-cent stamps on May
Sethby's desk.

"I wonder if it is the cursed gold of Diaz?" said Vera to the comrades.

They elevated their brows and could not decide. And Felipe Rivera, the
scrubber for the Revolution, continued, as occasion arose, to lay down
gold and silver for the Junta's use.

And still they could not bring themselves to like him. They did not know
him. His ways were not theirs. He gave no confidences. He repelled all
probing. Youth that he was, they could never nerve themselves to dare to
question him.

"A great and lonely spirit, perhaps, I do not know, I do not know,"
Arrellano said helplessly.

"He is not human," said Ramos.

"His soul has been seared," said May Sethby. "Light and laughter have
been burned out of him. He is like one dead, and yet he is fearfully
alive."

"He has been through hell," said Vera. "No man could look like that who
has not been through hell--and he is only a boy."

Yet they could not like him. He never talked, never inquired, never
suggested. He would stand listening, expressionless, a thing dead, save
for his eyes, coldly burning, while their talk of the Revolution ran
high and warm. From face to face and speaker to speaker his eyes
would turn, boring like gimlets of incandescent ice, disconcerting and
perturbing.

"He is no spy," Vera confided to May Sethby. "He is a patriot--mark me,
the greatest patriot of us all. I know it, I feel it, here in my heart
and head I feel it. But him I know not at all."

"He has a bad temper," said May Sethby.

"I know," said Vera, with a shudder. "He has looked at me with those
eyes of his. They do not love; they threaten; they are savage as a wild
tiger's. I know, if I should prove unfaithful to the Cause, that he
would kill me. He has no heart. He is pitiless as steel, keen and cold
as frost. He is like moonshine in a winter night when a man freezes to
death on some lonely mountain top. I am not afraid of Diaz and all his
killers; but this boy, of him am I afraid. I tell you true. I am afraid.
He is the breath of death."

Yet Vera it was who persuaded the others to give the first trust
to Rivera. The line of communication between Los Angeles and Lower
California had broken down. Three of the comrades had dug their own
graves and been shot into them. Two more were United States prisoners
in Los Angeles. Juan Alvarado, the Federal commander, was a monster. All
their plans did he checkmate. They could no longer gain access to the
active revolutionists, and the incipient ones, in Lower California.

Young Rivera was given his instructions and dispatched south. When he
returned, the line of communication was reestablished, and Juan Alvarado
was dead. He had been found in bed, a knife hilt-deep in his breast.
This had exceeded Rivera's instructions, but they of the Junta knew the
times of his movements. They did not ask him. He said nothing. But they
looked at one another and conjectured.

"I have told you," said Vera. "Diaz has more to fear from this youth
than from any man. He is implacable. He is the hand of God."

The bad temper, mentioned by May Sethby, and sensed by them all,
was evidenced by physical proofs. Now he appeared with a cut lip,
a blackened cheek, or a swollen ear. It was patent that he brawled,
somewhere in that outside world where he ate and slept, gained money,
and moved in ways unknown to them. As the time passed, he had come to
set type for the little revolutionary sheet they published weekly. There
were occasions when he was unable to set type, when his knuckles were
bruised and battered, when his thumbs were injured and helpless, when
one arm or the other hung wearily at his side while his face was drawn
with unspoken pain.

"A wastrel," said Arrellano.

"A frequenter of low places," said Ramos.

"But where does he get the money?" Vera demanded. "Only to-day, just
now, have I learned that he paid the bill for white paper--one hundred
and forty dollars."

"There are his absences," said May Sethby. "He never explains them."

"We should set a spy upon him," Ramos propounded.

"I should not care to be that spy," said Vera. "I fear you would never
see me again, save to bury me. He has a terrible passion. Not even God
would he permit to stand between him and the way of his passion."

"I feel like a child before him," Ramos confessed.

"To me he is power--he is the primitive, the wild wolf, the striking
rattlesnake, the stinging centipede," said Arrellano.

"He is the Revolution incarnate," said Vera. "He is the flame and the
spirit of it, the insatiable cry for vengeance that makes no cry but
that slays noiselessly. He is a destroying angel in moving through the
still watches of the night."

"I could weep over him," said May Sethby. "He knows nobody. He hates
all people. Us he tolerates, for we are the way of his desire. He is
alone.... lonely." Her voice broke in a half sob and there was dimness
in her eyes.

Rivera's ways and times were truly mysterious. There were periods when
they did not see him for a week at a time. Once, he was away a month.
These occasions were always capped by his return, when, without
advertisement or speech, he laid gold coins on May Sethby's desk. Again,
for days and weeks, he spent all his time with the Junta. And yet again,
for irregular periods, he would disappear through the heart of each day,
from early morning until late afternoon. At such times he came early and
remained late. Arrellano had found him at midnight, setting type with
fresh swollen knuckles, or mayhap it was his lip, new-split, that still
bled.

II

The time of the crisis approached. Whether or not the Revolution would
be depended upon the Junta, and the Junta was hard-pressed. The need
for money was greater than ever before, while money was harder to get.
Patriots had given their last cent and now could give no more. Section
gang laborers-fugitive peons from Mexico--were contributing half
their scanty wages. But more than that was needed. The heart-breaking,
conspiring, undermining toil of years approached fruition. The time
was ripe. The Revolution hung on the balance. One shove more, one last
heroic effort, and it would tremble across the scales to victory. They
knew their Mexico. Once started, the Revolution would take care of
itself. The whole Diaz machine would go down like a house of cards. The
border was ready to rise. One Yankee, with a hundred I.W.W. men, waited
the word to cross over the border and begin the conquest of Lower
California. But he needed guns. And clear across to the Atlantic,
the Junta in touch with them all and all of them needing guns, mere
adventurers, soldiers of fortune, bandits, disgruntled American union
men, socialists, anarchists, rough-necks, Mexican exiles, peons escaped
from bondage, whipped miners from the bull-pens of Coeur d'Alene and
Colorado who desired only the more vindictively to fight--all the
flotsam and jetsam of wild spirits from the madly complicated modern
world. And it was guns and ammunition, ammunition and guns--the
unceasing and eternal cry.

Fling this heterogeneous, bankrupt, vindictive mass across the border,
and the Revolution was on. The custom house, the northern ports of
entry, would be captured. Diaz could not resist. He dared not throw
the weight of his armies against them, for he must hold the south. And
through the south the flame would spread despite. The people would rise.
The defenses of city after city would crumple up. State after state
would totter down. And at last, from every side, the victorious armies
of the Revolution would close in on the City of Mexico itself, Diaz's
last stronghold.

But the money. They had the men, impatient and urgent, who would use the
guns. They knew the traders who would sell and deliver the guns. But to
culture the Revolution thus far had exhausted the Junta. The last dollar
had been spent, the last resource and the last starving patriot milked
dry, and the great adventure still trembled on the scales. Guns and
ammunition! The ragged battalions must be armed. But how? Ramos lamented
his confiscated estates. Arrellano wailed the spendthriftness of his
youth. May Sethby wondered if it would have been different had they of
the Junta been more economical in the past.

"To think that the freedom of Mexico should stand or fall on a few
paltry thousands of dollars," said Paulino Vera.

Despair was in all their faces. Jose Amarillo, their last hope, a recent
convert, who had promised money, had been apprehended at his hacienda in
Chihuahua and shot against his own stable wall. The news had just come
through.

Rivera, on his knees, scrubbing, looked up, with suspended brush, his
bare arms flecked with soapy, dirty water.

"Will five thousand do it?" he asked.

They looked their amazement. Vera nodded and swallowed. He could not
speak, but he was on the instant invested with a vast faith.

"Order the guns," Rivera said, and thereupon was guilty of the longest
flow of words they had ever heard him utter. "The time is short. In
three weeks I shall bring you the five thousand. It is well. The weather
will be warmer for those who fight. Also, it is the best I can do."

Vera fought his faith. It was incredible. Too many fond hopes had been
shattered since he had begun to play the revolution game. He believed
this threadbare scrubber of the Revolution, and yet he dared not
believe.

"You are crazy," he said.

"In three weeks," said Rivera. "Order the guns."

He got up, rolled down his sleeves, and put on his coat.

"Order the guns," he said.

"I am going now."

III

After hurrying and scurrying, much telephoning and bad language, a night
session was held in Kelly's office. Kelly was rushed with business;
also, he was unlucky. He had brought Danny Ward out from New York,
arranged the fight for him with Billy Carthey, the date was three
weeks away, and for two days now, carefully concealed from the sporting
writers, Carthey had been lying up, badly injured. There was no one to
take his place. Kelly had been burning the wires East to every eligible
lightweight, but they were tied up with dates and contracts. And now
hope had revived, though faintly.

"You've got a hell of a nerve," Kelly addressed Rivera, after one look,
as soon as they got together.

Hate that was malignant was in Rivera's eyes, but his face remained
impassive.

"I can lick Ward," was all he said.

"How do you know? Ever see him fight?"

Rivera shook his head.

"He can beat you up with one hand and both eyes closed."

Rivera shrugged his shoulders.

"Haven't you got anything to say?" the fight promoter snarled.

"I can lick him."

"Who'd you ever fight, anyway!" Michael Kelly demanded. Michael was the
promotor's brother, and ran the Yellowstone pool rooms where he made
goodly sums on the fight game.

Rivera favored him with a bitter, unanswering stare.

The promoter's secretary, a distinctively sporty young man, sneered
audibly.

"Well, you know Roberts," Kelly broke the hostile silence. "He ought to
be here. I've sent for him. Sit down and wait, though f rom the looks of
you, you haven't got a chance. I can't throw the public down with a bum
fight. Ringside seats are selling at fifteen dollars, you know that."

When Roberts arrived, it was patent that he was mildly drunk. He was a
tall, lean, slack-jointed individual, and his walk, like his talk, was a
smooth and languid drawl.

Kelly went straight to the point.

"Look here, Roberts, you've been bragging you discovered this little
Mexican. You know Carthey's broke his arm. Well, this little yellow
streak has the gall to blow in to-day and say he'll take Carthey's
place. What about it?"

"It's all right, Kelly," came the slow response. "He can put up a
fight."

"I suppose you'll be sayin' next that he can lick Ward," Kelly snapped.

Roberts considered judicially.

"No, I won't say that. Ward's a top-notcher and a ring general. But he
can't hashhouse Rivera in short order. I know Rivera. Nobody can get
his goat. He ain't got a goat that I could ever discover. And he's a
two-handed fighter. He can throw in the sleep-makers from any position."

"Never mind that. What kind of a show can he put up? You've been
conditioning and training fighters all your life. I take off my hat to
your judgment. Can he give the public a run for its money?"

"He sure can, and he'll worry Ward a mighty heap on top of it. You
don't know that boy. I do. I discovered him. He ain't got a goat. He's a
devil. He's a wizzy-wooz if anybody should ask you. He'll make Ward sit
up with a show of local talent that'll make the rest of you sit up. I
won't say he'll lick Ward, but he'll put up such a show that you'll all
know he's a comer."

"All right." Kelly turned to his secretary. "Ring up Ward. I warned
him to show up if I thought it worth while. He's right across at the
Yellowstone, throwin' chests and doing the popular."

Kelly turned back to the conditioner. "Have a drink?"

Roberts sipped his highball and unburdened himself.

"Never told you how I discovered the little cuss. It was a couple of
years ago he showed up out at the quarters. I was getting Prayne ready
for his fight with Delaney. Prayne's wicked. He ain't got a tickle of
mercy in his make-up. I chopped up his pardner's something cruel, and
I couldn't find a willing boy that'd work with him. I'd noticed this
little starved Mexican kid hanging around, and I was desperate. So
I grabbed him, shoved on the gloves and put him in. He was tougher'n
rawhide, but weak. And he didn't know the first letter in the alphabet
of boxing. Prayne chopped him to ribbons. But he hung on for two
sickening rounds, when he fainted. Starvation, that was all. Battered!
You couldn't have recognized him. I gave him half a dollar and a square
meal. You oughta seen him wolf it down. He hadn't had the end of a bite
for a couple of days. That's the end of him, thinks I. But next day he
showed up, stiff an' sore, ready for another half and a square meal. And
he done better as time went by. Just a born fighter, and tough beyond
belief. He hasn't a heart. He's a piece of ice. And he never talked
eleven words in a string since I know him. He saws wood and does his
work."

"I've seen 'm," the secretary said. "He's worked a lot for you."

"All the big little fellows has tried out on him," Roberts answered.
"And he's learned from 'em. I've seen some of them he could lick. But
his heart wasn't in it. I reckoned he never liked the game. He seemed to
act that way."

"He's been fighting some before the little clubs the last few months,"
Kelly said.

"Sure. But I don't know what struck 'm. All of a sudden his heart got
into it. He just went out like a streak and cleaned up all the little
local fellows. Seemed to want the money, and he's won a bit, though his
clothes don't look it. He's peculiar. Nobody knows his business. Nobody
knows how he spends his time. Even when he's on the job, he plumb up and
disappears most of each day soon as his work is done. Sometimes he just
blows away for weeks at a time. But he don't take advice. There's a
fortune in it for the fellow that gets the job of managin' him, only he
won't consider it. And you watch him hold out for the cash money when
you get down to terms."

It was at this stage that Danny Ward arrived. Quite a party it was.
His manager and trainer were with him, and he breezed in like a gusty
draught of geniality, good-nature, and all-conqueringness. Greetings
flew about, a joke here, a retort there, a smile or a laugh for
everybody. Yet it was his way, and only partly sincere. He was a good
actor, and he had found geniality a most valuable asset in the game
of getting on in the world. But down underneath he was the deliberate,
cold-blooded fighter and business man. The rest was a mask. Those who
knew him or trafficked with him said that when it came to brass tacks
he was Danny-on-the-Spot. He was invariably present at all business
discussions, and it was urged by some that his manager was a blind whose
only function was to serve as Danny's mouth-piece.

Rivera's way was different. Indian blood, as well as Spanish, was in
his veins, and he sat back in a corner, silent, immobile, only his black
eyes passing from face to face and noting everything.

"So that's the guy," Danny said, running an appraising eye over his
proposed antagonist. "How de do, old chap."

Rivera's eyes burned venomously, but he made no sign of acknowledgment.
He disliked all Gringos, but this Gringo he hated with an immediacy that
was unusual even in him.

"Gawd!" Danny protested facetiously to the promoter. "You ain't
expectin' me to fight a deef mute." When the laughter subsided, he made
another hit. "Los Angeles must be on the dink when this is the best you
can scare up. What kindergarten did you get 'm from?"

"He's a good little boy, Danny, take it from me," Roberts defended. "Not
as easy as he looks."

"And half the house is sold already," Kelly pleaded. "You'll have to
take 'm on, Danny. It is the best we can do."

Danny ran another careless and unflattering glance over Rivera and
sighed.

"I gotta be easy with 'm, I guess. If only he don't blow up."

Roberts snorted.

"You gotta be careful," Danny's manager warned. "No taking chances with
a dub that's likely to sneak a lucky one across."

"Oh, I'll be careful all right, all right," Danny smiled. "I'll get in
at the start an' nurse 'im along for the dear public's sake. What d' ye
say to fifteen rounds, Kelly--an' then the hay for him?"

"That'll do," was the answer. "As long as you make it realistic."

"Then let's get down to biz." Danny paused and calculated. "Of course,
sixty-five per cent of the gate receipts, same as with Carthey. But
the split'll be different. Eighty will just about suit me." And to his
manager, "That right?"

The manager nodded.

"Here, you, did you get that?" Kelly asked Rivera.

Rivera shook his head.

"Well, it is this way," Kelly exposited. "The purse'll be sixty-five per
cent of the gate receipts. You're a dub, and an unknown. You and Danny
split, twenty per cent goin' to you, an' eighty to Danny. That's fair,
isn't it, Roberts?"

"Very fair, Rivera," Roberts agreed.

"You see, you ain't got a reputation yet."

"What will sixty-five per cent of the gate receipts be?" Rivera
demanded.

"Oh, maybe five thousand, maybe as high as eight thousand," Danny broke
in to explain. "Something like that. Your share'll come to something
like a thousand or sixteen hundred. Pretty good for takin' a licking
from a guy with my reputation. What d' ye say?"

Then Rivera took their breaths away. "Winner takes all," he said with
finality.

A dead silence prevailed.

"It's like candy from a baby," Danny's manager proclaimed.

Danny shook his head.

"I've been in the game too long," he explained.

"I'm not casting reflections on the referee, or the present company.
I'm not sayin' nothing about book-makers an' frame-ups that sometimes
happen. But what I do say is that it's poor business for a fighter like
me. I play safe. There's no tellin'. Mebbe I break my arm, eh? Or some
guy slips me a bunch of dope?" He shook his head solemnly. "Win or lose,
eighty is my split. What d' ye say, Mexican?"

Rivera shook his head.

Danny exploded. He was getting down to brass tacks now.

"Why, you dirty little greaser! I've a mind to knock your block off
right now."

Roberts drawled his body to interposition between hostilities.

"Winner takes all," Rivera repeated sullenly.

"Why do you stand out that way?" Danny asked.

"I can lick you," was the straight answer.

Danny half started to take off his coat. But, as his manager knew, it
was a grand stand play. The coat did not come off, and Danny allowed
himself to be placated by the group. Everybody sympathized with him.
Rivera stood alone.

"Look here, you little fool," Kelly took up the argument. "You're
nobody. We know what you've been doing the last few months--putting away
little local fighters. But Danny is class. His next fight after this
will be for the championship. And you're unknown. Nobody ever heard of
you out of Los Angeles."

"They will," Rivera answered with a shrug, "after this fight."

"You think for a second you can lick me?" Danny blurted in.

Rivera nodded.

"Oh, come; listen to reason," Kelly pleaded. "Think of the advertising."

"I want the money," was Rivera's answer.

"You couldn't win from me in a thousand years," Danny assured him.

"Then what are you holdin' out for?" Rivera countered. "If the money's
that easy, why don't you go after it?"

"I will, so help me!" Danny cried with abrupt conviction. "I'll beat you
to death in the ring, my boy--you monkeyin' with me this way. Make
out the articles, Kelly. Winner take all. Play it up in the sportin'
columns. Tell 'em it's a grudge fight. I'll show this fresh kid a few."

Kelly's secretary had begun to write, when Danny interrupted.

"Hold on!" He turned to Rivera.

"Weights?"

"Ringside," came the answer.

"Not on your life, Fresh Kid. If winner takes all, we weigh in at ten
A.M."

"And winner takes all?" Rivera queried.

Danny nodded. That settled it. He would enter the ring in his full
ripeness of strength.

"Weigh in at ten," Rivera said.

The secretary's pen went on scratching.

"It means five pounds," Roberts complained to Rivera.

"You've given too much away. You've thrown the fight right there.
Danny'll lick you sure. He'll be as strong as a bull. You're a fool. You
ain't got the chance of a dewdrop in hell."

Rivera's answer was a calculated look of hatred. Even this Gringo he
despised, and him had he found the whitest Gringo of them all.

IV

Barely noticed was Rivera as he entered the ring. Only a very slight and
very scattering ripple of half-hearted hand-clapping greeted him. The
house did not believe in him. He was the lamb led to slaughter at the
hands of the great Danny. Besides, the house was disappointed. It had
expected a rushing battle between Danny Ward and Billy Carthey, and
here it must put up with this poor little tyro. Still further, it had
manifested its disapproval of the change by betting two, and even three,
to one on Danny. And where a betting audience's money is, there is its
heart.

The Mexican boy sat down in his corner and waited. The slow minutes
lagged by. Danny was making him wait. It was an old trick, but ever it
worked on the young, new fighters. They grew frightened, sitting thus
and facing their own apprehensions and a callous, tobacco-smoking
audience. But for once the trick failed. Roberts was right. Rivera had
no goat. He, who was more delicately coordinated, more finely nerved and
strung than any of them, had no nerves of this sort. The atmosphere of
foredoomed defeat in his own corner had no effect on him. His handlers
were Gringos and strangers. Also they were scrubs--the dirty driftage
of the fight game, without honor, without efficiency. And they were
chilled, as well, with certitude that theirs was the losing corner.

"Now you gotta be careful," Spider Hagerty warned him. Spider was his
chief second. "Make it last as long as you can--them's my instructions
from Kelly. If you don't, the papers'll call it another bum fight and
give the game a bigger black eye in Los Angeles."

All of which was not encouraging. But Rivera took no notice. He despised
prize fighting. It was the hated game of the hated Gringo. He had taken
up with it, as a chopping block for others in the training quarters,
solely because he was starving. The fact that he was marvelously made
for it had meant nothing. He hated it. Not until he had come in to the
Junta, had he fought for money, and he had found the money easy. Not
first among the sons of men had he been to find himself successful at a
despised vocation.

He did not analyze. He merely knew that he must win this fight. There
could be no other outcome. For behind him, nerving him to this belief,
were profounder forces than any the crowded house dreamed. Danny Ward
fought for money, and for the easy ways of life that money would bring.
But the things Rivera fought for burned in his brain--blazing and
terrible visions, that, with eyes wide open, sitting lonely in the
corner of the ring and waiting for his tricky antagonist, he saw as
clearly as he had lived them.

He saw the white-walled, water-power factories of Rio Blanco. He saw the
six thousand workers, starved and wan, and the little children, seven
and eight years of age, who toiled long shifts for ten cents a day.
He saw the perambulating corpses, the ghastly death's heads of men who
labored in the dye-rooms. He remembered that he had heard his father
call the dye-rooms the "suicide-holes," where a year was death. He
saw the little patio, and his mother cooking and moiling at crude
housekeeping and finding time to caress and love him. And his father he
saw, large, big-moustached and deep-chested, kindly above all men,
who loved all men and whose heart was so large that there was love to
overflowing still left for the mother and the little muchacho playing
in the corner of the patio. In those days his name had not been Felipe
Rivera. It had been Fernandez, his father's and mother's name. Him had
they called Juan. Later, he had changed it himself, for he had found
the name of Fernandez hated by prefects of police, jefes politicos, and
rurales.

Big, hearty Joaquin Fernandez! A large place he occupied in Rivera's
visions. He had not understood at the time, but looking back he could
understand. He could see him setting type in the little printery, or
scribbling endless hasty, nervous lines on the much-cluttered desk. And
he could see the strange evenings, when workmen, coming secretly in the
dark like men who did ill deeds, met with his father and talked long
hours where he, the muchacho, lay not always asleep in the corner.

As from a remote distance he could hear Spider Hagerty saying to him:
"No layin' down at the start. Them's instructions. Take a beatin' and
earn your dough."

Ten minutes had passed, and he still sat in his corner. There were no
signs of Danny, who was evidently playing the trick to the limit.

But more visions burned before the eye of Rivera's memory. The strike,
or, rather, the lockout, because the workers of Rio Blanco had helped
their striking brothers of Puebla. The hunger, the expeditions in the
hills for berries, the roots and herbs that all ate and that twisted and
pained the stomachs of all of them. And then, the nightmare; the waste
of ground before the company's store; the thousands of starving workers;
General Rosalio Martinez and the soldiers of Porfirio Diaz, and the
death-spitting rifles that seemed never to cease spitting, while the
workers' wrongs were washed and washed again in their own blood. And
that night! He saw the flat cars, piled high with the bodies of the
slain, consigned to Vera Cruz, food for the sharks of the bay. Again
he crawled over the grisly heaps, seeking and finding, stripped
and mangled, his father and his mother. His mother he especially
remembered--only her face projecting, her body burdened by the weight
of dozens of bodies. Again the rifles of the soldiers of Porfirio Diaz
cracked, and again he dropped to the ground and slunk away like some
hunted coyote of the hills.

To his ears came a great roar, as of the sea, and he saw Danny Ward,
leading his retinue of trainers and seconds, coming down the center
aisle. The house was in wild uproar for the popular hero who was bound
to win. Everybody proclaimed him. Everybody was for him. Even Rivera's
own seconds warmed to something akin to cheerfulness when Danny ducked
jauntily through the ropes and entered the ring. His face continually
spread to an unending succession of smiles, and when Danny smiled he
smiled in every feature, even to the laughter-wrinkles of the corners of
the eyes and into the depths of the eyes themselves. Never was there so
genial a fighter. His face was a running advertisement of good feeling,
of good fellowship. He knew everybody. He joked, and laughed, and
greeted his friends through the ropes. Those farther away, unable to
suppress their admiration, cried loudly: "Oh, you Danny!" It was a
joyous ovation of affection that lasted a full five minutes.

Rivera was disregarded. For all that the audience noticed, he did not
exist. Spider Lagerty's bloated face bent down close to his.

"No gettin' scared," the Spider warned.

"An' remember instructions. You gotta last. No layin' down. If you lay
down, we got instructions to beat you up in the dressing rooms. Savve?
You just gotta fight."

The house began to applaud. Danny was crossing the ring to him. Danny
bent over, caught Rivera's right hand in both his own and shook it with
impulsive heartiness. Danny's smile-wreathed face was close to his. The
audience yelled its appreciation of Danny's display of sporting spirit.
He was greeting his opponent with the fondness of a brother. Danny's
lips moved, and the audience, interpreting the unheard words to be
those of a kindly-natured sport, yelled again. Only Rivera heard the low
words.

"You little Mexican rat," hissed from between Danny's gaily smiling
lips, "I'll fetch the yellow outa you."

Rivera made no move. He did not rise. He merely hated with his eyes.

"Get up, you dog!" some man yelled through the ropes from behind.

The crowd began to hiss and boo him for his unsportsmanlike conduct,
but he sat unmoved. Another great outburst of applause was Danny's as he
walked back across the ring.

When Danny stripped, there was ohs! and ahs! of delight. His body was
perfect, alive with easy suppleness and health and strength. The skin
was white as a woman's, and as smooth. All grace, and resilience,
and power resided therein. He had proved it in scores of battles. His
photographs were in all the physical culture magazines.

A groan went up as Spider Hagerty peeled Rivera's sweater over his head.
His body seemed leaner, because of the swarthiness of the skin. He had
muscles, but they made no display like his opponent's. What the audience
neglected to see was the deep chest. Nor could it guess the toughness of
the fiber of the flesh, the instantaneousness of the cell explosions
of the muscles, the fineness of the nerves that wired every part of
him into a splendid fighting mechanism. All the audience saw was a
brown-skinned boy of eighteen with what seemed the body of a boy. With
Danny it was different. Danny was a man of twenty-four, and his body
was a man's body. The contrast was still more striking as they stood
together in the center of the ring receiving the referee's last
instructions.

Rivera noticed Roberts sitting directly behind the newspaper men. He was
drunker than usual, and his speech was correspondingly slower.

"Take it easy, Rivera," Roberts drawled.

"He can't kill you, remember that. He'll rush you at the go-off, but
don't get rattled. You just and stall, and clinch. He can't hurt cover
up, much. Just make believe to yourself that he's choppin' out on you at
the trainin' quarters."

Rivera made no sign that he had heard.

"Sullen little devil," Roberts muttered to the man next to him. "He
always was that way."

But Rivera forgot to look his usual hatred. A vision of countless rifles
blinded his eyes. Every face in the audience, far as he could see, to
the high dollar-seats, was transformed into a rifle. And he saw the long
Mexican border arid and sun-washed and aching, and along it he saw the
ragged bands that delayed only for the guns.

Back in his corner he waited, standing up. His seconds had crawled out
through the ropes, taking the canvas stool with them. Diagonally across
the squared ring, Danny faced him. The gong struck, and the battle was
on. The audience howled its delight. Never had it seen a battle open
more convincingly. The papers were right. It was a grudge fight.
Three-quarters of the distance Danny covered in the rush to get
together, his intention to eat up the Mexican lad plainly advertised. He
assailed with not one blow, nor two, nor a dozen. He was a gyroscope
of blows, a whirlwind of destruction. Rivera was nowhere. He was
overwhelmed, buried beneath avalanches of punches delivered from every
angle and position by a past master in the art. He was overborne, swept
back against the ropes, separated by the referee, and swept back against
the ropes again.

It was not a fight. It was a slaughter, a massacre. Any audience, save
a prize fighting one, would have exhausted its emotions in that first
minute. Danny was certainly showing what he could do--a splendid
exhibition. Such was the certainty of the audience, as well as its
excitement and favoritism, that it failed to take notice that the
Mexican still stayed on his feet. It forgot Rivera. It rarely saw him,
so closely was he enveloped in Danny's man-eating attack. A minute of
this went by, and two minutes. Then, in a separation, it caught a clear
glimpse of the Mexican. His lip was cut, his nose was bleeding. As he
turned and staggered into a clinch, the welts of oozing blood, from his
contacts with the ropes, showed in red bars across his back. But what
the audience did not notice was that his chest was not heaving and that
his eyes were coldly burning as ever. Too many aspiring champions, in
the cruel welter of the training camps, had practiced this man-eating
attack on him. He had learned to live through for a compensation of from
half a dollar a go up to fifteen dollars a week--a hard school, and he
was schooled hard.

Then happened the amazing thing. The whirling, blurring mix-up ceased
suddenly. Rivera stood alone. Danny, the redoubtable Danny, lay on his
back. His body quivered as consciousness strove to return to it. He had
not staggered and sunk down, nor had he gone over in a long slumping
fall. The right hook of Rivera had dropped him in midair with the
abruptness of death. The referee shoved Rivera back with one hand, and
stood over the fallen gladiator counting the seconds. It is the custom
of prize-fighting audiences to cheer a clean knock-down blow. But this
audience did not cheer. The thing had been too unexpected. It watched
the toll of the seconds in tense silence, and through this silence the
voice of Roberts rose exultantly:

"I told you he was a two-handed fighter!"

By the fifth second, Danny was rolling over on his face, and when seven
was counted, he rested on one knee, ready to rise after the count of
nine and before the count of ten. If his knee still touched the floor
at "ten," he was considered "down," and also "out." The instant his
knee left the floor, he was considered "up," and in that instant it was
Rivera's right to try and put him down again. Rivera took no chances.
The moment that knee left the floor he would strike again. He circled
around, but the referee circled in between, and Rivera knew that the
seconds he counted were very slow. All Gringos were against him, even
the referee.

At "nine" the referee gave Rivera a sharp thrust back. It was unfair,
but it enabled Danny to rise, the smile back on his lips. Doubled partly
over, with arms wrapped about face and abdomen, he cleverly stumbled
into a clinch. By all the rules of the game the referee should have
broken it, but he did not, and Danny clung on like a surf-battered
barnacle and moment by moment recuperated. The last minute of the round
was going fast. If he could live to the end, he would have a full minute
in his corner to revive. And live to the end he did, smiling through all
desperateness and extremity.

"The smile that won't come off!" somebody yelled, and the audience
laughed loudly in its relief.

"The kick that Greaser's got is something God-awful," Danny gasped in
his corner to his adviser while his handlers worked frantically over
him.

The second and third rounds were tame. Danny, a tricky and consummate
ring general, stalled and blocked and held on, devoting himself to
recovering from that dazing first-round blow. In the fourth round he was
himself again. Jarred and shaken, nevertheless his good condition had
enabled him to regain his vigor. But he tried no man-eating tactics.
The Mexican had proved a tartar. Instead, he brought to bear his best
fighting powers. In tricks and skill and experience he was the master,
and though he could land nothing vital, he proceeded scientifically to
chop and wear down his opponent. He landed three blows to Rivera's one,
but they were punishing blows only, and not deadly. It was the sum of
many of them that constituted deadliness. He was respectful of this
two-handed dub with the amazing short-arm kicks in both his fists.

In defense, Rivera developed a disconcerting straight-left. Again
and again, attack after attack he straight-lefted away from him with
accumulated damage to Danny's mouth and nose. But Danny was protean.
That was why he was the coming champion. He could change from style to
style of fighting at will. He now devoted himself to infighting. In
this he was particularly wicked, and it enabled him to avoid the other's
straight-left. Here he set the house wild repeatedly, capping it with
a marvelous lockbreak and lift of an inside upper-cut that raised the
Mexican in the air and dropped him to the mat. Rivera rested on one
knee, making the most of the count, and in the soul of him he knew the
referee was counting short seconds on him.

Again, in the seventh, Danny achieved the diabolical inside uppercut.
He succeeded only in staggering Rivera, but, in the ensuing moment of
defenseless helplessness, he smashed him with another blow through the
ropes. Rivera's body bounced on the heads of the newspaper men below,
and they boosted him back to the edge of the platform outside the ropes.
Here he rested on one knee, while the referee raced off the seconds.
Inside the ropes, through which he must duck to enter the ring, Danny
waited for him. Nor did the referee intervene or thrust Danny back.

The house was beside itself with delight.

"Kill'm, Danny, kill'm!" was the cry.

Scores of voices took it up until it was like a war-chant of wolves.

Danny did his best, but Rivera, at the count of eight, instead of nine,
came unexpectedly through the ropes and safely into a clinch. Now the
referee worked, tearing him away so that he could be hit, giving Danny
every advantage that an unfair referee can give.

But Rivera lived, and the daze cleared from his brain. It was all of a
piece. They were the hated Gringos and they were all unfair. And in the
worst of it visions continued to flash and sparkle in his brain--long
lines of railroad track that simmered across the desert; rurales and
American constables, prisons and calabooses; tramps at water tanks--all
the squalid and painful panorama of his odyssey after Rio Blanca and the
strike. And, resplendent and glorious, he saw the great, red Revolution
sweeping across his land. The guns were there before him. Every hated
face was a gun. It was for the guns he fought. He was the guns. He was
the Revolution. He fought for all Mexico.

The audience began to grow incensed with Rivera. Why didn't he take the
licking that was appointed him? Of course he was going to be licked, but
why should he be so obstinate about it? Very few were interested in him,
and they were the certain, definite percentage of a gambling crowd that
plays long shots. Believing Danny to be the winner, nevertheless they
had put their money on the Mexican at four to ten and one to three. More
than a trifle was up on the point of how many rounds Rivera could last.
Wild money had appeared at the ringside proclaiming that he could not
last seven rounds, or even six. The winners of this, now that their cash
risk was happily settled, had joined in cheering on the favorite.

Rivera refused to be licked. Through the eighth round his opponent
strove vainly to repeat the uppercut. In the ninth, Rivera stunned the
house again. In the midst of a clinch he broke the lock with a quick,
lithe movement, and in the narrow space between their bodies his right
lifted from the waist. Danny went to the floor and took the safety of
the count. The crowd was appalled. He was being bested at his own game.
His famous right-uppercut had been worked back on him. Rivera made
no attempt to catch him as he arose at "nine." The referee was openly
blocking that play, though he stood clear when the situation was
reversed and it was Rivera who desired to rise.

Twice in the tenth, Rivera put through the right-uppercut, lifted from
waist to opponent's chin. Danny grew desperate. The smile never left his
face, but he went back to his man-eating rushes. Whirlwind as he would,
he could not damage Rivera, while Rivera through the blur and whirl,
dropped him to the mat three times in succession. Danny did not
recuperate so quickly now, and by the eleventh round he was in a serious
way. But from then till the fourteenth he put up the gamest exhibition
of his career. He stalled and blocked, fought parsimoniously, and strove
to gather strength. Also, he fought as foully as a successful fighter
knows how. Every trick and device he employed, butting in the clinches
with the seeming of accident, pinioning Rivera's glove between arm and
body, heeling his glove on Rivera's mouth to clog his breathing. Often,
in the clinches, through his cut and smiling lips he snarled insults
unspeakable and vile in Rivera's ear. Everybody, from the referee to the
house, was with Danny and was helping Danny. And they knew what he had
in mind. Bested by this surprise-box of an unknown, he was pinning
all on a single punch. He offered himself for punishment, fished, and
feinted, and drew, for that one opening that would enable him to whip
a blow through with all his strength and turn the tide. As another and
greater fighter had done before him, he might do a right and left, to
solar plexus and across the jaw. He could do it, for he was noted for
the strength of punch that remained in his arms as long as he could keep
his feet.

Rivera's seconds were not half-caring for him in the intervals between
rounds. Their towels made a showing, but drove little air into his
panting lungs. Spider Hagerty talked advice to him, but Rivera knew
it was wrong advice. Everybody was against him. He was surrounded by
treachery. In the fourteenth round he put Danny down again, and himself
stood resting, hands dropped at side, while the referee counted. In
the other corner Rivera had been noting suspicious whisperings. He saw
Michael Kelly make his way to Roberts and bend and whisper. Rivera's
ears were a cat's, desert-trained, and he caught snatches of what was
said. He wanted to hear more, and when his opponent arose he maneuvered
the fight into a clinch over against the ropes.

"Got to," he could hear Michael, while Roberts nodded. "Danny's got to
win--I stand to lose a mint--I've got a ton of money covered--my own.
If he lasts the fifteenth I'm bust--the boy'll mind you. Put something
across."

And thereafter Rivera saw no more visions. They were trying to job him.
Once again he dropped Danny and stood resting, his hands at his slide.
Roberts stood up.

"That settled him," he said.

"Go to your corner."

He spoke with authority, as he had often spoken to Rivera at the
training quarters. But Rivera looked hatred at him and waited for Danny
to rise. Back in his corner in the minute interval, Kelly, the promoter,
came and talked to Rivera.

"Throw it, damn you," he rasped in, a harsh low voice. "You gotta lay
down, Rivera. Stick with me and I'll make your future. I'll let you lick
Danny next time. But here's where you lay down."

Rivera showed with his eyes that he heard, but he made neither sign of
assent nor dissent.

"Why don't you speak?" Kelly demanded angrily.

"You lose, anyway," Spider Hagerty supplemented. "The referee'll take it
away from you. Listen to Kelly, and lay down."

"Lay down, kid," Kelly pleaded, "and I'll help you to the championship."

Rivera did not answer.

"I will, so help me, kid."

At the strike of the gong Rivera sensed something impending. The house
did not. Whatever it was it was there inside the ring with him and very
close. Danny's earlier surety seemed returned to him. The confidence of
his advance frightened Rivera. Some trick was about to be worked. Danny
rushed, but Rivera refused the encounter. He side-stepped away into
safety. What the other wanted was a clinch. It was in some way necessary
to the trick. Rivera backed and circled away, yet he knew, sooner or
later, the clinch and the trick would come. Desperately he resolved
to draw it. He made as if to effect the clinch with Danny's next rush.
Instead, at the last instant, just as their bodies should have come
together, Rivera darted nimbly back. And in the same instant Danny's
corner raised a cry of foul. Rivera had fooled them. The referee paused
irresolutely. The decision that trembled on his lips was never uttered,
for a shrill, boy's voice from the gallery piped, "Raw work!"

Danny cursed Rivera openly, and forced him, while Rivera danced away.
Also, Rivera made up his mind to strike no more blows at the body. In
this he threw away half his chance of winning, but he knew if he was to
win at all it was with the outfighting that remained to him. Given the
least opportunity, they would lie a foul on him. Danny threw all caution
to the winds. For two rounds he tore after and into the boy who dared
not meet him at close quarters. Rivera was struck again and again;
he took blows by the dozens to avoid the perilous clinch. During this
supreme final rally of Danny's the audience rose to its feet and went
mad. It did not understand. All it could see was that its favorite was
winning, after all.

"Why don't you fight?" it demanded wrathfully of Rivera.

"You're yellow! You're yellow!" "Open up, you cur! Open up!" "Kill'm,
Danny! Kill 'm!" "You sure got 'm! Kill 'm!"

In all the house, bar none, Rivera was the only cold man. By temperament
and blood he was the hottest-passioned there; but he had gone through
such vastly greater heats that this collective passion of ten thousand
throats, rising surge on surge, was to his brain no more than the velvet
cool of a summer twilight.

Into the seventeenth round Danny carried his rally. Rivera, under a
heavy blow, drooped and sagged. His hands dropped helplessly as he
reeled backward. Danny thought it was his chance. The boy was at, his
mercy. Thus Rivera, feigning, caught him off his guard, lashing out a
clean drive to the mouth. Danny went down. When he arose, Rivera felled
him with a down-chop of the right on neck and jaw. Three times he
repeated this. It was impossible for any referee to call these blows
foul.

"Oh, Bill! Bill!" Kelly pleaded to the referee.

"I can't," that official lamented back. "He won't give me a chance."

Danny, battered and heroic, still kept coming up. Kelly and others near
to the ring began to cry out to the police to stop it, though Danny's
corner refused to throw in the towel. Rivera saw the fat police captain
starting awkwardly to climb through the ropes, and was not sure what it
meant. There were so many ways of cheating in this game of the Gringos.
Danny, on his feet, tottered groggily and helplessly before him. The
referee and the captain were both reaching for Rivera when he struck the
last blow. There was no need to stop the fight, for Danny did not rise.

"Count!" Rivera cried hoarsely to the referee.

And when the count was finished, Danny's seconds gathered him up and
carried him to his corner.

"Who wins?" Rivera demanded.

Reluctantly, the referee caught his gloved hand and held it aloft.

There were no congratulations for Rivera. He walked to his corner
unattended, where his seconds had not yet placed his stool. He leaned
backward on the ropes and looked his hatred at them, swept it on and
about him till the whole ten thousand Gringos were included. His knees
trembled under him, and he was sobbing from exhaustion. Before his eyes
the hated faces swayed back and forth in the giddiness of nausea. Then
he remembered they were the guns. The guns were his. The Revolution
could go on.

========================================
========================================

version by Al Haines.









The Son of the Wolf

Jack London


1900



Contains

  The White Silence
  The Son of the Wolf
  The Men of Forty Mile
  In a Far Country
  To the Man on the Trail
  The Priestly Prerogative
  The Wisdom of the Trail
  The Wife of a King
  An Odyssey of the North




The White Silence

'Carmen won't last more than a couple of days.' Mason spat out a chunk
of ice and surveyed the poor animal ruefully, then put her foot in his
mouth and proceeded to bite out the ice which clustered cruelly between
the toes.

'I never saw a dog with a highfalutin' name that ever was worth a rap,'
he said, as he concluded his task and shoved her aside. 'They just fade
away and die under the responsibility. Did ye ever see one go wrong
with a sensible name like Cassiar, Siwash, or Husky? No, sir! Take a
look at Shookum here, he's--' Snap! The lean brute flashed up, the
white teeth just missing Mason's throat.

'Ye will, will ye?' A shrewd clout behind the ear with the butt of the
dog whip stretched the animal in the snow, quivering softly, a yellow
slaver dripping from its fangs.

'As I was saying, just look at Shookum here--he's got the spirit. Bet
ye he eats Carmen before the week's out.' 'I'll bank another
proposition against that,' replied Malemute Kid, reversing the frozen
bread placed before the fire to thaw. 'We'll eat Shookum before the
trip is over. What d'ye say, Ruth?' The Indian woman settled the coffee
with a piece of ice, glanced from Malemute Kid to her husband, then at
the dogs, but vouchsafed no reply. It was such a palpable truism that
none was necessary. Two hundred miles of unbroken trail in prospect,
with a scant six days' grub for themselves and none for the dogs, could
admit no other alternative. The two men and the woman grouped about the
fire and began their meager meal. The dogs lay in their harnesses for
it was a midday halt, and watched each mouthful enviously.

'No more lunches after today,' said Malemute Kid. 'And we've got to
keep a close eye on the dogs--they're getting vicious. They'd just as
soon pull a fellow down as not, if they get a chance.' 'And I was
president of an Epworth once, and taught in the Sunday school.' Having
irrelevantly delivered himself of this, Mason fell into a dreamy
contemplation of his steaming moccasins, but was aroused by Ruth
filling his cup.

'Thank God, we've got slathers of tea! I've seen it growing, down in
Tennessee. What wouldn't I give for a hot corn pone just now! Never
mind, Ruth; you won't starve much longer, nor wear moccasins either.'
The woman threw off her gloom at this, and in her eyes welled up a
great love for her white lord--the first white man she had ever
seen--the first man whom she had known to treat a woman as something
better than a mere animal or beast of burden.

'Yes, Ruth,' continued her husband, having recourse to the macaronic
jargon in which it was alone possible for them to understand each
other; 'wait till we clean up and pull for the Outside. We'll take the
White Man's canoe and go to the Salt Water. Yes, bad water, rough
water--great mountains dance up and down all the time. And so big, so
far, so far away--you travel ten sleep, twenty sleep, forty sleep'--he
graphically enumerated the days on his fingers--'all the time water,
bad water. Then you come to great village, plenty people, just the same
mosquitoes next summer. Wigwams oh, so high--ten, twenty pines.

'Hi-yu skookum!' He paused impotently, cast an appealing glance at
Malemute Kid, then laboriously placed the twenty pines, end on end, by
sign language. Malemute Kid smiled with cheery cynicism; but Ruth's
eyes were wide with wonder, and with pleasure; for she half believed he
was joking, and such condescension pleased her poor woman's heart.

'And then you step into a--a box, and pouf! up you go.' He tossed his
empty cup in the air by way of illustration and, as he deftly caught
it, cried: 'And biff! down you come. Oh, great medicine men! You go
Fort Yukon. I go Arctic City--twenty-five sleep--big string, all the
time--I catch him string--I say, "Hello, Ruth! How are ye?"--and you
say, "Is that my good husband?"--and I say, "Yes"--and you say, "No can
bake good bread, no more soda"--then I say, "Look in cache, under
flour; good-by." You look and catch plenty soda. All the time you Fort
Yukon, me Arctic City. Hi-yu medicine man!' Ruth smiled so ingenuously
at the fairy story that both men burst into laughter. A row among the
dogs cut short the wonders of the Outside, and by the time the snarling
combatants were separated, she had lashed the sleds and all was ready
for the trail.--'Mush! Baldy! Hi! Mush on!' Mason worked his whip
smartly and, as the dogs whined low in the traces, broke out the sled
with the gee pole. Ruth followed with the second team, leaving Malemute
Kid, who had helped her start, to bring up the rear. Strong man, brute
that he was, capable of felling an ox at a blow, he could not bear to
beat the poor animals, but humored them as a dog driver rarely
does--nay, almost wept with them in their misery.

'Come, mush on there, you poor sore-footed brutes!' he murmured, after
several ineffectual attempts to start the load. But his patience was at
last rewarded, and though whimpering with pain, they hastened to join
their fellows.

No more conversation; the toil of the trail will not permit such
extravagance.

And of all deadening labors, that of the Northland trail is the worst.
Happy is the man who can weather a day's travel at the price of
silence, and that on a beaten track.  And of all heartbreaking labors,
that of breaking trail is the worst. At every step the great webbed
shoe sinks till the snow is level with the knee. Then up, straight up,
the deviation of a fraction of an inch being a certain precursor of
disaster, the snowshoe must be lifted till the surface is cleared; then
forward, down, and the other foot is raised perpendicularly for the
matter of half a yard. He who tries this for the first time, if haply
he avoids bringing his shoes in dangerous propinquity and measures not
his length on the treacherous footing, will give up exhausted at the
end of a hundred yards; he who can keep out of the way of the dogs for
a whole day may well crawl into his sleeping bag with a clear
conscience and a pride which passeth all understanding; and he who
travels twenty sleeps on the Long Trail is a man whom the gods may envy.

The afternoon wore on, and with the awe, born of the White Silence, the
voiceless travelers bent to their work. Nature has many tricks
wherewith she convinces man of his finity--the ceaseless flow of the
tides, the fury of the storm, the shock of the earthquake, the long
roll of heaven's artillery--but the most tremendous, the most
stupefying of all, is the passive phase of the White Silence. All
movement ceases, the sky clears, the heavens are as brass; the
slightest whisper seems sacrilege, and man becomes timid, affrighted at
the sound of his own voice. Sole speck of life journeying across the
ghostly wastes of a dead world, he trembles at his audacity, realizes
that his is a maggot's life, nothing more.

Strange thoughts arise unsummoned, and the mystery of all things
strives for utterance.

And the fear of death, of God, of the universe, comes over him--the
hope of the Resurrection and the Life, the yearning for immortality,
the vain striving of the imprisoned essence--it is then, if ever, man
walks alone with God.

So wore the day away. The river took a great bend, and Mason headed his
team for the cutoff across the narrow neck of land. But the dogs balked
at the high bank. Again and again, though Ruth and Malemute Kid were
shoving on the sled, they slipped back. Then came the concerted effort.
The miserable creatures, weak from hunger, exerted their last strength.
Up--up--the sled poised on the top of the bank; but the leader swung
the string of dogs behind him to the right, fouling Mason's snowshoes.
The result was grievous.

Mason was whipped off his feet; one of the dogs fell in the traces; and
the sled toppled back, dragging everything to the bottom again.

Slash! the whip fell among the dogs savagely, especially upon the one
which had fallen.

'Don't,--Mason,' entreated Malemute Kid; 'the poor devil's on its last
legs.  Wait and we'll put my team on.' Mason deliberately withheld the
whip till the last word had fallen, then out flashed the long lash,
completely curling about the offending creature's body.

Carmen--for it was Carmen--cowered in the snow, cried piteously, then
rolled over on her side.

It was a tragic moment, a pitiful incident of the trail--a dying dog,
two comrades in anger.

Ruth glanced solicitously from man to man. But Malemute Kid restrained
himself, though there was a world of reproach in his eyes, and, bending
over the dog, cut the traces. No word was spoken. The teams were
doublespanned and the difficulty overcome; the sleds were under way
again, the dying dog dragging herself along in the rear. As long as an
animal can travel, it is not shot, and this last chance is accorded
it--the crawling into camp, if it can, in the hope of a moose being
killed.

Already penitent for his angry action, but too stubborn to make amends,
Mason toiled on at the head of the cavalcade, little dreaming that
danger hovered in the air. The timber clustered thick in the sheltered
bottom, and through this they threaded their way. Fifty feet or more
from the trail towered a lofty pine. For generations it had stood
there, and for generations destiny had had this one end in
view--perhaps the same had been decreed of Mason.

He stooped to fasten the loosened thong of his moccasin. The sleds came
to a halt, and the dogs lay down in the snow without a whimper. The
stillness was weird; not a breath rustled the frost-encrusted forest;
the cold and silence of outer space had chilled the heart and smote the
trembling lips of nature. A sigh pulsed through the air--they did not
seem to actually hear it, but rather felt it, like the premonition of
movement in a motionless void. Then the great tree, burdened with its
weight of years and snow, played its last part in the tragedy of life.
He heard the warning crash and attempted to spring up but, almost
erect, caught the blow squarely on the shoulder.

The sudden danger, the quick death--how often had Malemute Kid faced
it! The pine needles were still quivering as he gave his commands and
sprang into action. Nor did the Indian girl faint or raise her voice in
idle wailing, as might many of her white sisters. At his order, she
threw her weight on the end of a quickly extemporized handspike, easing
the pressure and listening to her husband's groans, while Malemute Kid
attacked the tree with his ax. The steel rang merrily as it bit into
the frozen trunk, each stroke being accompanied by a forced, audible
respiration, the 'Huh!' 'Huh!' of the woodsman.

At last the Kid laid the pitiable thing that was once a man in the
snow. But worse than his comrade's pain was the dumb anguish in the
woman's face, the blended look of hopeful, hopeless query. Little was
said; those of the Northland are early taught the futility of words and
the inestimable value of deeds. With the temperature at sixty-five
below zero, a man cannot lie many minutes in the snow and live. So the
sled lashings were cut, and the sufferer, rolled in furs, laid on a
couch of boughs. Before him roared a fire, built of the very wood which
wrought the mishap. Behind and partially over him was stretched the
primitive fly--a piece of canvas, which caught the radiating heat and
threw it back and down upon him--a trick which men may know who study
physics at the fount.

And men who have shared their bed with death know when the call is
sounded. Mason was terribly crushed. The most cursory examination
revealed it.

His right arm, leg, and back were broken; his limbs were paralyzed from
the hips; and the likelihood of internal injuries was large. An
occasional moan was his only sign of life.

No hope; nothing to be done. The pitiless night crept slowly by--Ruth's
portion, the despairing stoicism of her race, and Malemute Kid adding
new lines to his face of bronze.

In fact, Mason suffered least of all, for he spent his time in eastern
Tennessee, in the Great Smoky Mountains, living over the scenes of his
childhood. And most pathetic was the melody of his long-forgotten
Southern vernacular, as he raved of swimming holes and coon hunts and
watermelon raids. It was as Greek to Ruth, but the Kid understood and
felt--felt as only one can feel who has been shut out for years from
all that civilization means.

Morning brought consciousness to the stricken man, and Malemute Kid
bent closer to catch his whispers.

'You remember when we foregathered on the Tanana, four years come next
ice run? I didn't care so much for her then. It was more like she was
pretty, and there was a smack of excitement about it, I think. But d'ye
know, I've come to think a heap of her. She's been a good wife to me,
always at my shoulder in the pinch. And when it comes to trading, you
know there isn't her equal. D'ye recollect the time she shot the
Moosehorn Rapids to pull you and me off that rock, the bullets whipping
the water like hailstones?--and the time of the famine at
Nuklukyeto?--when she raced the ice run to bring the news?

'Yes, she's been a good wife to me, better'n that other one. Didn't
know I'd been there?

'Never told you, eh? Well, I tried it once, down in the States. That's
why I'm here. Been raised together, too. I came away to give her a
chance for divorce. She got it.

'But that's got nothing to do with Ruth. I had thought of cleaning up
and pulling for the Outside next year--her and I--but it's too late.
Don't send her back to her people, Kid. It's beastly hard for a woman
to go back. Think of it!--nearly four years on our bacon and beans and
flour and dried fruit, and then to go back to her fish and caribou.
It's not good for her to have tried our ways, to come to know they're
better'n her people's, and then return to them. Take care of her, Kid,
why don't you--but no, you always fought shy of them--and you never
told me why you came to this country. Be kind to her, and send her back
to the States as soon as you can. But fix it so she can come
back--liable to get homesick, you know.

'And the youngster--it's drawn us closer, Kid. I only hope it is a boy.
Think of it!--flesh of my flesh, Kid. He mustn't stop in this country.
And if it's a girl, why, she can't. Sell my furs; they'll fetch at
least five thousand, and I've got as much more with the company. And
handle my interests with yours. I think that bench claim will show up.
See that he gets a good schooling; and Kid, above all, don't let him
come back. This country was not made for white men.

'I'm a gone man, Kid. Three or four sleeps at the best. You've got to
go on.  You must go on! Remember, it's my wife, it's my boy--O God! I
hope it's a boy! You can't stay by me--and I charge you, a dying man,
to pull on.'

'Give me three days,' pleaded Malemute Kid. 'You may change for the
better; something may turn up.'

'No.'

'Just three days.'

'You must pull on.'

'Two days.'

'It's my wife and my boy, Kid. You would not ask it.'

'One day.'

'No, no! I charge--'

'Only one day. We can shave it through on the grub, and I might knock
over a moose.'

'No--all right; one day, but not a minute more. And, Kid, don't--don't
leave me to face it alone. Just a shot, one pull on the trigger. You
understand. Think of it! Think of it! Flesh of my flesh, and I'll never
live to see him!

'Send Ruth here. I want to say good-by and tell her that she must think
of the boy and not wait till I'm dead. She might refuse to go with you
if I didn't. Goodby, old man; good-by.

'Kid! I say--a--sink a hole above the pup, next to the slide. I panned
out forty cents on my shovel there.

'And, Kid!' He stooped lower to catch the last faint words, the dying
man's surrender of his pride. 'I'm sorry--for--you know--Carmen.'
Leaving the girl crying softly over her man, Malemute Kid slipped into
his parka and snowshoes, tucked his rifle under his arm, and crept away
into the forest. He was no tyro in the stern sorrows of the Northland,
but never had he faced so stiff a problem as this. In the abstract, it
was a plain, mathematical proposition--three possible lives as against
one doomed one. But now he hesitated. For five years, shoulder to
shoulder, on the rivers and trails, in the camps and mines, facing
death by field and flood and famine, had they knitted the bonds of
their comradeship. So close was the tie that he had often been
conscious of a vague jealousy of Ruth, from the first time she had come
between. And now it must be severed by his own hand.

Though he prayed for a moose, just one moose, all game seemed to have
deserted the land, and nightfall found the exhausted man crawling into
camp, lighthanded, heavyhearted. An uproar from the dogs and shrill
cries from Ruth hastened him.

Bursting into the camp, he saw the girl in the midst of the snarling
pack, laying about her with an ax. The dogs had broken the iron rule of
their masters and were rushing the grub.

He joined the issue with his rifle reversed, and the hoary game of
natural selection was played out with all the ruthlessness of its
primeval environment. Rifle and ax went up and down, hit or missed with
monotonous regularity; lithe bodies flashed, with wild eyes and
dripping fangs; and man and beast fought for supremacy to the bitterest
conclusion. Then the beaten brutes crept to the edge of the firelight,
licking their wounds, voicing their misery to the stars.

The whole stock of dried salmon had been devoured, and perhaps five
pounds of flour remained to tide them over two hundred miles of
wilderness. Ruth returned to her husband, while Malemute Kid cut up the
warm body of one of the dogs, the skull of which had been crushed by
the ax. Every portion was carefully put away, save the hide and offal,
which were cast to his fellows of the moment before.

Morning brought fresh trouble. The animals were turning on each other.
Carmen, who still clung to her slender thread of life, was downed by
the pack. The lash fell among them unheeded. They cringed and cried
under the blows, but refused to scatter till the last wretched bit had
disappeared--bones, hide, hair, everything.

Malemute Kid went about his work, listening to Mason, who was back in
Tennessee, delivering tangled discourses and wild exhortations to his
brethren of other days.

Taking advantage of neighboring pines, he worked rapidly, and Ruth
watched him make a cache similar to those sometimes used by hunters to
preserve their meat from the wolverines and dogs. One after the other,
he bent the tops of two small pines toward each other and nearly to the
ground, making them fast with thongs of moosehide. Then he beat the
dogs into submission and harnessed them to two of the sleds, loading
the same with everything but the furs which enveloped Mason. These he
wrapped and lashed tightly about him, fastening either end of the robes
to the bent pines. A single stroke of his hunting knife would release
them and send the body high in the air.

Ruth had received her husband's last wishes and made no struggle. Poor
girl, she had learned the lesson of obedience well. From a child, she
had bowed, and seen all women bow, to the lords of creation, and it did
not seem in the nature of things for woman to resist. The Kid permitted
her one outburst of grief, as she kissed her husband--her own people
had no such custom--then led her to the foremost sled and helped her
into her snowshoes. Blindly, instinctively, she took the gee pole and
whip, and 'mushed' the dogs out on the trail. Then he returned to
Mason, who had fallen into a coma, and long after she was out of sight
crouched by the fire, waiting, hoping, praying for his comrade to die.

It is not pleasant to be alone with painful thoughts in the White
Silence. The silence of gloom is merciful, shrouding one as with
protection and breathing a thousand intangible sympathies; but the
bright White Silence, clear and cold, under steely skies, is pitiless.

An hour passed--two hours--but the man would not die. At high noon the
sun, without raising its rim above the southern horizon, threw a
suggestion of fire athwart the heavens, then quickly drew it back.
Malemute Kid roused and dragged himself to his comrade's side. He cast
one glance about him. The White Silence seemed to sneer, and a great
fear came upon him. There was a sharp report; Mason swung into his
aerial sepulcher, and Malemute Kid lashed the dogs into a wild gallop
as he fled across the snow.



The Son of the Wolf

Man rarely places a proper valuation upon his womankind, at least not
until deprived of them. He has no conception of the subtle atmosphere
exhaled by the sex feminine, so long as he bathes in it; but let it be
withdrawn, and an ever-growing void begins to manifest itself in his
existence, and he becomes hungry, in a vague sort of way, for a
something so indefinite that he cannot characterize it. If his comrades
have no more experience than himself, they will shake their heads
dubiously and dose him with strong physic. But the hunger will continue
and become stronger; he will lose interest in the things of his
everyday life and wax morbid; and one day, when the emptiness has
become unbearable, a revelation will dawn upon him.

In the Yukon country, when this comes to pass, the man usually
provisions a poling boat, if it is summer, and if winter, harnesses his
dogs, and heads for the Southland. A few months later, supposing him to
be possessed of a faith in the country, he returns with a wife to share
with him in that faith, and incidentally in his hardships. This but
serves to show the innate selfishness of man. It also brings us to the
trouble of 'Scruff' Mackenzie, which occurred in the old days, before
the country was stampeded and staked by a tidal-wave of the
che-cha-quas, and when the Klondike's only claim to notice was its
salmon fisheries.

'Scruff' Mackenzie bore the earmarks of a frontier birth and a frontier
life.

His face was stamped with twenty-five years of incessant struggle with
Nature in her wildest moods,--the last two, the wildest and hardest of
all, having been spent in groping for the gold which lies in the shadow
of the Arctic Circle. When the yearning sickness came upon him, he was
not surprised, for he was a practical man and had seen other men thus
stricken. But he showed no sign of his malady, save that he worked
harder. All summer he fought mosquitoes and washed the sure-thing bars
of the Stuart River for a double grubstake. Then he floated a raft of
houselogs down the Yukon to Forty Mile, and put together as comfortable
a cabin as any the camp could boast of. In fact, it showed such cozy
promise that many men elected to be his partner and to come and live
with him. But he crushed their aspirations with rough speech, peculiar
for its strength and brevity, and bought a double supply of grub from
the trading-post.

As has been noted, 'Scruff' Mackenzie was a practical man. If he wanted
a thing he usually got it, but in doing so, went no farther out of his
way than was necessary. Though a son of toil and hardship, he was
averse to a journey of six hundred miles on the ice, a second of two
thousand miles on the ocean, and still a third thousand miles or so to
his last stamping-grounds,--all in the mere quest of a wife. Life was
too short. So he rounded up his dogs, lashed a curious freight to his
sled, and faced across the divide whose westward slopes were drained by
the head-reaches of the Tanana.

He was a sturdy traveler, and his wolf-dogs could work harder and
travel farther on less grub than any other team in the Yukon. Three
weeks later he strode into a hunting-camp of the Upper Tanana Sticks.
They marveled at his temerity; for they had a bad name and had been
known to kill white men for as trifling a thing as a sharp ax or a
broken rifle.

But he went among them single-handed, his bearing being a delicious
composite of humility, familiarity, sang-froid, and insolence. It
required a deft hand and deep knowledge of the barbaric mind
effectually to handle such diverse weapons; but he was a past-master in
the art, knowing when to conciliate and when to threaten with Jove-like
wrath.

He first made obeisance to the Chief Thling-Tinneh, presenting him with
a couple of pounds of black tea and tobacco, and thereby winning his
most cordial regard. Then he mingled with the men and maidens, and that
night gave a potlach.

The snow was beaten down in the form of an oblong, perhaps a hundred
feet in length and quarter as many across. Down the center a long fire
was built, while either side was carpeted with spruce boughs. The
lodges were forsaken, and the fivescore or so members of the tribe gave
tongue to their folk-chants in honor of their guest.

'Scruff' Mackenzie's two years had taught him the not many hundred
words of their vocabulary, and he had likewise conquered their deep
gutturals, their Japanese idioms, constructions, and honorific and
agglutinative particles. So he made oration after their manner,
satisfying their instinctive poetry-love with crude flights of
eloquence and metaphorical contortions. After Thling-Tinneh and the
Shaman had responded in kind, he made trifling presents to the menfolk,
joined in their singing, and proved an expert in their fifty-two-stick
gambling game.

And they smoked his tobacco and were pleased. But among the younger men
there was a defiant attitude, a spirit of braggadocio, easily
understood by the raw insinuations of the toothless squaws and the
giggling of the maidens. They had known few white men, 'Sons of the
Wolf,' but from those few they had learned strange lessons.

Nor had 'Scruff' Mackenzie, for all his seeming carelessness, failed to
note these phenomena. In truth, rolled in his sleeping-furs, he thought
it all over, thought seriously, and emptied many pipes in mapping out a
campaign. One maiden only had caught his fancy,--none other than
Zarinska, daughter to the chief. In features, form, and poise,
answering more nearly to the white man's type of beauty, she was almost
an anomaly among her tribal sisters. He would possess her, make her his
wife, and name her--ah, he would name her Gertrude! Having thus
decided, he rolled over on his side and dropped off to sleep, a true
son of his all-conquering race, a Samson among the Philistines.

It was slow work and a stiff game; but 'Scruff' Mackenzie maneuvered
cunningly, with an unconcern which served to puzzle the Sticks. He took
great care to impress the men that he was a sure shot and a mighty
hunter, and the camp rang with his plaudits when he brought down a
moose at six hundred yards. Of a night he visited in Chief
Thling-Tinneh's lodge of moose and cariboo skins, talking big and
dispensing tobacco with a lavish hand. Nor did he fail to likewise
honor the Shaman; for he realized the medicine-man's influence with his
people, and was anxious to make of him an ally. But that worthy was
high and mighty, refused to be propitiated, and was unerringly marked
down as a prospective enemy.

Though no opening presented for an interview with Zarinska, Mackenzie
stole many a glance to her, giving fair warning of his intent. And well
she knew, yet coquettishly surrounded herself with a ring of women
whenever the men were away and he had a chance. But he was in no hurry;
besides, he knew she could not help but think of him, and a few days of
such thought would only better his suit.

At last, one night, when he deemed the time to be ripe, he abruptly
left the chief's smoky dwelling and hastened to a neighboring lodge. As
usual, she sat with squaws and maidens about her, all engaged in sewing
moccasins and beadwork. They laughed at his entrance, and badinage,
which linked Zarinska to him, ran high. But one after the other they
were unceremoniously bundled into the outer snow, whence they hurried
to spread the tale through all the camp.

His cause was well pleaded, in her tongue, for she did not know his,
and at the end of two hours he rose to go.

'So Zarinska will come to the White Man's lodge? Good! I go now to have
talk with thy father, for he may not be so minded. And I will give him
many tokens; but he must not ask too much. If he say no? Good! Zarinska
shall yet come to the White Man's lodge.'

He had already lifted the skin flap to depart, when a low exclamation
brought him back to the girl's side. She brought herself to her knees
on the bearskin mat, her face aglow with true Eve-light, and shyly
unbuckled his heavy belt. He looked down, perplexed, suspicious, his
ears alert for the slightest sound without.

But her next move disarmed his doubt, and he smiled with pleasure. She
took from her sewing bag a moosehide sheath, brave with bright
beadwork, fantastically designed. She drew his great hunting-knife,
gazed reverently along the keen edge, half tempted to try it with her
thumb, and shot it into place in its new home. Then she slipped the
sheath along the belt to its customary resting-place, just above the
hip.  For all the world, it was like a scene of olden time,--a lady and
her knight.

Mackenzie drew her up full height and swept her red lips with his
moustache, the, to her, foreign caress of the Wolf. It was a meeting of
the stone age and the steel; but she was none the less a woman, as her
crimson cheeks and the luminous softness of her eyes attested.

There was a thrill of excitement in the air as 'Scruff' Mackenzie, a
bulky bundle under his arm, threw open the flap of Thling-Tinneh's
tent. Children were running about in the open, dragging dry wood to the
scene of the potlach, a babble of women's voices was growing in
intensity, the young men were consulting in sullen groups, while from
the Shaman's lodge rose the eerie sounds of an incantation.

The chief was alone with his blear-eyed wife, but a glance sufficed to
tell Mackenzie that the news was already told. So he plunged at once
into the business, shifting the beaded sheath prominently to the fore
as advertisement of the betrothal.

'O Thling-Tinneh, mighty chief of the Sticks And the land of the
Tanana, ruler of the salmon and the bear, the moose and the cariboo!
The White Man is before thee with a great purpose. Many moons has his
lodge been empty, and he is lonely. And his heart has eaten itself in
silence, and grown hungry for a woman to sit beside him in his lodge,
to meet him from the hunt with warm fire and good food. He has heard
strange things, the patter of baby moccasins and the sound of
children's voices. And one night a vision came upon him, and he beheld
the Raven, who is thy father, the great Raven, who is the father of all
the Sticks. And the Raven spake to the lonely White Man, saying: "Bind
thou thy moccasins upon thee, and gird thy snow-shoes on, and lash thy
sled with food for many sleeps and fine tokens for the Chief
Thling-Tinneh. For thou shalt turn thy face to where the mid-spring sun
is wont to sink below the land and journey to this great chief's
hunting-grounds. There thou shalt make big presents, and Thling-Tinneh,
who is my son, shall become to thee as a father. In his lodge there is
a maiden into whom I breathed the breath of life for thee. This maiden
shalt thou take to wife." 'O Chief, thus spake the great Raven; thus do
I lay many presents at thy feet; thus am I come to take thy daughter!'
The old man drew his furs about him with crude consciousness of
royalty, but delayed reply while a youngster crept in, delivered a
quick message to appear before the council, and was gone.

'O White Man, whom we have named Moose-Killer, also known as the Wolf,
and the Son of the Wolf! We know thou comest of a mighty race; we are
proud to have thee our potlach-guest; but the king-salmon does not mate
with the dogsalmon, nor the Raven with the Wolf.' 'Not so!' cried
Mackenzie. 'The daughters of the Raven have I met in the camps of the
Wolf,--the squaw of Mortimer, the squaw of Tregidgo, the squaw of
Barnaby, who came two ice-runs back, and I have heard of other squaws,
though my eyes beheld them not.' 'Son, your words are true; but it were
evil mating, like the water with the sand, like the snow-flake with the
sun. But met you one Mason and his squaw' No?

He came ten ice-runs ago,--the first of all the Wolves. And with him
there was a mighty man, straight as a willow-shoot, and tall; strong as
the bald-faced grizzly, with a heart like the full summer moon; his-'
'Oh!' interrupted Mackenzie, recognizing the well-known Northland
figure, 'Malemute Kid!' 'The same,--a mighty man. But saw you aught of
the squaw? She was full sister to Zarinska.' 'Nay, Chief; but I have
heard. Mason--far, far to the north, a spruce-tree, heavy with years,
crushed out his life beneath. But his love was great, and he had much
gold. With this, and her boy, she journeyed countless sleeps toward the
winter's noonday sun, and there she yet lives,--no biting frost, no
snow, no summer's midnight sun, no winter's noonday night.'

A second messenger interrupted with imperative summons from the council.

As Mackenzie threw him into the snow, he caught a glimpse of the
swaying forms before the council-fire, heard the deep basses of the men
in rhythmic chant, and knew the Shaman was fanning the anger of his
people. Time pressed. He turned upon the chief.

'Come! I wish thy child. And now, see! Here are tobacco, tea, many cups
of sugar, warm blankets, handkerchiefs, both good and large; and here,
a true rifle, with many bullets and much powder.' 'Nay,' replied the
old man, struggling against the great wealth spread before him. 'Even
now are my people come together. They will not have this marriage.'

'But thou art chief.' 'Yet do my young men rage because the Wolves have
taken their maidens so that they may not marry.' 'Listen, O
Thling-Tinneh! Ere the night has passed into the day, the Wolf shall
face his dogs to the Mountains of the East and fare forth to the
Country of the Yukon. And Zarinska shall break trail for his dogs.'
'And ere the night has gained its middle, my young men may fling to the
dogs the flesh of the Wolf, and his bones be scattered in the snow till
the springtime lay them bare.' It was threat and counter-threat.
Mackenzie's bronzed face flushed darkly. He raised his voice. The old
squaw, who till now had sat an impassive spectator, made to creep by
him for the door.

The song of the men broke suddenly and there was a hubbub of many
voices as he whirled the old woman roughly to her couch of skins.

'Again I cry--listen, O Thling-Tinneh! The Wolf dies with teeth
fast-locked, and with him there shall sleep ten of thy strongest
men,--men who are needed, for the hunting is not begun, and the fishing
is not many moons away. And again, of what profit should I die? I know
the custom of thy people; thy share of my wealth shall be very small.
Grant me thy child, and it shall all be thine. And yet again, my
brothers will come, and they are many, and their maws are never filled;
and the daughters of the Raven shall bear children in the lodges of the
Wolf. My people are greater than thy people. It is destiny. Grant, and
all this wealth is thine.' Moccasins were crunching the snow without.
Mackenzie threw his rifle to cock, and loosened the twin Colts in his
belt.

'Grant, O Chief!' 'And yet will my people say no.' 'Grant, and the
wealth is thine. Then shall I deal with thy people after.' 'The Wolf
will have it so. I will take his tokens,--but I would warn him.'
Mackenzie passed over the goods, taking care to clog the rifle's
ejector, and capping the bargain with a kaleidoscopic silk kerchief.
The Shaman and half a dozen young braves entered, but he shouldered
boldly among them and passed out.

'Pack!' was his laconic greeting to Zarinska as he passed her lodge and
hurried to harness his dogs. A few minutes later he swept into the
council at the head of the team, the woman by his side. He took his
place at the upper end of the oblong, by the side of the chief. To his
left, a step to the rear, he stationed Zarinska, her proper place.
Besides, the time was ripe for mischief, and there was need to guard
his back.

On either side, the men crouched to the fire, their voices lifted in a
folk-chant out of the forgotten past. Full of strange, halting cadences
and haunting recurrences, it was not beautiful. 'Fearful' may
inadequately express it. At the lower end, under the eye of the Shaman,
danced half a score of women. Stern were his reproofs of those who did
not wholly abandon themselves to the ecstasy of the rite. Half hidden
in their heavy masses of raven hair, all dishevelled and falling to
their waists, they slowly swayed to and fro, their forms rippling to an
ever-changing rhythm.

It was a weird scene; an anachronism. To the south, the nineteenth
century was reeling off the few years of its last decade; here
flourished man primeval, a shade removed from the prehistoric
cave-dweller, forgotten fragment of the Elder World. The tawny
wolf-dogs sat between their skin-clad masters or fought for room, the
firelight cast backward from their red eyes and dripping fangs. The
woods, in ghostly shroud, slept on unheeding.

The White Silence, for the moment driven to the rimming forest, seemed
ever crushing inward; the stars danced with great leaps, as is their
wont in the time of the Great Cold; while the Spirits of the Pole
trailed their robes of glory athwart the heavens.

'Scruff' Mackenzie dimly realized the wild grandeur of the setting as
his eyes ranged down the fur-fringed sides in quest of missing faces.
They rested for a moment on a newborn babe, suckling at its mother's
naked breast. It was forty below,--seven and odd degrees of frost. He
thought of the tender women of his own race and smiled grimly. Yet from
the loins of some such tender woman had he sprung with a kingly
inheritance,--an inheritance which gave to him and his dominance over
the land and sea, over the animals and the peoples of all the zones.
Single-handed against fivescore, girt by the Arctic winter, far from
his own, he felt the prompting of his heritage, the desire to possess,
the wild danger--love, the thrill of battle, the power to conquer or to
die.

The singing and the dancing ceased, and the Shaman flared up in rude
eloquence.

Through the sinuosities of their vast mythology, he worked cunningly
upon the credulity of his people. The case was strong. Opposing the
creative principles as embodied in the Crow and the Raven, he
stigmatized Mackenzie as the Wolf, the fighting and the destructive
principle. Not only was the combat of these forces spiritual, but men
fought, each to his totem. They were the children of Jelchs, the Raven,
the Promethean fire-bringer; Mackenzie was the child of the Wolf, or in
other words, the Devil. For them to bring a truce to this perpetual
warfare, to marry their daughters to the arch-enemy, were treason and
blasphemy of the highest order. No phrase was harsh nor figure vile
enough in branding Mackenzie as a sneaking interloper and emissary of
Satan. There was a subdued, savage roar in the deep chests of his
listeners as he took the swing of his peroration.

'Aye, my brothers, Jelchs is all-powerful! Did he not bring
heaven-borne fire that we might be warm? Did he not draw the sun, moon,
and stars, from their holes that we might see? Did he not teach us that
we might fight the Spirits of Famine and of Frost? But now Jelchs is
angry with his children, and they are grown to a handful, and he will
not help.

'For they have forgotten him, and done evil things, and trod bad
trails, and taken his enemies into their lodges to sit by their fires.
And the Raven is sorrowful at the wickedness of his children; but when
they shall rise up and show they have come back, he will come out of
the darkness to aid them. O brothers! the Fire-Bringer has whispered
messages to thy Shaman; the same shall ye hear. Let the young men take
the young women to their lodges; let them fly at the throat of the
Wolf; let them be undying in their enmity! Then shall their women
become fruitful and they shall multiply into a mighty people! And the
Raven shall lead great tribes of their fathers and their fathers'
fathers from out of the North; and they shall beat back the Wolves till
they are as last year's campfires; and they shall again come to rule
over all the land! 'Tis the message of Jelchs, the Raven.' This
foreshadowing of the Messiah's coming brought a hoarse howl from the
Sticks as they leaped to their feet. Mackenzie slipped the thumbs of
his mittens and waited. There was a clamor for the 'Fox,' not to be
stilled till one of the young men stepped forward to speak.

'Brothers! The Shaman has spoken wisely. The Wolves have taken our
women, and our men are childless. We are grown to a handful. The Wolves
have taken our warm furs and given for them evil spirits which dwell in
bottles, and clothes which come not from the beaver or the lynx, but
are made from the grass.

And they are not warm, and our men die of strange sicknesses. I, the
Fox, have taken no woman to wife; and why? Twice have the maidens which
pleased me gone to the camps of the Wolf. Even now have I laid by skins
of the beaver, of the moose, of the cariboo, that I might win favor in
the eyes of Thling-Tinneh, that I might marry Zarinska, his daughter.
Even now are her snow-shoes bound to her feet, ready to break trail for
the dogs of the Wolf. Nor do I speak for myself alone.

As I have done, so has the Bear. He, too, had fain been the father of
her children, and many skins has he cured thereto. I speak for all the
young men who know not wives. The Wolves are ever hungry. Always do
they take the choice meat at the killing. To the Ravens are left the
leavings.

'There is Gugkla,' he cried, brutally pointing out one of the women,
who was a cripple.

'Her legs are bent like the ribs of a birch canoe. She cannot gather
wood nor carry the meat of the hunters. Did the Wolves choose her?'
'Ai! ai!' vociferated his tribesmen.

'There is Moyri, whose eyes are crossed by the Evil Spirit. Even the
babes are affrighted when they gaze upon her, and it is said the
bald-face gives her the trail.

'Was she chosen?' Again the cruel applause rang out.

'And there sits Pischet. She does not hearken to my words. Never has
she heard the cry of the chit-chat, the voice of her husband, the
babble of her child.

'She lives in the White Silence. Cared the Wolves aught for her? No!
Theirs is the choice of the kill; ours is the leavings.

'Brothers, it shall not be! No more shall the Wolves slink among our
campfires. The time is come.' A great streamer of fire, the aurora
borealis, purple, green, and yellow, shot across the zenith, bridging
horizon to horizon. With head thrown back and arms extended, he swayed
to his climax.

'Behold! The spirits of our fathers have arisen and great deeds are
afoot this night!' He stepped back, and another young man somewhat
diffidently came forward, pushed on by his comrades. He towered a full
head above them, his broad chest defiantly bared to the frost. He swung
tentatively from one foot to the other.

Words halted upon his tongue, and he was ill at ease. His face was
horrible to look upon, for it had at one time been half torn away by
some terrific blow. At last he struck his breast with his clenched
fist, drawing sound as from a drum, and his voice rumbled forth as does
the surf from an ocean cavern.

'I am the Bear,--the Silver-Tip and the Son of the Silver-Tip! When my
voice was yet as a girl's, I slew the lynx, the moose, and the cariboo;
when it whistled like the wolverines from under a cache, I crossed the
Mountains of the South and slew three of the White Rivers; when it
became as the roar of the Chinook, I met the bald-faced grizzly, but
gave no trail.' At this he paused, his hand significantly sweeping
across his hideous scars.

'I am not as the Fox. My tongue is frozen like the river. I cannot make
great talk. My words are few. The Fox says great deeds are afoot this
night. Good! Talk flows from his tongue like the freshets of the
spring, but he is chary of deeds.

'This night shall I do battle with the Wolf. I shall slay him, and
Zarinska shall sit by my fire. The Bear has spoken.' Though pandemonium
raged about him, 'Scruff' Mackenzie held his ground.

Aware how useless was the rifle at close quarters, he slipped both
holsters to the fore, ready for action, and drew his mittens till his
hands were barely shielded by the elbow gauntlets. He knew there was no
hope in attack en masse, but true to his boast, was prepared to die
with teeth fast-locked. But the Bear restrained his comrades, beating
back the more impetuous with his terrible fist. As the tumult began to
die away, Mackenzie shot a glance in the direction of Zarinska. It was
a superb picture. She was leaning forward on her snow-shoes, lips apart
and nostrils quivering, like a tigress about to spring. Her great black
eyes were fixed upon her tribesmen, in fear and defiance. So extreme
the tension, she had forgotten to breathe. With one hand pressed
spasmodically against her breast and the other as tightly gripped about
the dog-whip, she was as turned to stone. Even as he looked, relief
came to her. Her muscles loosened; with a heavy sigh she settled back,
giving him a look of more than love--of worship.

Thling-Tinneh was trying to speak, but his people drowned his voice.
Then Mackenzie strode forward. The Fox opened his mouth to a piercing
yell, but so savagely did Mackenzie whirl upon him that he shrank back,
his larynx all agurgle with suppressed sound. His discomfiture was
greeted with roars of laughter, and served to soothe his fellows to a
listening mood.

'Brothers! The White Man, whom ye have chosen to call the Wolf, came
among you with fair words. He was not like the Innuit; he spoke not
lies. He came as a friend, as one who would be a brother. But your men
have had their say, and the time for soft words is past.

'First, I will tell you that the Shaman has an evil tongue and is a
false prophet, that the messages he spake are not those of the
Fire-Bringer. His ears are locked to the voice of the Raven, and out of
his own head he weaves cunning fancies, and he has made fools of you.
He has no power.

'When the dogs were killed and eaten, and your stomachs were heavy with
untanned hide and strips of moccasins; when the old men died, and the
old women died, and the babes at the dry dugs of the mothers died; when
the land was dark, and ye perished as do the salmon in the fall; aye,
when the famine was upon you, did the Shaman bring reward to your
hunters? did the Shaman put meat in your bellies? Again I say, the
Shaman is without power. Thus I spit upon his face!' Though taken aback
by the sacrilege, there was no uproar. Some of the women were even
frightened, but among the men there was an uplifting, as though in
preparation or anticipation of the miracle. All eyes were turned upon
the two central figures. The priest realized the crucial moment, felt
his power tottering, opened his mouth in denunciation, but fled
backward before the truculent advance, upraised fist, and flashing
eyes, of Mackenzie. He sneered and resumed.

'Was I stricken dead? Did the lightning burn me? Did the stars fall
from the sky and crush me? Pish! I have done with the dog. Now will I
tell you of my people, who are the mightiest of all the peoples, who
rule in all the lands. At first we hunt as I hunt, alone.

'After that we hunt in packs; and at last, like the cariboo-run, we
sweep across all the land.

'Those whom we take into our lodges live; those who will not come die.
Zarinska is a comely maiden, full and strong, fit to become the mother
of Wolves. Though I die, such shall she become; for my brothers are
many, and they will follow the scent of my dogs.

'Listen to the Law of the Wolf: Whoso taketh the life of one Wolf, the
forfeit shall ten of his people pay. In many lands has the price been
paid; in many lands shall it yet be paid.

'Now will I deal with the Fox and the Bear. It seems they have cast
eyes upon the maiden. So? Behold, I have bought her! Thling-Tinneh
leans upon the rifle; the goods of purchase are by his fire. Yet will I
be fair to the young men. To the Fox, whose tongue is dry with many
words, will I give of tobacco five long plugs.

'Thus will his mouth be wetted that he may make much noise in the
council. But to the Bear, of whom I am well proud, will I give of
blankets two; of flour, twenty cups; of tobacco, double that of the
Fox; and if he fare with me over the Mountains of the East, then will I
give him a rifle, mate to Thling-Tinneh's. If not? Good! The Wolf is
weary of speech. Yet once again will he say the Law: Whoso taketh the
life of one Wolf, the forfeit shall ten of his people pay.'

Mackenzie smiled as he stepped back to his old position, but at heart
he was full of trouble. The night was yet dark. The girl came to his
side, and he listened closely as she told of the Bear's battle-tricks
with the knife.

The decision was for war. In a trice, scores of moccasins were widening
the space of beaten snow by the fire. There was much chatter about the
seeming defeat of the Shaman; some averred he had but withheld his
power, while others conned past events and agreed with the Wolf. The
Bear came to the center of the battle-ground, a long naked
hunting-knife of Russian make in his hand. The Fox called attention to
Mackenzie's revolvers; so he stripped his belt, buckling it about
Zarinska, into whose hands he also entrusted his rifle. She shook her
head that she could not shoot,--small chance had a woman to handle such
precious things.

'Then, if danger come by my back, cry aloud, "My husband!" No; thus,
"My husband!"'

He laughed as she repeated it, pinched her cheek, and reentered the
circle. Not only in reach and stature had the Bear the advantage of
him, but his blade was longer by a good two inches. 'Scruff' Mackenzie
had looked into the eyes of men before, and he knew it was a man who
stood against him; yet he quickened to the glint of light on the steel,
to the dominant pulse of his race.

Time and again he was forced to the edge of the fire or the deep snow,
and time and again, with the foot tactics of the pugilist, he worked
back to the center.  Not a voice was lifted in encouragement, while his
antagonist was heartened with applause, suggestions, and warnings. But
his teeth only shut the tighter as the knives clashed together, and he
thrust or eluded with a coolness born of conscious strength. At first
he felt compassion for his enemy; but this fled before the primal
instinct of life, which in turn gave way to the lust of slaughter. The
ten thousand years of culture fell from him, and he was a cave-dweller,
doing battle for his female.

Twice he pricked the Bear, getting away unscathed; but the third time
caught, and to save himself, free hands closed on fighting hands, and
they came together.

Then did he realize the tremendous strength of his opponent. His
muscles were knotted in painful lumps, and cords and tendons threatened
to snap with the strain; yet nearer and nearer came the Russian steel.
He tried to break away, but only weakened himself. The fur-clad circle
closed in, certain of and anxious to see the final stroke. But with
wrestler's trick, swinging partly to the side, he struck at his
adversary with his head. Involuntarily the Bear leaned back, disturbing
his center of gravity. Simultaneous with this, Mackenzie tripped
properly and threw his whole weight forward, hurling him clear through
the circle into the deep snow. The Bear floundered out and came back
full tilt.

'O my husband!' Zarinska's voice rang out, vibrant with danger.

To the twang of a bow-string, Mackenzie swept low to the ground, and a
bonebarbed arrow passed over him into the breast of the Bear, whose
momentum carried him over his crouching foe. The next instant Mackenzie
was up and about. The bear lay motionless, but across the fire was the
Shaman, drawing a second arrow. Mackenzie's knife leaped short in the
air. He caught the heavy blade by the point. There was a flash of light
as it spanned the fire. Then the Shaman, the hilt alone appearing
without his throat, swayed and pitched forward into the glowing embers.

Click! Click!--the Fox had possessed himself of Thling-Tinneh's rifle
and was vainly trying to throw a shell into place. But he dropped it at
the sound of Mackenzie's laughter.

'So the Fox has not learned the way of the plaything? He is yet a woman.

'Come! Bring it, that I may show thee!' The Fox hesitated.

'Come, I say!' He slouched forward like a beaten cur.

'Thus, and thus; so the thing is done.' A shell flew into place and the
trigger was at cock as Mackenzie brought it to shoulder.

'The Fox has said great deeds were afoot this night, and he spoke true.
There have been great deeds, yet least among them were those of the
Fox. Is he still intent to take Zarinska to his lodge? Is he minded to
tread the trail already broken by the Shaman and the Bear?

'No? Good!'

Mackenzie turned contemptuously and drew his knife from the priest's
throat.

'Are any of the young men so minded? If so, the Wolf will take them by
two and three till none are left. No? Good! Thling-Tinneh, I now give
thee this rifle a second time. If, in the days to come, thou shouldst
journey to the Country of the Yukon, know thou that there shall always
be a place and much food by the fire of the Wolf. The night is now
passing into the day. I go, but I may come again. And for the last
time, remember the Law of the Wolf!' He was supernatural in their sight
as he rejoined Zarinska. She took her place at the head of the team,
and the dogs swung into motion. A few moments later they were swallowed
up by the ghostly forest. Till now Mackenzie had waited; he slipped
into his snow-shoes to follow.

'Has the Wolf forgotten the five long plugs?' Mackenzie turned upon the
Fox angrily; then the humor of it struck him.

'I will give thee one short plug.' 'As the Wolf sees fit,' meekly
responded the Fox, stretching out his hand.



The Men of Forty Mile

When Big Jim Belden ventured the apparently innocuous proposition that
mush-ice was 'rather pecooliar,' he little dreamed of what it would
lead to.

Neither did Lon McFane, when he affirmed that anchor-ice was even more
so; nor did Bettles, as he instantly disagreed, declaring the very
existence of such a form to be a bugaboo.

'An' ye'd be tellin' me this,' cried Lon, 'after the years ye've spint
in the land! An' we atin' out the same pot this many's the day!' 'But
the thing's agin reasin,' insisted Bettles.

'Look you, water's warmer than ice--' 'An' little the difference, once
ye break through.'

'Still it's warmer, because it ain't froze. An' you say it freezes on
the bottom?' 'Only the anchor-ice, David, only the anchor-ice. An' have
ye niver drifted along, the water clear as glass, whin suddin, belike a
cloud over the sun, the mushy-ice comes bubblin' up an' up till from
bank to bank an' bind to bind it's drapin' the river like a first
snowfall?' 'Unh, hunh! more'n once when I took a doze at the
steering-oar. But it allus come out the nighest side-channel, an' not
bubblin' up an' up.' 'But with niver a wink at the helm?'

'No; nor you. It's agin reason. I'll leave it to any man!' Bettles
appealed to the circle about the stove, but the fight was on between
himself and Lon McFane.

'Reason or no reason, it's the truth I'm tellin' ye. Last fall, a year
gone, 'twas Sitka Charley and meself saw the sight, droppin' down the
riffle ye'll remember below Fort Reliance. An' regular fall weather it
was--the glint o' the sun on the golden larch an' the quakin' aspens;
an' the glister of light on ivery ripple; an' beyand, the winter an'
the blue haze of the North comin' down hand in hand. It's well ye know
the same, with a fringe to the river an' the ice formin' thick in the
eddies--an' a snap an' sparkle to the air, an' ye a-feelin' it through
all yer blood, a-takin' new lease of life with ivery suck of it. 'Tis
then, me boy, the world grows small an' the wandtherlust lays ye by the
heels.

'But it's meself as wandthers. As I was sayin', we a-paddlin', with
niver a sign of ice, barrin' that by the eddies, when the Injun lifts
his paddle an' sings out, "Lon McFane! Look ye below!" So have I heard,
but niver thought to see! As ye know, Sitka Charley, like meself, niver
drew first breath in the land; so the sight was new. Then we drifted,
with a head over ayther side, peerin' down through the sparkly water.
For the world like the days I spint with the pearlers, watchin' the
coral banks a-growin' the same as so many gardens under the sea. There
it was, the anchor-ice, clingin' an' clusterin' to ivery rock, after
the manner of the white coral.

'But the best of the sight was to come. Just after clearin' the tail of
the riffle, the water turns quick the color of milk, an' the top of it
in wee circles, as when the graylin' rise in the spring, or there's a
splatter of wet from the sky. 'Twas the anchor-ice comin' up. To the
right, to the lift, as far as iver a man cud see, the water was covered
with the same.

An' like so much porridge it was, slickin' along the bark of the canoe,
stickin' like glue to the paddles. It's many's the time I shot the
self-same riffle before, and it's many's the time after, but niver a
wink of the same have I seen. 'Twas the sight of a lifetime.' 'Do
tell!' dryly commented Bettles. 'D'ye think I'd b'lieve such a yarn?
I'd ruther say the glister of light'd gone to your eyes, and the snap
of the air to your tongue.' ''Twas me own eyes that beheld it, an' if
Sitka Charley was here, he'd be the lad to back me.' 'But facts is
facts, an' they ain't no gettin' round 'em. It ain't in the nature of
things for the water furtherest away from the air to freeze first.'
'But me own eyes-' 'Don't git het up over it,' admonished Bettles, as
the quick Celtic anger began to mount.

'Then yer not after belavin' me?' 'Sence you're so blamed forehanded
about it, no; I'd b'lieve nature first, and facts.'

'Is it the lie ye'd be givin' me?' threatened Lon. 'Ye'd better be
askin' that Siwash wife of yours. I'll lave it to her, for the truth I
spake.' Bettles flared up in sudden wrath. The Irishman had unwittingly
wounded him; for his wife was the half-breed daughter of a Russian
fur-trader, married to him in the Greek Mission of Nulato, a thousand
miles or so down the Yukon, thus being of much higher caste than the
common Siwash, or native, wife. It was a mere Northland nuance, which
none but the Northland adventurer may understand.

'I reckon you kin take it that way,' was his deliberate affirmation.

The next instant Lon McFane had stretched him on the floor, the circle
was broken up, and half a dozen men had stepped between.

Bettles came to his feet, wiping the blood from his mouth. 'It hain't
new, this takin' and payin' of blows, and don't you never think but
that this will be squared.' 'An' niver in me life did I take the lie
from mortal man,' was the retort courteous. 'An' it's an avil day I'll
not be to hand, waitin' an' willin' to help ye lift yer debts, barrin'
no manner of way.'

'Still got that 38-55?' Lon nodded.

'But you'd better git a more likely caliber. Mine'll rip holes through
you the size of walnuts.'

'Niver fear; it's me own slugs smell their way with soft noses, an'
they'll spread like flapjacks against the coming out beyand. An'
when'll I have the pleasure of waitin' on ye? The waterhole's a
strikin' locality.' ''Tain't bad. Jest be there in an hour, and you
won't set long on my coming.' Both men mittened and left the Post,
their ears closed to the remonstrances of their comrades. It was such a
little thing; yet with such men, little things, nourished by quick
tempers and stubborn natures, soon blossomed into big things.

Besides, the art of burning to bedrock still lay in the womb of the
future, and the men of Forty-Mile, shut in by the long Arctic winter,
grew high-stomached with overeating and enforced idleness, and became
as irritable as do the bees in the fall of the year when the hives are
overstocked with honey.

There was no law in the land. The mounted police was also a thing of
the future. Each man measured an offense, and meted out the punishment
inasmuch as it affected himself.

Rarely had combined action been necessary, and never in all the dreary
history of the camp had the eighth article of the Decalogue been
violated.

Big Jim Belden called an impromptu meeting. Scruff Mackenzie was placed
as temporary chairman, and a messenger dispatched to solicit Father
Roubeau's good offices. Their position was paradoxical, and they knew
it. By the right of might could they interfere to prevent the duel; yet
such action, while in direct line with their wishes, went counter to
their opinions. While their rough-hewn, obsolete ethics recognized the
individual prerogative of wiping out blow with blow, they could not
bear to think of two good comrades, such as Bettles and McFane, meeting
in deadly battle. Deeming the man who would not fight on provocation a
dastard, when brought to the test it seemed wrong that he should fight.

But a scurry of moccasins and loud cries, rounded off with a
pistol-shot, interrupted the discussion. Then the storm-doors opened
and Malemute Kid entered, a smoking Colt's in his hand, and a merry
light in his eye.

'I got him.' He replaced the empty shell, and added, 'Your dog,
Scruff.' 'Yellow Fang?'

Mackenzie asked.

'No; the lop-eared one.' 'The devil! Nothing the matter with him.'
'Come out and take a look.' 'That's all right after all. Buess he's got
'em, too. Yellow Fang came back this morning and took a chunk out of
him, and came near to making a widower of me. Made a rush for Zarinska,
but she whisked her skirts in his face and escaped with the loss of the
same and a good roll in the snow. Then he took to the woods again. Hope
he don't come back. Lost any yourself?' 'One--the best one of the
pack--Shookum. Started amuck this morning, but didn't get very far. Ran
foul of Sitka Charley's team, and they scattered him all over the
street. And now two of them are loose, and raging mad; so you see he
got his work in. The dog census will be small in the spring if we don't
do something.'

'And the man census, too.' 'How's that? Who's in trouble now?' 'Oh,
Bettles and Lon McFane had an argument, and they'll be down by the
waterhole in a few minutes to settle it.' The incident was repeated for
his benefit, and Malemute Kid, accustomed to an obedience which his
fellow men never failed to render, took charge of the affair. His
quickly formulated plan was explained, and they promised to follow his
lead implicitly.

'So you see,' he concluded, 'we do not actually take away their
privilege of fighting; and yet I don't believe they'll fight when they
see the beauty of the scheme. Life's a game and men the gamblers.
They'll stake their whole pile on the one chance in a thousand.

'Take away that one chance, and--they won't play.' He turned to the man
in charge of the Post. 'Storekeeper, weight out three fathoms of your
best half-inch manila.

'We'll establish a precedent which will last the men of Forty-Mile to
the end of time,' he prophesied. Then he coiled the rope about his arm
and led his followers out of doors, just in time to meet the principals.

'What danged right'd he to fetch my wife in?' thundered Bettles to the
soothing overtures of a friend. ''Twa'n't called for,' he concluded
decisively. ''Twa'n't called for,' he reiterated again and again,
pacing up and down and waiting for Lon McFane.

And Lon McFane--his face was hot and tongue rapid as he flaunted
insurrection in the face of the Church. 'Then, father,' he cried, 'it's
with an aisy heart I'll roll in me flamy blankets, the broad of me back
on a bed of coals. Niver shall it be said that Lon McFane took a lie
'twixt the teeth without iver liftin' a hand! An' I'll not ask a
blessin'. The years have been wild, but it's the heart was in the right
place.' 'But it's not the heart, Lon,' interposed Father Roubeau; 'It's
pride that bids you forth to slay your fellow man.' 'Yer Frinch,' Lon
replied. And then, turning to leave him, 'An' will ye say a mass if the
luck is against me?' But the priest smiled, thrust his moccasined feet
to the fore, and went out upon the white breast of the silent river. A
packed trail, the width of a sixteen-inch sled, led out to the
waterhole. On either side lay the deep, soft snow. The men trod in
single file, without conversation; and the black-stoled priest in their
midst gave to the function the solemn aspect of a funeral. It was a
warm winter's day for Forty-Mile--a day in which the sky, filled with
heaviness, drew closer to the earth, and the mercury sought the
unwonted level of twenty below. But there was no cheer in the warmth.
There was little air in the upper strata, and the clouds hung
motionless, giving sullen promise of an early snowfall. And the earth,
unresponsive, made no preparation, content in its hibernation.

When the waterhole was reached, Bettles, having evidently reviewed the
quarrel during the silent walk, burst out in a final ''Twa'n't called
for,' while Lon McFane kept grim silence. Indignation so choked him
that he could not speak.

Yet deep down, whenever their own wrongs were not uppermost, both men
wondered at their comrades. They had expected opposition, and this
tacit acquiescence hurt them. It seemed more was due them from the men
they had been so close with, and they felt a vague sense of wrong,
rebelling at the thought of so many of their brothers coming out, as on
a gala occasion, without one word of protest, to see them shoot each
other down. It appeared their worth had diminished in the eyes of the
community. The proceedings puzzled them.

'Back to back, David. An' will it be fifty paces to the man, or double
the quantity?'

'Fifty,' was the sanguinary reply, grunted out, yet sharply cut.

But the new manila, not prominently displayed, but casually coiled
about Malemute Kid's arm, caught the quick eye of the Irishman, and
thrilled him with a suspicious fear.

'An' what are ye doin' with the rope?' 'Hurry up!' Malemute Kid glanced
at his watch.

'I've a batch of bread in the cabin, and I don't want it to fall.
Besides, my feet are getting cold.' The rest of the men manifested
their impatience in various suggestive ways.

'But the rope, Kid' It's bran' new, an' sure yer bread's not that heavy
it needs raisin' with the like of that?' Bettles by this time had faced
around. Father Roubeau, the humor of the situation just dawning on him,
hid a smile behind his mittened hand.

'No, Lon; this rope was made for a man.' Malemute Kid could be very
impressive on occasion.

'What man?' Bettles was becoming aware of a personal interest.

'The other man.' 'An' which is the one ye'd mane by that?' 'Listen,
Lon--and you, too, Bettles! We've been talking this little trouble of
yours over, and we've come to one conclusion. We know we have no right
to stop your fighting-' 'True for ye, me lad!' 'And we're not going to.
But this much we can do, and shall do--make this the only duel in the
history of Forty-Mile, set an example for every che-cha-qua that comes
up or down the Yukon. The man who escapes killing shall be hanged to
the nearest tree. Now, go ahead!'

Lon smiled dubiously, then his face lighted up. 'Pace her off,
David--fifty paces, wheel, an' niver a cease firin' till a lad's down
for good. 'Tis their hearts'll niver let them do the deed, an' it's
well ye should know it for a true Yankee bluff.'

He started off with a pleased grin on his face, but Malemute Kid halted
him.

'Lon! It's a long while since you first knew me?' 'Many's the day.'
'And you, Bettles?'

'Five year next June high water.' 'And have you once, in all that time,
known me to break my word' Or heard of me breaking it?' Both men shook
their heads, striving to fathom what lay beyond.

'Well, then, what do you think of a promise made by me?' 'As good as
your bond,' from Bettles.

'The thing to safely sling yer hopes of heaven by,' promptly endorsed
Lon McFane.

'Listen! I, Malemute Kid, give you my word--and you know what that
means that the man who is not shot stretches rope within ten minutes
after the shooting.' He stepped back as Pilate might have done after
washing his hands.

A pause and a silence came over the men of Forty-Mile. The sky drew
still closer, sending down a crystal flight of frost--little geometric
designs, perfect, evanescent as a breath, yet destined to exist till
the returning sun had covered half its northern journey.

Both men had led forlorn hopes in their time--led with a curse or a
jest on their tongues, and in their souls an unswerving faith in the
God of Chance. But that merciful deity had been shut out from the
present deal. They studied the face of Malemute Kid, but they studied
as one might the Sphinx. As the quiet minutes passed, a feeling that
speech was incumbent on them began to grow. At last the howl of a
wolf-dog cracked the silence from the direction of Forty-Mile. The
weird sound swelled with all the pathos of a breaking heart, then died
away in a long-drawn sob.

'Well I be danged!' Bettles turned up the collar of his mackinaw jacket
and stared about him helplessly.

'It's a gloryus game yer runnin', Kid,' cried Lon McFane. 'All the
percentage of the house an' niver a bit to the man that's buckin'. The
Devil himself'd niver tackle such a cinch--and damned if I do.' There
were chuckles, throttled in gurgling throats, and winks brushed away
with the frost which rimed the eyelashes, as the men climbed the
ice-notched bank and started across the street to the Post. But the
long howl had drawn nearer, invested with a new note of menace. A woman
screamed round the corner. There was a cry of, 'Here he comes!' Then an
Indian boy, at the head of half a dozen frightened dogs, racing with
death, dashed into the crowd. And behind came Yellow Fang, a bristle of
hair and a flash of gray. Everybody but the Yankee fled.

The Indian boy had tripped and fallen. Bettles stopped long enough to
grip him by the slack of his furs, then headed for a pile of cordwood
already occupied by a number of his comrades. Yellow Fang, doubling
after one of the dogs, came leaping back. The fleeing animal, free of
the rabies, but crazed with fright, whipped Bettles off his feet and
flashed on up the street. Malemute Kid took a flying shot at Yellow
Fang. The mad dog whirled a half airspring, came down on his back,
then, with a single leap, covered half the distance between himself and
Bettles.

But the fatal spring was intercepted. Lon McFane leaped from the
woodpile, countering him in midair. Over they rolled, Lon holding him
by the throat at arm's length, blinking under the fetid slaver which
sprayed his face. Then Bettles, revolver in hand and coolly waiting a
chance, settled the combat.

''Twas a square game, Kid,' Lon remarked, rising to his feet and
shaking the snow from out his sleeves; 'with a fair percentage to
meself that bucked it.' That night, while Lon McFane sought the
forgiving arms of the Church in the direction of Father Roubeau's
cabin, Malemute Kid talked long to little purpose.

'But would you,' persisted Mackenzie, 'supposing they had fought?'
'Have I ever broken my word?' 'No; but that isn't the point. Answer the
question. Would you?' Malemute Kid straightened up. 'Scruff, I've been
asking myself that question ever since, and--'

'Well?'

'Well, as yet, I haven't found the answer.'



In a Far Country

When a man journeys into a far country, he must be prepared to forget
many of the things he has learned, and to acquire such customs as are
inherent with existence in the new land; he must abandon the old ideals
and the old gods, and oftentimes he must reverse the very codes by
which his conduct has hitherto been shaped. To those who have the
protean faculty of adaptability, the novelty of such change may even be
a source of pleasure; but to those who happen to be hardened to the
ruts in which they were created, the pressure of the altered
environment is unbearable, and they chafe in body and in spirit under
the new restrictions which they do not understand. This chafing is
bound to act and react, producing divers evils and leading to various
misfortunes. It were better for the man who cannot fit himself to the
new groove to return to his own country; if he delay too long, he will
surely die.

The man who turns his back upon the comforts of an elder civilization,
to face the savage youth, the primordial simplicity of the North, may
estimate success at an inverse ratio to the quantity and quality of his
hopelessly fixed habits. He will soon discover, if he be a fit
candidate, that the material habits are the less important. The
exchange of such things as a dainty menu for rough fare, of the stiff
leather shoe for the soft, shapeless moccasin, of the feather bed for a
couch in the snow, is after all a very easy matter. But his pinch will
come in learning properly to shape his mind's attitude toward all
things, and especially toward his fellow man. For the courtesies of
ordinary life, he must substitute unselfishness, forbearance, and
tolerance. Thus, and thus only, can he gain that pearl of great
price--true comradeship. He must not say 'thank you'; he must mean it
without opening his mouth, and prove it by responding in kind. In
short, he must substitute the deed for the word, the spirit for the
letter.

When the world rang with the tale of Arctic gold, and the lure of the
North gripped the heartstrings of men, Carter Weatherbee threw up his
snug clerkship, turned the half of his savings over to his wife, and
with the remainder bought an outfit. There was no romance in his
nature--the bondage of commerce had crushed all that; he was simply
tired of the ceaseless grind, and wished to risk great hazards in view
of corresponding returns. Like many another fool, disdaining the old
trails used by the Northland pioneers for a score of years, he hurried
to Edmonton in the spring of the year; and there, unluckily for his
soul's welfare, he allied himself with a party of men.

There was nothing unusual about this party, except its plans. Even its
goal, like that of all the other parties, was the Klondike. But the
route it had mapped out to attain that goal took away the breath of the
hardiest native, born and bred to the vicissitudes of the Northwest.
Even Jacques Baptiste, born of a Chippewa woman and a renegade voyageur
(having raised his first whimpers in a deerskin lodge north of the
sixty-fifth parallel, and had the same hushed by blissful sucks of raw
tallow), was surprised. Though he sold his services to them and agreed
to travel even to the never-opening ice, he shook his head ominously
whenever his advice was asked.

Percy Cuthfert's evil star must have been in the ascendant, for he,
too, joined this company of argonauts. He was an ordinary man, with a
bank account as deep as his culture, which is saying a good deal. He
had no reason to embark on such a venture--no reason in the world save
that he suffered from an abnormal development of sentimentality. He
mistook this for the true spirit of romance and adventure. Many another
man has done the like, and made as fatal a mistake.

The first break-up of spring found the party following the ice-run of
Elk River. It was an imposing fleet, for the outfit was large, and they
were accompanied by a disreputable contingent of half-breed voyageurs
with their women and children. Day in and day out, they labored with
the bateaux and canoes, fought mosquitoes and other kindred pests, or
sweated and swore at the portages. Severe toil like this lays a man
naked to the very roots of his soul, and ere Lake Athabasca was lost in
the south, each member of the party had hoisted his true colors.

The two shirks and chronic grumblers were Carter Weatherbee and Percy
Cuthfert. The whole party complained less of its aches and pains than
did either of them. Not once did they volunteer for the thousand and
one petty duties of the camp. A bucket of water to be brought, an extra
armful of wood to be chopped, the dishes to be washed and wiped, a
search to be made through the outfit for some suddenly indispensable
article--and these two effete scions of civilization discovered sprains
or blisters requiring instant attention.

They were the first to turn in at night, with score of tasks yet
undone; the last to turn out in the morning, when the start should be
in readiness before the breakfast was begun.

They were the first to fall to at mealtime, the last to have a hand in
the cooking; the first to dive for a slim delicacy, the last to
discover they had added to their own another man's share. If they
toiled at the oars, they slyly cut the water at each stroke and allowed
the boat's momentum to float up the blade. They thought nobody noticed;
but their comrades swore under their breaths and grew to hate them,
while Jacques Baptiste sneered openly and damned them from morning till
night. But Jacques Baptiste was no gentleman.

At the Great Slave, Hudson Bay dogs were purchased, and the fleet sank
to the guards with its added burden of dried fish and pemican. Then
canoe and bateau answered to the swift current of the Mackenzie, and
they plunged into the Great Barren Ground. Every likely-looking
'feeder' was prospected, but the elusive 'pay-dirt' danced ever to the
north. At the Great Bear, overcome by the common dread of the Unknown
Lands, their voyageurs began to desert, and Fort of Good Hope saw the
last and bravest bending to the towlines as they bucked the current
down which they had so treacherously glided.

Jacques Baptiste alone remained. Had he not sworn to travel even to the
never-opening ice? The lying charts, compiled in main from hearsay,
were now constantly consulted.

And they felt the need of hurry, for the sun had already passed its
northern solstice and was leading the winter south again. Skirting the
shores of the bay, where the Mackenzie disembogues into the Arctic
Ocean, they entered the mouth of the Little Peel River. Then began the
arduous up-stream toil, and the two Incapables fared worse than ever.
Towline and pole, paddle and tumpline, rapids and portages--such
tortures served to give the one a deep disgust for great hazards, and
printed for the other a fiery text on the true romance of adventure.
One day they waxed mutinous, and being vilely cursed by Jacques
Baptiste, turned, as worms sometimes will. But the half-breed thrashed
the twain, and sent them, bruised and bleeding, about their work. It
was the first time either had been manhandled.

Abandoning their river craft at the headwaters of the Little Peel, they
consumed the rest of the summer in the great portage over the Mackenzie
watershed to the West Rat. This little stream fed the Porcupine, which
in turn joined the Yukon where that mighty highway of the North
countermarches on the Arctic Circle.

But they had lost in the race with winter, and one day they tied their
rafts to the thick eddy-ice and hurried their goods ashore. That night
the river jammed and broke several times; the following morning it had
fallen asleep for good. 'We can't be more'n four hundred miles from the
Yukon,' concluded Sloper, multiplying his thumb nails by the scale of
the map. The council, in which the two Incapables had whined to
excellent disadvantage, was drawing to a close.

'Hudson Bay Post, long time ago. No use um now.' Jacques Baptiste's
father had made the trip for the Fur Company in the old days,
incidentally marking the trail with a couple of frozen toes.

Sufferin' cracky!' cried another of the party. 'No whites?' 'Nary
white,' Sloper sententiously affirmed; 'but it's only five hundred more
up the Yukon to Dawson. Call it a rough thousand from here.' Weatherbee
and Cuthfert groaned in chorus.

'How long'll that take, Baptiste?' The half-breed figured for a moment.
'Workum like hell, no man play out, ten--twenty--forty--fifty days. Um
babies come' (designating the Incapables), 'no can tell. Mebbe when
hell freeze over; mebbe not then.' The manufacture of snowshoes and
moccasins ceased. Somebody called the name of an absent member, who
came out of an ancient cabin at the edge of the campfire and joined
them. The cabin was one of the many mysteries which lurk in the vast
recesses of the North. Built when and by whom, no man could tell.

Two graves in the open, piled high with stones, perhaps contained the
secret of those early wanderers. But whose hand had piled the stones?
The moment had come. Jacques Baptiste paused in the fitting of a
harness and pinned the struggling dog in the snow. The cook made mute
protest for delay, threw a handful of bacon into a noisy pot of beans,
then came to attention. Sloper rose to his feet. His body was a
ludicrous contrast to the healthy physiques of the Incapables. Yellow
and weak, fleeing from a South American fever-hole, he had not broken
his flight across the zones, and was still able to toil with men. His
weight was probably ninety pounds, with the heavy hunting knife thrown
in, and his grizzled hair told of a prime which had ceased to be. The
fresh young muscles of either Weatherbee or Cuthfert were equal to ten
times the endeavor of his; yet he could walk them into the earth in a
day's journey. And all this day he had whipped his stronger comrades
into venturing a thousand miles of the stiffest hardship man can
conceive. He was the incarnation of the unrest of his race, and the old
Teutonic stubbornness, dashed with the quick grasp and action of the
Yankee, held the flesh in the bondage of the spirit.

'All those in favor of going on with the dogs as soon as the ice sets,
say ay.' 'Ay!' rang out eight voices--voices destined to string a trail
of oaths along many a hundred miles of pain.

'Contrary minded?' 'No!' For the first time the Incapables were united
without some compromise of personal interests.

'And what are you going to do about it?' Weatherbee added belligerently.

'Majority rule! Majority rule!' clamored the rest of the party.

'I know the expedition is liable to fall through if you don't come,'
Sloper replied sweetly; 'but I guess, if we try real hard, we can
manage to do without you.

What do you say, boys?' The sentiment was cheered to the echo.

'But I say, you know,' Cuthfert ventured apprehensively; 'what's a chap
like me to do?'

'Ain't you coming with us.' 'No--o.' 'Then do as you damn well please.
We won't have nothing to say.' 'Kind o' calkilate yuh might settle it
with that canoodlin' pardner of yourn,' suggested a heavy-going
Westerner from the Dakotas, at the same time pointing out Weatherbee.
'He'll be shore to ask yuh what yur a-goin' to do when it comes to
cookin' an' gatherin' the wood.' 'Then we'll consider it all arranged,'
concluded Sloper.

'We'll pull out tomorrow, if we camp within five miles--just to get
everything in running order and remember if we've forgotten anything.'
The sleds groaned by on their steel-shod runners, and the dogs strained
low in the harnesses in which they were born to die.

Jacques Baptiste paused by the side of Sloper to get a last glimpse of
the cabin. The smoke curled up pathetically from the Yukon stovepipe.
The two Incapables were watching them from the doorway.

Sloper laid his hand on the other's shoulder.

'Jacques Baptiste, did you ever hear of the Kilkenny cats?' The
half-breed shook his head.

'Well, my friend and good comrade, the Kilkenny cats fought till
neither hide, nor hair, nor yowl, was left. You understand?--till
nothing was left. Very good.

Now, these two men don't like work. They'll be all alone in that cabin
all winter--a mighty long, dark winter. Kilkenny cats--well?' The
Frenchman in Baptiste shrugged his shoulders, but the Indian in him was
silent. Nevertheless, it was an eloquent shrug, pregnant with prophecy.
Things prospered in the little cabin at first. The rough badinage of
their comrades had made Weatherbee and Cuthfert conscious of the mutual
responsibility which had devolved upon them; besides, there was not so
much work after all for two healthy men. And the removal of the cruel
whiphand, or in other words the bulldozing half-breed, had brought with
it a joyous reaction. At first, each strove to outdo the other, and
they performed petty tasks with an unction which would have opened the
eyes of their comrades who were now wearing out bodies and souls on the
Long Trail.

All care was banished. The forest, which shouldered in upon them from
three sides, was an inexhaustible woodyard. A few yards from their door
slept the Porcupine, and a hole through its winter robe formed a
bubbling spring of water, crystal clear and painfully cold. But they
soon grew to find fault with even that. The hole would persist in
freezing up, and thus gave them many a miserable hour of ice-chopping.
The unknown builders of the cabin had extended the sidelogs so as to
support a cache at the rear. In this was stored the bulk of the party's
provisions.

Food there was, without stint, for three times the men who were fated
to live upon it. But the most of it was the kind which built up brawn
and sinew, but did not tickle the palate.

True, there was sugar in plenty for two ordinary men; but these two
were little else than children. They early discovered the virtues of
hot water judiciously saturated with sugar, and they prodigally swam
their flapjacks and soaked their crusts in the rich, white syrup.

Then coffee and tea, and especially the dried fruits, made disastrous
inroads upon it. The first words they had were over the sugar question.
And it is a really serious thing when two men, wholly dependent upon
each other for company, begin to quarrel.

Weatherbee loved to discourse blatantly on politics, while Cuthfert,
who had been prone to clip his coupons and let the commonwealth jog on
as best it might, either ignored the subject or delivered himself of
startling epigrams. But the clerk was too obtuse to appreciate the
clever shaping of thought, and this waste of ammunition irritated
Cuthfert.

He had been used to blinding people by his brilliancy, and it worked
him quite a hardship, this loss of an audience. He felt personally
aggrieved and unconsciously held his muttonhead companion responsible
for it.

Save existence, they had nothing in common--came in touch on no single
point.

Weatherbee was a clerk who had known naught but clerking all his life;
Cuthfert was a master of arts, a dabbler in oils, and had written not a
little. The one was a lower-class man who considered himself a
gentleman, and the other was a gentleman who knew himself to be such.
From this it may be remarked that a man can be a gentleman without
possessing the first instinct of true comradeship. The clerk was as
sensuous as the other was aesthetic, and his love adventures, told at
great length and chiefly coined from his imagination, affected the
supersensitive master of arts in the same way as so many whiffs of
sewer gas. He deemed the clerk a filthy, uncultured brute, whose place
was in the muck with the swine, and told him so; and he was
reciprocally informed that he was a milk-and-water sissy and a cad.
Weatherbee could not have defined 'cad' for his life; but it satisfied
its purpose, which after all seems the main point in life.

Weatherbee flatted every third note and sang such songs as 'The Boston
Burglar' and 'the Handsome Cabin Boy,' for hours at a time, while
Cuthfert wept with rage, till he could stand it no longer and fled into
the outer cold. But there was no escape. The intense frost could not be
endured for long at a time, and the little cabin crowded them--beds,
stove, table, and all--into a space of ten by twelve. The very presence
of either became a personal affront to the other, and they lapsed into
sullen silences which increased in length and strength as the days went
by. Occasionally, the flash of an eye or the curl of a lip got the
better of them, though they strove to wholly ignore each other during
these mute periods.

And a great wonder sprang up in the breast of each, as to how God had
ever come to create the other.

With little to do, time became an intolerable burden to them. This
naturally made them still lazier. They sank into a physical lethargy
which there was no escaping, and which made them rebel at the
performance of the smallest chore. One morning when it was his turn to
cook the common breakfast, Weatherbee rolled out of his blankets, and
to the snoring of his companion, lighted first the slush lamp and then
the fire. The kettles were frozen hard, and there was no water in the
cabin with which to wash. But he did not mind that. Waiting for it to
thaw, he sliced the bacon and plunged into the hateful task of
bread-making. Cuthfert had been slyly watching through his half-closed
lids.

Consequently there was a scene, in which they fervently blessed each
other, and agreed, henceforth, that each do his own cooking. A week
later, Cuthfert neglected his morning ablutions, but none the less
complacently ate the meal which he had cooked. Weatherbee grinned.
After that the foolish custom of washing passed out of their lives.

As the sugar-pile and other little luxuries dwindled, they began to be
afraid they were not getting their proper shares, and in order that
they might not be robbed, they fell to gorging themselves. The luxuries
suffered in this gluttonous contest, as did also the men.

In the absence of fresh vegetables and exercise, their blood became
impoverished, and a loathsome, purplish rash crept over their bodies.
Yet they refused to heed the warning.

Next, their muscles and joints began to swell, the flesh turning black,
while their mouths, gums, and lips took on the color of rich cream.
Instead of being drawn together by their misery, each gloated over the
other's symptoms as the scurvy took its course.

They lost all regard for personal appearance, and for that matter,
common decency. The cabin became a pigpen, and never once were the beds
made or fresh pine boughs laid underneath. Yet they could not keep to
their blankets, as they would have wished; for the frost was
inexorable, and the fire box consumed much fuel. The hair of their
heads and faces grew long and shaggy, while their garments would have
disgusted a ragpicker. But they did not care. They were sick, and there
was no one to see; besides, it was very painful to move about.

To all this was added a new trouble--the Fear of the North. This Fear
was the joint child of the Great Cold and the Great Silence, and was
born in the darkness of December, when the sun dipped below the horizon
for good. It affected them according to their natures.

Weatherbee fell prey to the grosser superstitions, and did his best to
resurrect the spirits which slept in the forgotten graves. It was a
fascinating thing, and in his dreams they came to him from out of the
cold, and snuggled into his blankets, and told him of their toils and
troubles ere they died. He shrank away from the clammy contact as they
drew closer and twined their frozen limbs about him, and when they
whispered in his ear of things to come, the cabin rang with his
frightened shrieks. Cuthfert did not understand--for they no longer
spoke--and when thus awakened he invariably grabbed for his revolver.
Then he would sit up in bed, shivering nervously, with the weapon
trained on the unconscious dreamer. Cuthfert deemed the man going mad,
and so came to fear for his life.

His own malady assumed a less concrete form. The mysterious artisan who
had laid the cabin, log by log, had pegged a wind-vane to the
ridgepole. Cuthfert noticed it always pointed south, and one day,
irritated by its steadfastness of purpose, he turned it toward the
east. He watched eagerly, but never a breath came by to disturb it.
Then he turned the vane to the north, swearing never again to touch it
till the wind did blow. But the air frightened him with its unearthly
calm, and he often rose in the middle of the night to see if the vane
had veered--ten degrees would have satisfied him. But no, it poised
above him as unchangeable as fate.

His imagination ran riot, till it became to him a fetish. Sometimes he
followed the path it pointed across the dismal dominions, and allowed
his soul to become saturated with the Fear. He dwelt upon the unseen
and the unknown till the burden of eternity appeared to be crushing
him. Everything in the Northland had that crushing effect--the absence
of life and motion; the darkness; the infinite peace of the brooding
land; the ghastly silence, which made the echo of each heartbeat a
sacrilege; the solemn forest which seemed to guard an awful,
inexpressible something, which neither word nor thought could compass.

The world he had so recently left, with its busy nations and great
enterprises, seemed very far away. Recollections occasionally
obtruded--recollections of marts and galleries and crowded
thoroughfares, of evening dress and social functions, of good men and
dear women he had known--but they were dim memories of a life he had
lived long centuries agone, on some other planet. This phantasm was the
Reality. Standing beneath the wind-vane, his eyes fixed on the polar
skies, he could not bring himself to realize that the Southland really
existed, that at that very moment it was a-roar with life and action.

There was no Southland, no men being born of women, no giving and
taking in marriage.

Beyond his bleak skyline there stretched vast solitudes, and beyond
these still vaster solitudes.

There were no lands of sunshine, heavy with the perfume of flowers.
Such things were only old dreams of paradise. The sunlands of the West
and the spicelands of the East, the smiling Arcadias and blissful
Islands of the Blest--ha! ha! His laughter split the void and shocked
him with its unwonted sound. There was no sun.

This was the Universe, dead and cold and dark, and he its only citizen.
Weatherbee? At such moments Weatherbee did not count. He was a Caliban,
a monstrous phantom, fettered to him for untold ages, the penalty of
some forgotten crime.

He lived with Death among the dead, emasculated by the sense of his own
insignificance, crushed by the passive mastery of the slumbering ages.
The magnitude of all things appalled him. Everything partook of the
superlative save himself--the perfect cessation of wind and motion, the
immensity of the snow-covered wildness, the height of the sky and the
depth of the silence. That wind-vane--if it would only move. If a
thunderbolt would fall, or the forest flare up in flame.

The rolling up of the heavens as a scroll, the crash of Doom--anything,
anything! But no, nothing moved; the Silence crowded in, and the Fear
of the North laid icy fingers on his heart.

Once, like another Crusoe, by the edge of the river he came upon a
track--the faint tracery of a snowshoe rabbit on the delicate
snow-crust. It was a revelation.

There was life in the Northland. He would follow it, look upon it,
gloat over it.

He forgot his swollen muscles, plunging through the deep snow in an
ecstasy of anticipation. The forest swallowed him up, and the brief
midday twilight vanished; but he pursued his quest till exhausted
nature asserted itself and laid him helpless in the snow.

There he groaned and cursed his folly, and knew the track to be the
fancy of his brain; and late that night he dragged himself into the
cabin on hands and knees, his cheeks frozen and a strange numbness
about his feet. Weatherbee grinned malevolently, but made no offer to
help him. He thrust needles into his toes and thawed them out by the
stove. A week later mortification set in.

But the clerk had his own troubles. The dead men came out of their
graves more frequently now, and rarely left him, waking or sleeping. He
grew to wait and dread their coming, never passing the twin cairns
without a shudder. One night they came to him in his sleep and led him
forth to an appointed task. Frightened into inarticulate horror, he
awoke between the heaps of stones and fled wildly to the cabin. But he
had lain there for some time, for his feet and cheeks were also frozen.

Sometimes he became frantic at their insistent presence, and danced
about the cabin, cutting the empty air with an axe, and smashing
everything within reach.

During these ghostly encounters, Cuthfert huddled into his blankets and
followed the madman about with a cocked revolver, ready to shoot him if
he came too near.

But, recovering from one of these spells, the clerk noticed the weapon
trained upon him.

His suspicions were aroused, and thenceforth he, too, lived in fear of
his life. They watched each other closely after that, and faced about
in startled fright whenever either passed behind the other's back. The
apprehensiveness became a mania which controlled them even in their
sleep. Through mutual fear they tacitly let the slush-lamp burn all
night, and saw to a plentiful supply of bacon-grease before retiring.
The slightest movement on the part of one was sufficient to arouse the
other, and many a still watch their gazes countered as they shook
beneath their blankets with fingers on the trigger-guards.

What with the Fear of the North, the mental strain, and the ravages of
the disease, they lost all semblance of humanity, taking on the
appearance of wild beasts, hunted and desperate. Their cheeks and
noses, as an aftermath of the freezing, had turned black.

Their frozen toes had begun to drop away at the first and second
joints. Every movement brought pain, but the fire box was insatiable,
wringing a ransom of torture from their miserable bodies. Day in, day
out, it demanded its food--a veritable pound of flesh--and they dragged
themselves into the forest to chop wood on their knees. Once, crawling
thus in search of dry sticks, unknown to each other they entered a
thicket from opposite sides.

Suddenly, without warning, two peering death's-heads confronted each
other. Suffering had so transformed them that recognition was
impossible. They sprang to their feet, shrieking with terror, and
dashed away on their mangled stumps; and falling at the cabin's door,
they clawed and scratched like demons till they discovered their
mistake.

Occasionally they lapsed normal, and during one of these sane
intervals, the chief bone of contention, the sugar, had been divided
equally between them. They guarded their separate sacks, stored up in
the cache, with jealous eyes; for there were but a few cupfuls left,
and they were totally devoid of faith in each other.

But one day Cuthfert made a mistake. Hardly able to move, sick with
pain, with his head swimming and eyes blinded, he crept into the cache,
sugar canister in hand, and mistook Weatherbee's sack for his own.

January had been born but a few days when this occurred. The sun had
some time since passed its lowest southern declination, and at meridian
now threw flaunting streaks of yellow light upon the northern sky. On
the day following his mistake with the sugar-bag, Cuthfert found
himself feeling better, both in body and in spirit. As noontime drew
near and the day brightened, he dragged himself outside to feast on the
evanescent glow, which was to him an earnest of the sun's future
intentions. Weatherbee was also feeling somewhat better, and crawled
out beside him. They propped themselves in the snow beneath the
moveless wind-vane, and waited.

The stillness of death was about them. In other climes, when nature
falls into such moods, there is a subdued air of expectancy, a waiting
for some small voice to take up the broken strain. Not so in the North.
The two men had lived seeming eons in this ghostly peace.

They could remember no song of the past; they could conjure no song of
the future. This unearthly calm had always been--the tranquil silence
of eternity.

Their eyes were fixed upon the north. Unseen, behind their backs,
behind the towering mountains to the south, the sun swept toward the
zenith of another sky than theirs. Sole spectators of the mighty
canvas, they watched the false dawn slowly grow. A faint flame began to
glow and smoulder. It deepened in intensity, ringing the changes of
reddish-yellow, purple, and saffron. So bright did it become that
Cuthfert thought the sun must surely be behind it--a miracle, the sun
rising in the north! Suddenly, without warning and without fading, the
canvas was swept clean. There was no color in the sky. The light had
gone out of the day.

They caught their breaths in half-sobs. But lo! the air was aglint with
particles of scintillating frost, and there, to the north, the
wind-vane lay in vague outline of the snow.

A shadow! A shadow! It was exactly midday. They jerked their heads
hurriedly to the south. A golden rim peeped over the mountain's snowy
shoulder, smiled upon them an instant, then dipped from sight again.

There were tears in their eyes as they sought each other. A strange
softening came over them. They felt irresistibly drawn toward each
other. The sun was coming back again. It would be with them tomorrow,
and the next day, and the next.

And it would stay longer every visit, and a time would come when it
would ride their heaven day and night, never once dropping below the
skyline. There would be no night.

The ice-locked winter would be broken; the winds would blow and the
forests answer; the land would bathe in the blessed sunshine, and life
renew.

Hand in hand, they would quit this horrid dream and journey back to the
Southland. They lurched blindly forward, and their hands met--their
poor maimed hands, swollen and distorted beneath their mittens.

But the promise was destined to remain unfulfilled. The Northland is
the Northland, and men work out their souls by strange rules, which
other men, who have not journeyed into far countries, cannot come to
understand.

An hour later, Cuthfert put a pan of bread into the oven, and fell to
speculating on what the surgeons could do with his feet when he got
back. Home did not seem so very far away now. Weatherbee was rummaging
in the cache. Of a sudden, he raised a whirlwind of blasphemy, which in
turn ceased with startling abruptness. The other man had robbed his
sugar-sack. Still, things might have happened differently, had not the
two dead men come out from under the stones and hushed the hot words in
his throat. They led him quite gently from the cache, which he forgot
to close. That consummation was reached; that something they had
whispered to him in his dreams was about to happen. They guided him
gently, very gently, to the woodpile, where they put the axe in his
hands.

Then they helped him shove open the cabin door, and he felt sure they
shut it after him--at least he heard it slam and the latch fall sharply
into place. And he knew they were waiting just without, waiting for him
to do his task.

'Carter! I say, Carter!' Percy Cuthfert was frightened at the look on
the clerk's face, and he made haste to put the table between them.

Carter Weatherbee followed, without haste and without enthusiasm. There
was neither pity nor passion in his face, but rather the patient,
stolid look of one who has certain work to do and goes about it
methodically.

'I say, what's the matter?'

The clerk dodged back, cutting off his retreat to the door, but never
opening his mouth.

'I say, Carter, I say; let's talk. There's a good chap.' The master of
arts was thinking rapidly, now, shaping a skillful flank movement on
the bed where his Smith & Wesson lay. Keeping his eyes on the madman,
he rolled backward on the bunk, at the same time clutching the pistol.

'Carter!' The powder flashed full in Weatherbee's face, but he swung
his weapon and leaped forward. The axe bit deeply at the base of the
spine, and Percy Cuthfert felt all consciousness of his lower limbs
leave him. Then the clerk fell heavily upon him, clutching him by the
throat with feeble fingers. The sharp bite of the axe had caused
Cuthfert to drop the pistol, and as his lungs panted for release, he
fumbled aimlessly for it among the blankets. Then he remembered. He
slid a hand up the clerk's belt to the sheath-knife; and they drew very
close to each other in that last clinch.

Percy Cuthfert felt his strength leave him. The lower portion of his
body was useless, The inert weight of Weatherbee crushed him--crushed
him and pinned him there like a bear under a trap. The cabin became
filled with a familiar odor, and he knew the bread to be burning. Yet
what did it matter? He would never need it. And there were all of six
cupfuls of sugar in the cache--if he had foreseen this he would not
have been so saving the last several days. Would the wind-vane ever
move? Why not' Had he not seen the sun today? He would go and see. No;
it was impossible to move. He had not thought the clerk so heavy a man.

How quickly the cabin cooled! The fire must be out. The cold was
forcing in.

It must be below zero already, and the ice creeping up the inside of
the door. He could not see it, but his past experience enabled him to
gauge its progress by the cabin's temperature. The lower hinge must be
white ere now. Would the tale of this ever reach the world? How would
his friends take it? They would read it over their coffee, most likely,
and talk it over at the clubs. He could see them very clearly, 'Poor
Old Cuthfert,' they murmured; 'not such a bad sort of a chap, after
all.' He smiled at their eulogies, and passed on in search of a Turkish
bath. It was the same old crowd upon the streets.

Strange, they did not notice his moosehide moccasins and tattered
German socks! He would take a cab. And after the bath a shave would not
be bad. No; he would eat first.

Steak, and potatoes, and green things how fresh it all was! And what
was that? Squares of honey, streaming liquid amber! But why did they
bring so much? Ha! ha! he could never eat it all.

Shine! Why certainly. He put his foot on the box. The bootblack looked
curiously up at him, and he remembered his moosehide moccasins and went
away hastily.

Hark! The wind-vane must be surely spinning. No; a mere singing in his
ears.

That was all--a mere singing. The ice must have passed the latch by
now. More likely the upper hinge was covered. Between the moss-chinked
roof-poles, little points of frost began to appear. How slowly they
grew! No; not so slowly. There was a new one, and there another.
Two--three--four; they were coming too fast to count. There were two
growing together. And there, a third had joined them.

Why, there were no more spots. They had run together and formed a sheet.

Well, he would have company. If Gabriel ever broke the silence of the
North, they would stand together, hand in hand, before the great White
Throne. And God would judge them, God would judge them!

Then Percy Cuthfert closed his eyes and dropped off to sleep.



To the Man on the Trail

'Dump it in!.' 'But I say, Kid, isn't that going it a little too
strong? Whisky and alcohol's bad enough; but when it comes to brandy
and pepper sauce and-' 'Dump it in. Who's making this punch, anyway?'
And Malemute Kid smiled benignantly through the clouds of steam. 'By
the time you've been in this country as long as I have, my son, and
lived on rabbit tracks and salmon belly, you'll learn that Christmas
comes only once per annum.

And a Christmas without punch is sinking a hole to bedrock with nary a
pay streak.'

'Stack up on that fer a high cyard,' approved Big Jim Belden, who had
come down from his claim on Mazy May to spend Christmas, and who, as
everyone knew, had been living the two months past on straight moose
meat. 'Hain't fergot the hooch we-uns made on the Tanana, hey yeh?'
'Well, I guess yes. Boys, it would have done your hearts good to see
that whole tribe fighting drunk--and all because of a glorious ferment
of sugar and sour dough. That was before your time,' Malemute Kid said
as he turned to Stanley Prince, a young mining expert who had been in
two years. 'No white women in the country then, and Mason wanted to get
married. Ruth's father was chief of the Tananas, and objected, like the
rest of the tribe. Stiff? Why, I used my last pound of sugar; finest
work in that line I ever did in my life. You should have seen the
chase, down the river and across the portage.' 'But the squaw?' asked
Louis Savoy, the tall French Canadian, becoming interested; for he had
heard of this wild deed when at Forty Mile the preceding winter.

Then Malemute Kid, who was a born raconteur, told the unvarnished tale
of the Northland Lochinvar. More than one rough adventurer of the North
felt his heartstrings draw closer and experienced vague yearnings for
the sunnier pastures of the Southland, where life promised something
more than a barren struggle with cold and death.

'We struck the Yukon just behind the first ice run,' he concluded, 'and
the tribe only a quarter of an hour behind. But that saved us; for the
second run broke the jam above and shut them out. When they finally got
into Nuklukyeto, the whole post was ready for them.

'And as to the forgathering, ask Father Roubeau here: he performed the
ceremony.' The Jesuit took the pipe from his lips but could only
express his gratification with patriarchal smiles, while Protestant and
Catholic vigorously applauded.

'By gar!' ejaculated Louis Savoy, who seemed overcome by the romance of
it. 'La petite squaw: mon Mason brav. By gar!' Then, as the first tin
cups of punch went round, Bettles the Unquenchable sprang to his feet
and struck up his favorite drinking song: 'There's Henry Ward Beecher
And Sunday-school teachers, All drink of the sassafras root; But you
bet all the same, If it had its right name, It's the juice of the
forbidden fruit.'

'Oh, the juice of the forbidden fruit,' roared out the bacchanalian
chorus, 'Oh, the juice of the forbidden fruit; But you bet all the
same, If it had its right name, It's the juice of the forbidden fruit.'

Malemute Kid's frightful concoction did its work; the men of the camps
and trails unbent in its genial glow, and jest and song and tales of
past adventure went round the board.

Aliens from a dozen lands, they toasted each and all. It was the
Englishman, Prince, who pledged 'Uncle Sam, the precocious infant of
the New World'; the Yankee, Bettles, who drank to 'The Queen, God bless
her'; and together, Savoy and Meyers, the German trader, clanged their
cups to Alsace and Lorraine.

Then Malemute Kid arose, cup in hand, and glanced at the greased-paper
window, where the frost stood full three inches thick. 'A health to the
man on trail this night; may his grub hold out; may his dogs keep their
legs; may his matches never miss fire.' Crack!

Crack! heard the familiar music of the dog whip, the whining howl of
the Malemutes, and the crunch of a sled as it drew up to the cabin.
Conversation languished while they waited the issue.

'An old-timer; cares for his dogs and then himself,' whispered Malemute
Kid to Prince as they listened to the snapping jaws and the wolfish
snarls and yelps of pain which proclaimed to their practiced ears that
the stranger was beating back their dogs while he fed his own.

Then came the expected knock, sharp and confident, and the stranger
entered.

Dazzled by the light, he hesitated a moment at the door, giving to all
a chance for scrutiny. He was a striking personage, and a most
picturesque one, in his Arctic dress of wool and fur. Standing six foot
two or three, with proportionate breadth of shoulders and depth of
chest, his smooth-shaven face nipped by the cold to a gleaming pink,
his long lashes and eyebrows white with ice, and the ear and neck flaps
of his great wolfskin cap loosely raised, he seemed, of a verity, the
Frost King, just stepped in out of the night.

Clasped outside his Mackinaw jacket, a beaded belt held two large
Colt's revolvers and a hunting knife, while he carried, in addition to
the inevitable dog whip, a smokeless rifle of the largest bore and
latest pattern. As he came forward, for all his step was firm and
elastic, they could see that fatigue bore heavily upon him.

An awkward silence had fallen, but his hearty 'What cheer, my lads?'
put them quickly at ease, and the next instant Malemute Kid and he had
gripped hands. Though they had never met, each had heard of the other,
and the recognition was mutual. A sweeping introduction and a mug of
punch were forced upon him before he could explain his errand.

How long since that basket sled, with three men and eight dogs,
passed?' he asked.

'An even two days ahead. Are you after them?' 'Yes; my team. Run them
off under my very nose, the cusses. I've gained two days on them
already--pick them up on the next run.' 'Reckon they'll show spunk?'
asked Belden, in order to keep up the conversation, for Malemute Kid
already had the coffeepot on and was busily frying bacon and moose meat.

The stranger significantly tapped his revolvers.

'When'd yeh leave Dawson?' 'Twelve o'clock.' 'Last night?'--as a matter
of course.

'Today.' A murmur of surprise passed round the circle. And well it
might; for it was just midnight, and seventy-five miles of rough river
trail was not to be sneered at for a twelve hours' run.

The talk soon became impersonal, however, harking back to the trails of
childhood. As the young stranger ate of the rude fare Malemute Kid
attentively studied his face. Nor was he long in deciding that it was
fair, honest, and open, and that he liked it. Still youthful, the lines
had been firmly traced by toil and hardship.

Though genial in conversation, and mild when at rest, the blue eyes
gave promise of the hard steel-glitter which comes when called into
action, especially against odds. The heavy jaw and square-cut chin
demonstrated rugged pertinacity and indomitability. Nor, though the
attributes of the lion were there, was there wanting the certain
softness, the hint of womanliness, which bespoke the emotional nature.

'So thet's how me an' the ol' woman got spliced,' said Belden,
concluding the exciting tale of his courtship. '"Here we be, Dad," sez
she. "An' may yeh be damned," sez he to her, an' then to me, "Jim,
yeh--yeh git outen them good duds o' yourn; I want a right peart slice
o' thet forty acre plowed 'fore dinner." An' then he sort o' sniffled
an' kissed her. An' I was thet happy--but he seen me an' roars out,
"Yeh, Jim!" An' yeh bet I dusted fer the barn.' 'Any kids waiting for
you back in the States?' asked the stranger.

'Nope; Sal died 'fore any come. Thet's why I'm here.' Belden
abstractedly began to light his pipe, which had failed to go out, and
then brightened up with, 'How 'bout yerself, stranger--married man?'
For reply, he opened his watch, slipped it from the thong which served
for a chain, and passed it over. Belden picked up the slush lamp,
surveyed the inside of the case critically, and, swearing admiringly to
himself, handed it over to Louis Savoy. With numerous 'By gars!' he
finally surrendered it to Prince, and they noticed that his hands
trembled and his eyes took on a peculiar softness. And so it passed
from horny hand to horny hand--the pasted photograph of a woman, the
clinging kind that such men fancy, with a babe at the breast. Those who
had not yet seen the wonder were keen with curiosity; those who had
became silent and retrospective. They could face the pinch of famine,
the grip of scurvy, or the quick death by field or flood; but the
pictured semblance of a stranger woman and child made women and
children of them all.

'Never have seen the youngster yet--he's a boy, she says, and two years
old,' said the stranger as he received the treasure back. A lingering
moment he gazed upon it, then snapped the case and turned away, but not
quick enough to hide the restrained rush of tears.  Malemute Kid led
him to a bunk and bade him turn in.

'Call me at four sharp. Don't fail me,' were his last words, and a
moment later he was breathing in the heaviness of exhausted sleep.

'By Jove! He's a plucky chap,' commented Prince. 'Three hours' sleep
after seventy-five miles with the dogs, and then the trail again. Who
is he, Kid?' 'Jack Westondale. Been in going on three years, with
nothing but the name of working like a horse, and any amount of bad
luck to his credit. I never knew him, but Sitka Charley told me about
him.' 'It seems hard that a man with a sweet young wife like his should
be putting in his years in this Godforsaken hole, where every year
counts two on the outside.' 'The trouble with him is clean grit and
stubbornness. He's cleaned up twice with a stake, but lost it both
times.' Here the conversation was broken off by an uproar from Bettles,
for the effect had begun to wear away. And soon the bleak years of
monotonous grub and deadening toil were being forgotten in rough
merriment. Malemute Kid alone seemed unable to lose himself, and cast
many an anxious look at his watch. Once he put on his mittens and
beaver-skin cap, and, leaving the cabin, fell to rummaging about in the
cache.

Nor could he wait the hour designated; for he was fifteen minutes ahead
of time in rousing his guest. The young giant had stiffened badly, and
brisk rubbing was necessary to bring him to his feet. He tottered
painfully out of the cabin, to find his dogs harnessed and everything
ready for the start. The company wished him good luck and a short
chase, while Father Roubeau, hurriedly blessing him, led the stampede
for the cabin; and small wonder, for it is not good to face
seventy-four degrees below zero with naked ears and hands.

Malemute Kid saw him to the main trail, and there, gripping his hand
heartily, gave him advice.

'You'll find a hundred pounds of salmon eggs on the sled,' he said.
'The dogs will go as far on that as with one hundred and fifty of fish,
and you can't get dog food at Pelly, as you probably expected.' The
stranger started, and his eyes flashed, but he did not interrupt. 'You
can't get an ounce of food for dog or man till you reach Five Fingers,
and that's a stiff two hundred miles. Watch out for open water on the
Thirty Mile River, and be sure you take the big cutoff above Le Barge.'
'How did you know it? Surely the news can't be ahead of me already?' 'I
don't know it; and what's more, I don't want to know it. But you never
owned that team you're chasing. Sitka Charley sold it to them last
spring. But he sized you up to me as square once, and I believe him.
I've seen your face; I like it. And I've seen--why, damn you, hit the
high places for salt water and that wife of yours, and--' Here the Kid
unmittened and jerked out his sack.

'No; I don't need it,' and the tears froze on his cheeks as he
convulsively gripped Malemute Kid's hand.

'Then don't spare the dogs; cut them out of the traces as fast as they
drop; buy them, and think they're cheap at ten dollars a pound. You can
get them at Five Fingers, Little Salmon, and Hootalinqua. And watch out
for wet feet,' was his parting advice. 'Keep a-traveling up to
twenty-five, but if it gets below that, build a fire and change your
socks.'

Fifteen minutes had barely elapsed when the jingle of bells announced
new arrivals. The door opened, and a mounted policeman of the Northwest
Territory entered, followed by two half-breed dog drivers. Like
Westondale, they were heavily armed and showed signs of fatigue. The
half-breeds had been born to the trail and bore it easily; but the
young policeman was badly exhausted. Still, the dogged obstinacy of his
race held him to the pace he had set, and would hold him till he
dropped in his tracks.

'When did Westondale pull out?' he asked. 'He stopped here, didn't he?'
This was supererogatory, for the tracks told their own tale too well.

Malemute Kid had caught Belden's eye, and he, scenting the wind,
replied evasively, 'A right peart while back.' 'Come, my man; speak
up,' the policeman admonished.

'Yeh seem to want him right smart. Hez he ben gittin' cantankerous down
Dawson way?'

'Held up Harry McFarland's for forty thousand; exchanged it at the P.C.
store for a check on Seattle; and who's to stop the cashing of it if we
don't overtake him? When did he pull out?'

Every eye suppressed its excitement, for Malemute Kid had given the
cue, and the young officer encountered wooden faces on every hand.

Striding over to Prince, he put the question to him. Though it hurt
him, gazing into the frank, earnest face of his fellow countryman, he
replied inconsequentially on the state of the trail.

Then he espied Father Roubeau, who could not lie. 'A quarter of an hour
ago,' the priest answered; 'but he had four hours' rest for himself and
dogs.' 'Fifteen minutes' start, and he's fresh! My God!' The poor
fellow staggered back, half fainting from exhaustion and
disappointment, murmuring something about the run from Dawson in ten
hours and the dogs being played out.

Malemute Kid forced a mug of punch upon him; then he turned for the
door, ordering the dog drivers to follow. But the warmth and promise of
rest were too tempting, and they objected strenuously. The Kid was
conversant with their French patois, and followed it anxiously.

They swore that the dogs were gone up; that Siwash and Babette would
have to be shot before the first mile was covered; that the rest were
almost as bad; and that it would be better for all hands to rest up.

'Lend me five dogs?' he asked, turning to Malemute Kid.

But the Kid shook his head.

'I'll sign a check on Captain Constantine for five thousand--here's my
papers--I'm authorized to draw at my own discretion.'

Again the silent refusal.

'Then I'll requisition them in the name of the Queen.' Smiling
incredulously, the Kid glanced at his well-stocked arsenal, and the
Englishman, realizing his impotency, turned for the door. But the dog
drivers still objecting, he whirled upon them fiercely, calling them
women and curs. The swart face of the older half-breed flushed angrily
as he drew himself up and promised in good, round terms that he would
travel his leader off his legs, and would then be delighted to plant
him in the snow.

The young officer--and it required his whole will--walked steadily to
the door, exhibiting a freshness he did not possess. But they all knew
and appreciated his proud effort; nor could he veil the twinges of
agony that shot across his face. Covered with frost, the dogs were
curled up in the snow, and it was almost impossible to get them to
their feet. The poor brutes whined under the stinging lash, for the dog
drivers were angry and cruel; nor till Babette, the leader, was cut
from the traces, could they break out the sled and get under way.

'A dirty scoundrel and a liar!' 'By gar! Him no good!' 'A thief!'
'Worse than an Indian!'

It was evident that they were angry--first at the way they had been
deceived; and second at the outraged ethics of the Northland, where
honesty, above all, was man's prime jewel.

'An' we gave the cuss a hand, after knowin' what he'd did.' All eyes
turned accusingly upon Malemute Kid, who rose from the corner where he
had been making Babette comfortable, and silently emptied the bowl for
a final round of punch.

'It's a cold night, boys--a bitter cold night,' was the irrelevant
commencement of his defense. 'You've all traveled trail, and know what
that stands for. Don't jump a dog when he's down. You've only heard one
side. A whiter man than Jack Westondale never ate from the same pot nor
stretched blanket with you or me.

'Last fall he gave his whole clean-up, forty thousand, to Joe Castrell,
to buy in on Dominion. Today he'd be a millionaire. But, while he
stayed behind at Circle City, taking care of his partner with the
scurvy, what does Castell do? Goes into McFarland's, jumps the limit,
and drops the whole sack. Found him dead in the snow the next day. And
poor Jack laying his plans to go out this winter to his wife and the
boy he's never seen. You'll notice he took exactly what his partner
lost--forty thousand. Well, he's gone out; and what are you going to do
about it?' The Kid glanced round the circle of his judges, noted the
softening of their faces, then raised his mug aloft. 'So a health to
the man on trail this night; may his grub hold out; may his dogs keep
their legs; may his matches never miss fire.

'God prosper him; good luck go with him; and--' 'Confusion to the
Mounted Police!' cried Bettles, to the crash of the empty cups.



The Priestly Prerogative

This is the story of a man who did not appreciate his wife; also, of a
woman who did him too great an honor when she gave herself to him.
Incidentally, it concerns a Jesuit priest who had never been known to
lie. He was an appurtenance, and a very necessary one, to the Yukon
country; but the presence of the other two was merely accidental. They
were specimens of the many strange waifs which ride the breast of a
gold rush or come tailing along behind.

Edwin Bentham and Grace Bentham were waifs; they were also tailing
along behind, for the Klondike rush of '97 had long since swept down
the great river and subsided into the famine-stricken city of Dawson.
When the Yukon shut up shop and went to sleep under a three-foot
ice-sheet, this peripatetic couple found themselves at the Five Finger
Rapids, with the City of Gold still a journey of many sleeps to the
north.

Many cattle had been butchered at this place in the fall of the year,
and the offal made a goodly heap. The three fellow-voyagers of Edwin
Bentham and wife gazed upon this deposit, did a little mental
arithmetic, caught a certain glimpse of a bonanza, and decided to
remain. And all winter they sold sacks of bones and frozen hides to the
famished dog-teams. It was a modest price they asked, a dollar a pound,
just as it came. Six months later, when the sun came back and the Yukon
awoke, they buckled on their heavy moneybelts and journeyed back to the
Southland, where they yet live and lie mightily about the Klondike they
never saw.

But Edwin Bentham--he was an indolent fellow, and had he not been
possessed of a wife, would have gladly joined issued in the dog-meat
speculation. As it was, she played upon his vanity, told him how great
and strong he was, how a man such as he certainly was could overcome
all obstacles and of a surety obtain the Golden Fleece. So he squared
his jaw, sold his share in the bones and hides for a sled and one dog,
and turned his snowshoes to the north. Needless to state, Grace
Bentham's snowshoes never allowed his tracks to grow cold. Nay, ere
their tribulations had seen three days, it was the man who followed in
the rear, and the woman who broke trail in advance. Of course, if
anybody hove in sight, the position was instantly reversed. Thus did
his manhood remain virgin to the travelers who passed like ghosts on
the silent trail. There are such men in this world.

How such a man and such a woman came to take each other for better and
for worse is unimportant to this narrative. These things are familiar
to us all, and those people who do them, or even question them too
closely, are apt to lose a beautiful faith which is known as Eternal
Fitness.

Edwin Bentham was a boy, thrust by mischance into a man's body,--a boy
who could complacently pluck a butterfly, wing from wing, or cower in
abject terror before a lean, nervy fellow, not half his size. He was a
selfish cry-baby, hidden behind a man's mustache and stature, and
glossed over with a skin-deep veneer of culture and conventionality.
Yes; he was a clubman and a society man, the sort that grace social
functions and utter inanities with a charm and unction which is
indescribable; the sort that talk big, and cry over a toothache; the
sort that put more hell into a woman's life by marrying her than can
the most graceless libertine that ever browsed in forbidden pastures.
We meet these men every day, but we rarely know them for what they are.
Second to marrying them, the best way to get this knowledge is to eat
out of the same pot and crawl under the same blanket with them
for--well, say a week; no greater margin is necessary.

To see Grace Bentham, was to see a slender, girlish creature; to know
her, was to know a soul which dwarfed your own, yet retained all the
elements of the eternal feminine. This was the woman who urged and
encouraged her husband in his Northland quest, who broke trail for him
when no one was looking, and cried in secret over her weakling woman's
body.

So journeyed this strangely assorted couple down to old Fort Selkirk,
then through fivescore miles of dismal wilderness to Stuart River. And
when the short day left them, and the man lay down in the snow and
blubbered, it was the woman who lashed him to the sled, bit her lips
with the pain of her aching limbs, and helped the dog haul him to
Malemute Kid's cabin. Malemute Kid was not at home, but Meyers, the
German trader, cooked great moose-steaks and shook up a bed of fresh
pine boughs. Lake, Langham, and Parker, were excited, and not unduly so
when the cause was taken into account.

'Oh, Sandy! Say, can you tell a porterhouse from a round? Come out and
lend us a hand, anyway!' This appeal emanated from the cache, where
Langham was vainly struggling with divers quarters of frozen moose.

'Don't you budge from those dishes!' commanded Parker.

'I say, Sandy; there's a good fellow--just run down to the Missouri
Camp and borrow some cinnamon,' begged Lake.

'Oh! oh! hurry up! Why don't--' But the crash of meat and boxes, in the
cache, abruptly quenched this peremptory summons.

'Come now, Sandy; it won't take a minute to go down to the Missouri--'

'You leave him alone,' interrupted Parker. 'How am I to mix the
biscuits if the table isn't cleared off?'

Sandy paused in indecision, till suddenly the fact that he was
Langham's 'man' dawned upon him. Then he apologetically threw down the
greasy dishcloth, and went to his master's rescue.

These promising scions of wealthy progenitors had come to the Northland
in search of laurels, with much money to burn, and a 'man' apiece.
Luckily for their souls, the other two men were up the White River in
search of a mythical quartz-ledge; so Sandy had to grin under the
responsibility of three healthy masters, each of whom was possessed of
peculiar cookery ideas. Twice that morning had a disruption of the
whole camp been imminent, only averted by immense concessions from one
or the other of these knights of the chafing-dish. But at last their
mutual creation, a really dainty dinner, was completed.

Then they sat down to a three-cornered game of 'cut-throat,'--a
proceeding which did away with all casus belli for future hostilities,
and permitted the victor to depart on a most important mission.

This fortune fell to Parker, who parted his hair in the middle, put on
his mittens and bearskin cap, and stepped over to Malemute Kid's cabin.
And when he returned, it was in the company of Grace Bentham and
Malemute Kid,--the former very sorry her husband could not share with
her their hospitality, for he had gone up to look at the Henderson
Creek mines, and the latter still a trifle stiff from breaking trail
down the Stuart River.

Meyers had been asked, but had declined, being deeply engrossed in an
experiment of raising bread from hops.

Well, they could do without the husband; but a woman--why they had not
seen one all winter, and the presence of this one promised a new era in
their lives.

They were college men and gentlemen, these three young fellows,
yearning for the flesh-pots they had been so long denied. Probably
Grace Bentham suffered from a similar hunger; at least, it meant much
to her, the first bright hour in many weeks of darkness.

But that wonderful first course, which claimed the versatile Lake for
its parent, had no sooner been served than there came a loud knock at
the door.

'Oh! Ah! Won't you come in, Mr. Bentham?' said Parker, who had stepped
to see who the newcomer might be.

'Is my wife here?' gruffly responded that worthy.

'Why, yes. We left word with Mr. Meyers.' Parker was exerting his most
dulcet tones, inwardly wondering what the deuce it all meant. 'Won't
you come in? Expecting you at any moment, we reserved a place. And just
in time for the first course, too.' 'Come in, Edwin, dear,' chirped
Grace Bentham from her seat at the table.

Parker naturally stood aside.

'I want my wife,' reiterated Bentham hoarsely, the intonation savoring
disagreeably of ownership.

Parker gasped, was within an ace of driving his fist into the face of
his boorish visitor, but held himself awkwardly in check. Everybody
rose. Lake lost his head and caught himself on the verge of saying,
'Must you go?' Then began the farrago of leave-taking. 'So nice of
you--' 'I am awfully sorry' 'By Jove! how things did brighten--'
'Really now, you--'

'Thank you ever so much--' 'Nice trip to Dawson--' etc., etc.

In this wise the lamb was helped into her jacket and led to the
slaughter. Then the door slammed, and they gazed woefully upon the
deserted table.

'Damn!' Langham had suffered disadvantages in his early training, and
his oaths were weak and monotonous. 'Damn!' he repeated, vaguely
conscious of the incompleteness and vainly struggling for a more virile
term. It is a clever woman who can fill out the many weak places in an
inefficient man, by her own indomitability, re-enforce his vacillating
nature, infuse her ambitious soul into his, and spur him on to great
achievements. And it is indeed a very clever and tactful woman who can
do all this, and do it so subtly that the man receives all the credit
and believes in his inmost heart that everything is due to him and him
alone.

This is what Grace Bentham proceeded to do. Arriving in Dawson with a
few pounds of flour and several letters of introduction, she at once
applied herself to the task of pushing her big baby to the fore. It was
she who melted the stony heart and wrung credit from the rude barbarian
who presided over the destiny of the P. C. Company; yet it was Edwin
Bentham to whom the concession was ostensibly granted. It was she who
dragged her baby up and down creeks, over benches and divides, and on a
dozen wild stampedes; yet everybody remarked what an energetic fellow
that Bentham was. It was she who studied maps, and catechised miners,
and hammered geography and locations into his hollow head, till
everybody marveled at his broad grasp of the country and knowledge of
its conditions. Of course, they said the wife was a brick, and only a
few wise ones appreciated and pitied the brave little woman.

She did the work; he got the credit and reward. In the Northwest
Territory a married woman cannot stake or record a creek, bench, or
quartz claim; so Edwin Bentham went down to the Gold Commissioner and
filed on Bench Claim 23, second tier, of French Hill. And when April
came they were washing out a thousand dollars a day, with many, many
such days in prospect.

At the base of French Hill lay Eldorado Creek, and on a creek claim
stood the cabin of Clyde Wharton. At present he was not washing out a
diurnal thousand dollars; but his dumps grew, shift by shift, and there
would come a time when those dumps would pass through his sluice-boxes,
depositing in the riffles, in the course of half a dozen days, several
hundred thousand dollars. He often sat in that cabin, smoked his pipe,
and dreamed beautiful little dreams,--dreams in which neither the dumps
nor the half-ton of dust in the P. C. Company's big safe, played a part.

And Grace Bentham, as she washed tin dishes in her hillside cabin,
often glanced down into Eldorado Creek, and dreamed,--not of dumps nor
dust, however. They met frequently, as the trail to the one claim
crossed the other, and there is much to talk about in the Northland
spring; but never once, by the light of an eye nor the slip of a
tongue, did they speak their hearts.

This is as it was at first. But one day Edwin Bentham was brutal. All
boys are thus; besides, being a French Hill king now, he began to think
a great deal of himself and to forget all he owed to his wife. On this
day, Wharton heard of it, and waylaid Grace Bentham, and talked wildly.
This made her very happy, though she would not listen, and made him
promise to not say such things again. Her hour had not come.

But the sun swept back on its northern journey, the black of midnight
changed to the steely color of dawn, the snow slipped away, the water
dashed again over the glacial drift, and the wash-up began. Day and
night the yellow clay and scraped bedrock hurried through the swift
sluices, yielding up its ransom to the strong men from the Southland.

And in that time of tumult came Grace Bentham's hour.

To all of us such hours at some time come,--that is, to us who are not
too phlegmatic.

Some people are good, not from inherent love of virtue, but from sheer
laziness. But those of us who know weak moments may understand.

Edwin Bentham was weighing dust over the bar of the saloon at the
Forks--altogether too much of his dust went over that pine board--when
his wife came down the hill and slipped into Clyde Wharton's cabin.
Wharton was not expecting her, but that did not alter the case. And
much subsequent misery and idle waiting might have been avoided, had
not Father Roubeau seen this and turned aside from the main creek
trail. 'My child,--' 'Hold on, Father Roubeau! Though I'm not of your
faith, I respect you; but you can't come in between this woman and me!'
'You know what you are doing?' 'Know! Were you God Almighty, ready to
fling me into eternal fire, I'd bank my will against yours in this
matter.' Wharton had placed Grace on a stool and stood belligerently
before her.

'You sit down on that chair and keep quiet,' he continued, addressing
the Jesuit. 'I'll take my innings now. You can have yours after.'

Father Roubeau bowed courteously and obeyed. He was an easy-going man
and had learned to bide his time. Wharton pulled a stool alongside the
woman's, smothering her hand in his.

'Then you do care for me, and will take me away?' Her face seemed to
reflect the peace of this man, against whom she might draw close for
shelter.

'Dear, don't you remember what I said before? Of course I-' 'But how
can you?--the wash-up?' 'Do you think that worries? Anyway, I'll give
the job to Father Roubeau, here.

'I can trust him to safely bank the dust with the company.' 'To think
of it!--I'll never see him again.' 'A blessing!' 'And to go--O, Clyde,
I can't! I can't!' 'There, there; of course you can, just let me plan
it.--You see, as soon as we get a few traps together, we'll start,
and-' 'Suppose he comes back?' 'I'll break every-' 'No, no! No
fighting, Clyde! Promise me that.' 'All right! I'll just tell the men
to throw him off the claim. They've seen how he's treated you, and
haven't much love for him.'

'You mustn't do that. You mustn't hurt him.' 'What then? Let him come
right in here and take you away before my eyes?' 'No-o,' she half
whispered, stroking his hand softly.

'Then let me run it, and don't worry. I'll see he doesn't get hurt.
Precious lot he cared whether you got hurt or not! We won't go back to
Dawson. I'll send word down for a couple of the boys to outfit and pole
a boat up the Yukon. We'll cross the divide and raft down the Indian
River to meet them. Then--' 'And then?' Her head was on his shoulder.

Their voices sank to softer cadences, each word a caress. The Jesuit
fidgeted nervously.

'And then?' she repeated.

'Why we'll pole up, and up, and up, and portage the White Horse Rapids
and the Box Canon.' 'Yes?' 'And the Sixty-Mile River; then the lakes,
Chilcoot, Dyea, and Salt Water.' 'But, dear, I can't pole a boat.' 'You
little goose! I'll get Sitka Charley; he knows all the good water and
best camps, and he is the best traveler I ever met, if he is an Indian.
All you'll have to do, is to sit in the middle of the boat, and sing
songs, and play Cleopatra, and fight--no, we're in luck; too early for
mosquitoes.'

'And then, O my Antony?' 'And then a steamer, San Francisco, and the
world! Never to come back to this cursed hole again. Think of it! The
world, and ours to choose from! I'll sell out. Why, we're rich! The
Waldworth Syndicate will give me half a million for what's left in the
ground, and I've got twice as much in the dumps and with the P. C.
Company. We'll go to the Fair in Paris in 1900. We'll go to Jerusalem,
if you say so.

'We'll buy an Italian palace, and you can play Cleopatra to your
heart's content. No, you shall be Lucretia, Acte, or anybody your
little heart sees fit to become. But you mustn't, you really mustn't-'
'The wife of Caesar shall be above reproach.' 'Of course, but--' 'But I
won't be your wife, will I, dear?' 'I didn't mean that.' 'But you'll
love me just as much, and never even think--oh! I know you'll be like
other men; you'll grow tired, and--and-'

'How can you? I--' 'Promise me.' 'Yes, yes; I do promise.' 'You say it
so easily, dear; but how do you know?--or I know? I have so little to
give, yet it is so much, and all I have. O, Clyde! promise me you
won't?'

'There, there! You mustn't begin to doubt already. Till death do us
part, you know.'

'Think! I once said that to--to him, and now?' 'And now, little
sweetheart, you're not to bother about such things any more.

Of course, I never, never will, and--' And for the first time, lips
trembled against lips.

Father Roubeau had been watching the main trail through the window, but
could stand the strain no longer.

He cleared his throat and turned around.

'Your turn now, Father!' Wharton's face was flushed with the fire of
his first embrace.

There was an exultant ring to his voice as he abdicated in the other's
favor. He had no doubt as to the result. Neither had Grace, for a smile
played about her mouth as she faced the priest.

'My child,' he began, 'my heart bleeds for you. It is a pretty dream,
but it cannot be.'

'And why, Father? I have said yes.' 'You knew not what you did. You did
not think of the oath you took, before your God, to that man who is
your husband. It remains for me to make you realize the sanctity of
such a pledge.' 'And if I do realize, and yet refuse?'

'Then God'

'Which God? My husband has a God which I care not to worship. There
must be many such.' 'Child! unsay those words! Ah! you do not mean
them. I understand. I, too, have had such moments.' For an instant he
was back in his native France, and a wistful, sad-eyed face came as a
mist between him and the woman before him.

'Then, Father, has my God forsaken me? I am not wicked above women. My
misery with him has been great. Why should it be greater? Why shall I
not grasp at happiness? I cannot, will not, go back to him!' 'Rather is
your God forsaken. Return. Throw your burden upon Him, and the darkness
shall be lifted. O my child,--' 'No; it is useless; I have made my bed
and so shall I lie. I will go on. And if God punishes me, I shall bear
it somehow. You do not understand. You are not a woman.' 'My mother was
a woman.'

'But--' 'And Christ was born of a woman.' She did not answer. A silence
fell. Wharton pulled his mustache impatiently and kept an eye on the
trail. Grace leaned her elbow on the table, her face set with resolve.
The smile had died away. Father Roubeau shifted his ground.

'You have children?'

'At one time I wished--but now--no. And I am thankful.' 'And a mother?'
'Yes.' 'She loves you?' 'Yes.' Her replies were whispers.

'And a brother?--no matter, he is a man. But a sister?' Her head
drooped a quavering 'Yes.' 'Younger? Very much?' 'Seven years.' 'And
you have thought well about this matter? About them? About your mother?
And your sister? She stands on the threshold of her woman's life, and
this wildness of yours may mean much to her. Could you go before her,
look upon her fresh young face, hold her hand in yours, or touch your
cheek to hers?'

To his words, her brain formed vivid images, till she cried out,
'Don't! don't!' and shrank away as do the wolf-dogs from the lash.

'But you must face all this; and better it is to do it now.' In his
eyes, which she could not see, there was a great compassion, but his
face, tense and quivering, showed no relenting.

She raised her head from the table, forced back the tears, struggled
for control.

'I shall go away. They will never see me, and come to forget me. I
shall be to them as dead. And--and I will go with Clyde--today.' It
seemed final. Wharton stepped forward, but the priest waved him back.

'You have wished for children?' A silent 'Yes.' 'And prayed for them?'
'Often.' 'And have you thought, if you should have children?' Father
Roubeau's eyes rested for a moment on the man by the window.

A quick light shot across her face. Then the full import dawned upon
her. She raised her hand appealingly, but he went on.

'Can you picture an innocent babe in your arms? A boy? The world is not
so hard upon a girl. Why, your very breast would turn to gall! And you
could be proud and happy of your boy, as you looked on other
children?--' 'O, have pity! Hush!' 'A scapegoat--'

'Don't! don't! I will go back!' She was at his feet.

'A child to grow up with no thought of evil, and one day the world to
fling a tender name in his face. A child to look back and curse you
from whose loins he sprang!'

'O my God! my God!' She groveled on the floor. The priest sighed and
raised her to her feet.

Wharton pressed forward, but she motioned him away.

'Don't come near me, Clyde! I am going back!' The tears were coursing
pitifully down her face, but she made no effort to wipe them away.

'After all this? You cannot! I will not let you!' 'Don't touch me!' She
shivered and drew back.

'I will! You are mine! Do you hear? You are mine!' Then he whirled upon
the priest. 'O what a fool I was to ever let you wag your silly tongue!
Thank your God you are not a common man, for I'd--but the priestly
prerogative must be exercised, eh? Well, you have exercised it. Now get
out of my house, or I'll forget who and what you are!' Father Roubeau
bowed, took her hand, and started for the door. But Wharton cut them
off.

'Grace! You said you loved me?' 'I did.' 'And you do now?' 'I do.' 'Say
it again.'

'I do love you, Clyde; I do.' 'There, you priest!' he cried. 'You have
heard it, and with those words on her lips you would send her back to
live a lie and a hell with that man?'

But Father Roubeau whisked the woman into the inner room and closed the
door. 'No words!' he whispered to Wharton, as he struck a casual
posture on a stool. 'Remember, for her sake,' he added.

The room echoed to a rough knock at the door; the latch raised and
Edwin Bentham stepped in.

'Seen anything of my wife?' he asked as soon as salutations had been
exchanged.

Two heads nodded negatively.

'I saw her tracks down from the cabin,' he continued tentatively, 'and
they broke off, just opposite here, on the main trail.' His listeners
looked bored.

'And I--I thought--'

'She was here!' thundered Wharton.

The priest silenced him with a look. 'Did you see her tracks leading up
to this cabin, my son?' Wily Father Roubeau--he had taken good care to
obliterate them as he came up the same path an hour before.

'I didn't stop to look, I--' His eyes rested suspiciously on the door
to the other room, then interrogated the priest. The latter shook his
head; but the doubt seemed to linger.

Father Roubeau breathed a swift, silent prayer, and rose to his feet.
'If you doubt me, why--' He made as though to open the door.

A priest could not lie. Edwin Bentham had heard this often, and
believed it.

'Of course not, Father,' he interposed hurriedly. 'I was only wondering
where my wife had gone, and thought maybe--I guess she's up at Mrs.
Stanton's on French Gulch. Nice weather, isn't it? Heard the news?
Flour's gone down to forty dollars a hundred, and they say the
che-cha-quas are flocking down the river in droves.

'But I must be going; so good-by.' The door slammed, and from the
window they watched him take his guest up French Gulch. A few weeks
later, just after the June high-water, two men shot a canoe into
mid-stream and made fast to a derelict pine. This tightened the painter
and jerked the frail craft along as would a tow-boat. Father Roubeau
had been directed to leave the Upper Country and return to his swarthy
children at Minook. The white men had come among them, and they were
devoting too little time to fishing, and too much to a certain deity
whose transient habitat was in countless black bottles.

Malemute Kid also had business in the Lower Country, so they journeyed
together.

But one, in all the Northland, knew the man Paul Roubeau, and that man
was Malemute Kid. Before him alone did the priest cast off the
sacerdotal garb and stand naked. And why not? These two men knew each
other. Had they not shared the last morsel of fish, the last pinch of
tobacco, the last and inmost thought, on the barren stretches of Bering
Sea, in the heartbreaking mazes of the Great Delta, on the terrible
winter journey from Point Barrow to the Porcupine? Father Roubeau
puffed heavily at his trail-worn pipe, and gazed on the reddisked sun,
poised somberly on the edge of the northern horizon.

Malemute Kid wound up his watch. It was midnight.

'Cheer up, old man!' The Kid was evidently gathering up a broken thread.

'God surely will forgive such a lie. Let me give you the word of a man
who strikes a true note: If She have spoken a word, remember thy lips
are sealed, And the brand of the Dog is upon him by whom is the secret
revealed.

If there be trouble to Herward, and a lie of the blackest can clear,
Lie, while thy lips can move or a man is alive to hear.'

Father Roubeau removed his pipe and reflected. 'The man speaks true,
but my soul is not vexed with that. The lie and the penance stand with
God; but--but--'

'What then? Your hands are clean.' 'Not so. Kid, I have thought much,
and yet the thing remains. I knew, and made her go back.' The clear
note of a robin rang out from the wooden bank, a partridge drummed the
call in the distance, a moose lunged noisily in the eddy; but the twain
smoked on in silence.



The Wisdom of the Trail

Sitka Charley had achieved the impossible. Other Indians might have
known as much of the wisdom of the trail as he did; but he alone knew
the white man's wisdom, the honor of the trail, and the law. But these
things had not come to him in a day. The aboriginal mind is slow to
generalize, and many facts, repeated often, are required to compass an
understanding. Sitka Charley, from boyhood, had been thrown continually
with white men, and as a man he had elected to cast his fortunes with
them, expatriating himself, once and for all, from his own people. Even
then, respecting, almost venerating their power, and pondering over it,
he had yet to divine its secret essence--the honor and the law. And it
was only by the cumulative evidence of years that he had finally come
to understand. Being an alien, when he did know, he knew it better than
the white man himself; being an Indian, he had achieved the impossible.

And of these things had been bred a certain contempt for his own
people--a contempt which he had made it a custom to conceal, but which
now burst forth in a polyglot whirlwind of curses upon the heads of
Kah-Chucte and Gowhee. They cringed before him like a brace of snarling
wolf dogs, too cowardly to spring, too wolfish to cover their fangs.
They were not handsome creatures. Neither was Sitka Charley. All three
were frightful-looking. There was no flesh to their faces; their
cheekbones were massed with hideous scabs which had cracked and frozen
alternately under the intense frost; while their eyes burned luridly
with the light which is born of desperation and hunger. Men so
situated, beyond the pale of the honor and the law, are not to be
trusted. Sitka Charley knew this; and this was why he had forced them
to abandon their rifles with the rest of the camp outfit ten days
before. His rifle and Captain Eppingwell's were the only ones that
remained.

'Come, get a fire started,' he commanded, drawing out the precious
matchbox with its attendant strips of dry birchbark.

The two Indians fell sullenly to the task of gathering dead branches
and underwood. They were weak and paused often, catching themselves, in
the act of stooping, with giddy motions, or staggering to the center of
operations with their knees shaking like castanets.

After each trip they rested for a moment, as though sick and deadly
weary. At times their eyes took on the patient stoicism of dumb
suffering; and again the ego seemed almost burst forth with its wild
cry, 'I, I, I want to exist!'--the dominant note of the whole living
universe.

A light breath of air blew from the south, nipping the exposed portions
of their bodies and driving the frost, in needles of fire, through fur
and flesh to the bones. So, when the fire had grown lusty and thawed a
damp circle in the snow about it, Sitka Charley forced his reluctant
comrades to lend a hand in pitching a fly. It was a primitive affair,
merely a blanket stretched parallel with the fire and to windward of
it, at an angle of perhaps forty-five degrees. This shut out the chill
wind and threw the heat backward and down upon those who were to huddle
in its shelter. Then a layer of green spruce boughs were spread, that
their bodies might not come in contact with the snow. When this task
was completed, Kah-Chucte and Gowhee proceeded to take care of their
feet. Their icebound moccasins were sadly worn by much travel, and the
sharp ice of the river jams had cut them to rags.

Their Siwash socks were similarly conditioned, and when these had been
thawed and removed, the dead-white tips of the toes, in the various
stages of mortification, told their simple tale of the trail.

Leaving the two to the drying of their footgear, Sitka Charley turned
back over the course he had come. He, too, had a mighty longing to sit
by the fire and tend his complaining flesh, but the honor and the law
forbade. He toiled painfully over the frozen field, each step a
protest, every muscle in revolt. Several times, where the open water
between the jams had recently crusted, he was forced to miserably
accelerate his movements as the fragile footing swayed and threatened
beneath him. In such places death was quick and easy; but it was not
his desire to endure no more.

His deepening anxiety vanished as two Indians dragged into view round a
bend in the river. They staggered and panted like men under heavy
burdens; yet the packs on their backs were a matter of but a few
pounds. He questioned them eagerly, and their replies seemed to relieve
him. He hurried on. Next came two white men, supporting between them a
woman. They also behaved as though drunken, and their limbs shook with
weakness. But the woman leaned lightly upon them, choosing to carry
herself forward with her own strength. At the sight of her a flash of
joy cast its fleeting light across Sitka Charley's face. He cherished a
very great regard for Mrs. Eppingwell. He had seen many white women,
but this was the first to travel the trail with him. When Captain
Eppingwell proposed the hazardous undertaking and made him an offer for
his services, he had shaken his head gravely; for it was an unknown
journey through the dismal vastnesses of the Northland, and he knew it
to be of the kind that try to the uttermost the souls of men.

But when he learned that the captain's wife was to accompany them, he
had refused flatly to have anything further to do with it. Had it been
a woman of his own race he would have harbored no objections; but these
women of the Southland--no, no, they were too soft, too tender, for
such enterprises.

Sitka Charley did not know this kind of woman. Five minutes before, he
did not even dream of taking charge of the expedition; but when she
came to him with her wonderful smile and her straight clean English,
and talked to the point, without pleading or persuading, he had
incontinently yielded. Had there been a softness and appeal to mercy in
the eyes, a tremble to the voice, a taking advantage of sex, he would
have stiffened to steel; instead her clear-searching eyes and
clear-ringing voice, her utter frankness and tacit assumption of
equality, had robbed him of his reason. He felt, then, that this was a
new breed of woman; and ere they had been trail mates for many days he
knew why the sons of such women mastered the land and the sea, and why
the sons of his own womankind could not prevail against them. Tender
and soft! Day after day he watched her, muscle-weary, exhausted,
indomitable, and the words beat in upon him in a perennial refrain.
Tender and soft! He knew her feet had been born to easy paths and sunny
lands, strangers to the moccasined pain of the North, unkissed by the
chill lips of the frost, and he watched and marveled at them twinkling
ever through the weary day.

She had always a smile and a word of cheer, from which not even the
meanest packer was excluded. As the way grew darker she seemed to
stiffen and gather greater strength, and when Kah-Chucte and Gowhee,
who had bragged that they knew every landmark of the way as a child did
the skin bails of the tepee, acknowledged that they knew not where they
were, it was she who raised a forgiving voice amid the curses of the
men. She had sung to them that night till they felt the weariness fall
from them and were ready to face the future with fresh hope. And when
the food failed and each scant stint was measured jealously, she it was
who rebelled against the machinations of her husband and Sitka Charley,
and demanded and received a share neither greater nor less than that of
the others.

Sitka Charley was proud to know this woman. A new richness, a greater
breadth, had come into his life with her presence. Hitherto he had been
his own mentor, had turned to right or left at no man's beck; he had
moulded himself according to his own dictates, nourished his manhood
regardless of all save his own opinion. For the first time he had felt
a call from without for the best that was in him, just a glance of
appreciation from the clear-searching eyes, a word of thanks from the
clear-ringing voice, just a slight wreathing of the lips in the
wonderful smile, and he walked with the gods for hours to come. It was
a new stimulant to his manhood; for the first time he thrilled with a
conscious pride in his wisdom of the trail; and between the twain they
ever lifted the sinking hearts of their comrades. The faces of the two
men and the woman brightened as they saw him, for after all he was the
staff they leaned upon. But Sitka Charley, rigid as was his wont,
concealing pain and pleasure impartially beneath an iron exterior,
asked them the welfare of the rest, told the distance to the fire, and
continued on the back-trip.

Next he met a single Indian, unburdened, limping, lips compressed, and
eyes set with the pain of a foot in which the quick fought a losing
battle with the dead. All possible care had been taken of him, but in
the last extremity the weak and unfortunate must perish, and Sitka
Charley deemed his days to be few. The man could not keep up for long,
so he gave him rough cheering words. After that came two more Indians,
to whom he had allotted the task of helping along Joe, the third white
man of the party. They had deserted him. Sitka Charley saw at a glance
the lurking spring in their bodies, and knew they had at last cast off
his mastery. So he was not taken unawares when he ordered them back in
quest of their abandoned charge, and saw the gleam of the hunting
knives that they drew from the sheaths. A pitiful spectacle, three weak
men lifting their puny strength in the face of the mighty vastness; but
the two recoiled under the fierce rifle blows of the one and returned
like beaten dogs to the leash. Two hours later, with Joe reeling
between them and Sitka Charley bringing up the rear, they came to the
fire, where the remainder of the expedition crouched in the shelter of
the fly.

'A few words, my comrades, before we sleep,' Sitka Charley said after
they had devoured their slim rations of unleavened bread. He was
speaking to the Indians in their own tongue, having already given the
import to the whites. 'A few words, my comrades, for your own good,
that ye may yet perchance live. I shall give you the law; on his own
head by the death of him that breaks it. We have passed the Hills of
Silence, and we now travel the head reaches of the Stuart. It may be
one sleep, it may be several, it may be many sleeps, but in time we
shall come among the men of the Yukon, who have much grub. It were well
that we look to the law. Today Kah-Chucte and Gowhee, whom I commanded
to break trail, forgot they were men, and like frightened children ran
away.

'True, they forgot; so let us forget. But hereafter, let them remember.
If it should happen they do not...' He touched his rifle carelessly,
grimly. 'Tomorrow they shall carry the flour and see that the white man
Joe lies not down by the trail. The cups of flour are counted; should
so much as an ounce be wanting at nightfall... Do ye understand? Today
there were others that forgot. Moose Head and Three Salmon left the
white man Joe to lie in the snow. Let them forget no more. With the
light of day shall they go forth and break trail. Ye have heard the
law. Look well, lest ye break it.' Sitka Charley found it beyond him to
keep the line close up. From Moose Head and Three Salmon, who broke
trail in advance, to Kah-Chucte, Gowhee, and Joe, it straggled out over
a mile. Each staggered, fell or rested as he saw fit.

The line of march was a progression through a chain of irregular halts.
Each drew upon the last remnant of his strength and stumbled onward
till it was expended, but in some miraculous way there was always
another last remnant. Each time a man fell it was with the firm belief
that he would rise no more; yet he did rise, and again and again. The
flesh yielded, the will conquered; but each triumph was a tragedy. The
Indian with the frozen foot, no longer erect, crawled forward on hand
and knee. He rarely rested, for he knew the penalty exacted by the
frost.

Even Mrs. Eppingwell's lips were at last set in a stony smile, and her
eyes, seeing, saw not. Often she stopped, pressing a mittened hand to
her heart, gasping and dizzy.

Joe, the white man, had passed beyond the stage of suffering. He no
longer begged to be let alone, prayed to die; but was soothed and
content under the anodyne of delirium. Kah-Chucte and Gowhee dragged
him on roughly, venting upon him many a savage glance or blow. To them
it was the acme of injustice.

Their hearts were bitter with hate, heavy with fear. Why should they
cumber their strength with his weakness? To do so meant death; not to
do so--and they remembered the law of Sitka Charley, and the rifle.

Joe fell with greater frequency as the daylight waned, and so hard was
he to raise that they dropped farther and farther behind. Sometimes all
three pitched into the snow, so weak had the Indians become. Yet on
their backs was life, and strength, and warmth.

Within the flour sacks were all the potentialities of existence. They
could not but think of this, and it was not strange, that which came to
pass. They had fallen by the side of a great timber jam where a
thousand cords of firewood waited the match. Near by was an air hole
through the ice. Kah-Chucte looked on the wood and the water, as did
Gowhee; then they looked at each other.

Never a word was spoken. Gowhee struck a fire; Kah-Chucte filled a tin
cup with water and heated it; Joe babbled of things in another land, in
a tongue they did not understand.

They mixed flour with the warm water till it was a thin paste, and of
this they drank many cups. They did not offer any to Joe; but he did
not mind. He did not mind anything, not even his moccasins, which
scorched and smoked among the coals.

A crystal mist of snow fell about them, softly, caressingly, wrapping
them in clinging robes of white. And their feet would have yet trod
many trails had not destiny brushed the clouds aside and cleared the
air. Nay, ten minutes' delay would have been salvation.

Sitka Charley, looking back, saw the pillared smoke of their fire, and
guessed. And he looked ahead at those who were faithful, and at Mrs.
Eppingwell. 'So, my good comrades, ye have again forgotten that you
were men? Good! Very good. There will be fewer bellies to feed.' Sitka
Charley retied the flour as he spoke, strapping the pack to the one on
his own back. He kicked Joe till the pain broke through the poor
devil's bliss and brought him doddering to his feet. Then he shoved him
out upon the trail and started him on his way. The two Indians
attempted to slip off.

'Hold, Gowhee! And thou, too, Kah-Chucte! Hath the flour given such
strength to thy legs that they may outrun the swift-winged lead? Think
not to cheat the law. Be men for the last time, and be content that ye
die full-stomached.

Come, step up, back to the timber, shoulder to shoulder. Come!' The two
men obeyed, quietly, without fear; for it is the future which pressed
upon the man, not the present.

'Thou, Gowhee, hast a wife and children and a deerskin lodge in the
Chipewyan. What is thy will in the matter?' 'Give thou her of the goods
which are mine by the word of the captain--the blankets, the beads, the
tobacco, the box which makes strange sounds after the manner of the
white men. Say that I did die on the trail, but say not how.' 'And
thou, Kah-Chucte, who hast nor wife nor child?' 'Mine is a sister, the
wife of the factor at Koshim. He beats her, and she is not happy. Give
thou her the goods which are mine by the contract, and tell her it were
well she go back to her own people. Shouldst thou meet the man, and be
so minded, it were a good deed that he should die. He beats her, and
she is afraid.' 'Are ye content to die by the law?' 'We are.' 'Then
good-bye, my good comrades. May ye sit by the well-filled pot, in warm
lodges, ere the day is done.' As he spoke he raised his rifle, and many
echoes broke the silence. Hardly had they died away when other rifles
spoke in the distance. Sitka Charley started.

There had been more than one shot, yet there was but one other rifle in
the party.

He gave a fleeting glance at the men who lay so quietly, smiled
viciously at the wisdom of the trail, and hurried on to meet the men of
the Yukon.



The Wife of a King

Once when the northland was very young, the social and civic virtues
were remarkably alike for their paucity and their simplicity. When the
burden of domestic duties grew grievous, and the fireside mood expanded
to a constant protest against its bleak loneliness, the adventurers
from the Southland, in lieu of better, paid the stipulated prices and
took unto themselves native wives. It was a foretaste of Paradise to
the women, for it must be confessed that the white rovers gave far
better care and treatment of them than did their Indian copartners. Of
course, the white men themselves were satisfied with such deals, as
were also the Indian men for that matter. Having sold their daughters
and sisters for cotton blankets and obsolete rifles and traded their
warm furs for flimsy calico and bad whisky, the sons of the soil
promptly and cheerfully succumbed to quick consumption and other swift
diseases correlated with the blessings of a superior civilization.

It was in these days of Arcadian simplicity that Cal Galbraith
journeyed through the land and fell sick on the Lower River. It was a
refreshing advent in the lives of the good Sisters of the Holy Cross,
who gave him shelter and medicine; though they little dreamed of the
hot elixir infused into his veins by the touch of their soft hands and
their gentle ministrations. Cal Galbraith, became troubled with strange
thoughts which clamored for attention till he laid eyes on the Mission
girl, Madeline. Yet he gave no sign, biding his time patiently. He
strengthened with the coming spring, and when the sun rode the heavens
in a golden circle, and the joy and throb of life was in all the land,
he gathered his still weak body together and departed.

Now, Madeline, the Mission girl, was an orphan. Her white father had
failed to give a bald-faced grizzly the trail one day, and had died
quickly. Then her Indian mother, having no man to fill the winter
cache, had tried the hazardous experiment of waiting till the
salmon-run on fifty pounds of flour and half as many of bacon. After
that, the baby, Chook-ra, went to live with the good Sisters, and to be
thenceforth known by another name.

But Madeline still had kinsfolk, the nearest being a dissolute uncle
who outraged his vitals with inordinate quantities of the white man's
whisky. He strove daily to walk with the gods, and incidentally, his
feet sought shorter trails to the grave. When sober he suffered
exquisite torture. He had no conscience. To this ancient vagabond Cal
Galbraith duly presented himself, and they consumed many words and much
tobacco in the conversation that followed. Promises were also made; and
in the end the old heathen took a few pounds of dried salmon and his
birch-bark canoe, and paddled away to the Mission of the Holy Cross.

It is not given the world to know what promises he made and what lies
he told--the Sisters never gossip; but when he returned, upon his
swarthy chest there was a brass crucifix, and in his canoe his niece
Madeline. That night there was a grand wedding and a potlach; so that
for two days to follow there was no fishing done by the village. But in
the morning Madeline shook the dust of the Lower River from her
moccasins, and with her husband, in a poling-boat, went to live on the
Upper River in a place known as the Lower Country. And in the years
which followed she was a good wife, sharing her husband's hardships and
cooking his food. And she kept him in straight trails, till he learned
to save his dust and to work mightily. In the end, he struck it rich
and built a cabin in Circle City; and his happiness was such that men
who came to visit him in his home-circle became restless at the sight
of it and envied him greatly.

But the Northland began to mature and social amenities to make their
appearance.

Hitherto, the Southland had sent forth its sons; but it now belched
forth a new exodus--this time of its daughters. Sisters and wives they
were not; but they did not fail to put new ideas in the heads of the
men, and to elevate the tone of things in ways peculiarly their own. No
more did the squaws gather at the dances, go roaring down the center in
the good, old Virginia reels, or make merry with jolly 'Dan Tucker.'
They fell back on their natural stoicism and uncomplainingly watched
the rule of their white sisters from their cabins.

Then another exodus came over the mountains from the prolific Southland.

This time it was of women that became mighty in the land. Their word
was law; their law was steel. They frowned upon the Indian wives, while
the other women became mild and walked humbly. There were cowards who
became ashamed of their ancient covenants with the daughters of the
soil, who looked with a new distaste upon their dark-skinned children;
but there were also others--men--who remained true and proud of their
aboriginal vows. When it became the fashion to divorce the native
wives. Cal Galbraith retained his manhood, and in so doing felt the
heavy hand of the women who had come last, knew least, but who ruled
the land.

One day, the Upper Country, which lies far above Circle City, was
pronounced rich. Dog-teams carried the news to Salt Water; golden
argosies freighted the lure across the North Pacific; wires and cables
sang with the tidings; and the world heard for the first time of the
Klondike River and the Yukon Country. Cal Galbraith had lived the years
quietly. He had been a good husband to Madeline, and she had blessed
him. But somehow discontent fell upon him; he felt vague yearnings for
his own kind, for the life he had been shut out from--a general sort of
desire, which men sometimes feel, to break out and taste the prime of
living. Besides, there drifted down the river wild rumors of the
wonderful El Dorado, glowing descriptions of the city of logs and
tents, and ludicrous accounts of the che-cha-quas who had rushed in and
were stampeding the whole country.

Circle City was dead. The world had moved on up river and become a new
and most marvelous world.

Cal Galbraith grew restless on the edge of things, and wished to see
with his own eyes.

So, after the wash-up, he weighed in a couple of hundred pounds of dust
on the Company's big scales, and took a draft for the same on Dawson.
Then he put Tom Dixon in charge of his mines, kissed Madeline good-by,
promised to be back before the first mush-ice ran, and took passage on
an up-river steamer.

Madeline waited, waited through all the three months of daylight. She
fed the dogs, gave much of her time to Young Cal, watched the short
summer fade away and the sun begin its long journey to the south. And
she prayed much in the manner of the Sisters of the Holy Cross. The
fall came, and with it there was mush-ice on the Yukon, and Circle City
kings returning to the winter's work at their mines, but no Cal
Galbraith. Tom Dixon received a letter, however, for his men sledded up
her winter's supply of dry pine. The Company received a letter for its
dogteams filled her cache with their best provisions, and she was told
that her credit was limitless.

Through all the ages man has been held the chief instigator of the woes
of woman; but in this case the men held their tongues and swore harshly
at one of their number who was away, while the women failed utterly to
emulate them. So, without needless delay, Madeline heard strange tales
of Cal Galbraith's doings; also, of a certain Greek dancer who played
with men as children did with bubbles. Now Madeline was an Indian
woman, and further, she had no woman friend to whom to go for wise
counsel. She prayed and planned by turns, and that night, being quick
of resolve and action, she harnessed the dogs, and with Young Cal
securely lashed to the sled, stole away.

Though the Yukon still ran free, the eddy-ice was growing, and each day
saw the river dwindling to a slushy thread. Save him who has done the
like, no man may know what she endured in traveling a hundred miles on
the rim-ice; nor may they understand the toil and hardship of breaking
the two hundred miles of packed ice which remained after the river
froze for good. But Madeline was an Indian woman, so she did these
things, and one night there came a knock at Malemute Kid's door.
Thereat he fed a team of starving dogs, put a healthy youngster to bed,
and turned his attention to an exhausted woman. He removed her icebound
moccasins while he listened to her tale, and stuck the point of his
knife into her feet that he might see how far they were frozen.

Despite his tremendous virility, Malemute Kid was possessed of a
softer, womanly element, which could win the confidence of a snarling
wolf-dog or draw confessions from the most wintry heart. Nor did he
seek them. Hearts opened to him as spontaneously as flowers to the sun.
Even the priest, Father Roubeau, had been known to confess to him,
while the men and women of the Northland were ever knocking at his
door--a door from which the latch-string hung always out. To Madeline,
he could do no wrong, make no mistake. She had known him from the time
she first cast her lot among the people of her father's race; and to
her half-barbaric mind it seemed that in him was centered the wisdom of
the ages, that between his vision and the future there could be no
intervening veil.

There were false ideals in the land. The social strictures of Dawson
were not synonymous with those of the previous era, and the swift
maturity of the Northland involved much wrong. Malemute Kid was aware
of this, and he had Cal Galbraith's measure accurately.

He knew a hasty word was the father of much evil; besides, he was
minded to teach a great lesson and bring shame upon the man. So Stanley
Prince, the young mining expert, was called into the conference the
following night as was also Lucky Jack Harrington and his violin. That
same night, Bettles, who owed a great debt to Malemute Kid, harnessed
up Cal Galbraith's dogs, lashed Cal Galbraith, Junior, to the sled, and
slipped away in the dark for Stuart River.


II

'So; one--two--three, one--two--three. Now reverse! No, no! Start up
again, Jack. See--this way.' Prince executed the movement as one should
who has led the cotillion.

'Now; one--two--three, one--two--three. Reverse! Ah! that's better. Try
it again. I say, you know, you mustn't look at your feet.
One--two--three, one--two--three. Shorter steps! You are not hanging to
the gee-pole just now. Try it over.

'There! that's the way. One--two--three, one--two--three.' Round and
round went Prince and Madeline in an interminable waltz. The table and
stools had been shoved over against the wall to increase the room.
Malemute Kid sat on the bunk, chin to knees, greatly interested. Jack
Harrington sat beside him, scraping away on his violin and following
the dancers.

It was a unique situation, the undertaking of these three men with the
woman.

The most pathetic part, perhaps, was the businesslike way in which they
went about it.

No athlete was ever trained more rigidly for a coming contest, nor
wolf-dog for the harness, than was she. But they had good material, for
Madeline, unlike most women of her race, in her childhood had escaped
the carrying of heavy burdens and the toil of the trail. Besides, she
was a clean-limbed, willowy creature, possessed of much grace which had
not hitherto been realized. It was this grace which the men strove to
bring out and knock into shape.

'Trouble with her she learned to dance all wrong,' Prince remarked to
the bunk after having deposited his breathless pupil on the table.
'She's quick at picking up; yet I could do better had she never danced
a step. But say, Kid, I can't understand this.' Prince imitated a
peculiar movement of the shoulders and head--a weakness Madeline
suffered from in walking.

'Lucky for her she was raised in the Mission,' Malemute Kid answered.
'Packing, you know,--the head-strap. Other Indian women have it bad,
but she didn't do any packing till after she married, and then only at
first. Saw hard lines with that husband of hers. They went through the
Forty-Mile famine together.' 'But can we break it?' 'Don't know.

'Perhaps long walks with her trainers will make the riffle. Anyway,
they'll take it out some, won't they, Madeline?' The girl nodded
assent. If Malemute Kid, who knew all things, said so, why it was so.
That was all there was about it.

She had come over to them, anxious to begin again. Harrington surveyed
her in quest of her points much in the same manner men usually do
horses. It certainly was not disappointing, for he asked with sudden
interest, 'What did that beggarly uncle of yours get anyway?' 'One
rifle, one blanket, twenty bottles of hooch. Rifle broke.' She said
this last scornfully, as though disgusted at how low her maiden-value
had been rated.

She spoke fair English, with many peculiarities of her husband's
speech, but there was still perceptible the Indian accent, the
traditional groping after strange gutturals. Even this her instructors
had taken in hand, and with no small success, too.

At the next intermission, Prince discovered a new predicament.

'I say, Kid,' he said, 'we're wrong, all wrong. She can't learn in
moccasins.

'Put her feet into slippers, and then onto that waxed floor--phew!'
Madeline raised a foot and regarded her shapeless house-moccasins
dubiously. In previous winters, both at Circle City and Forty-Mile, she
had danced many a night away with similar footgear, and there had been
nothing the matter.

But now--well, if there was anything wrong it was for Malemute Kid to
know, not her.

But Malemute Kid did know, and he had a good eye for measures; so he
put on his cap and mittens and went down the hill to pay Mrs.
Eppingwell a call. Her husband, Clove Eppingwell, was prominent in the
community as one of the great Government officials.

The Kid had noted her slender little foot one night, at the Governor's
Ball. And as he also knew her to be as sensible as she was pretty, it
was no task to ask of her a certain small favor.

On his return, Madeline withdrew for a moment to the inner room. When
she reappeared Prince was startled.

'By Jove!' he gasped. 'Who'd a' thought it! The little witch! Why my
sister--' 'Is an English girl,' interrupted Malemute Kid, 'with an
English foot. This girl comes of a small-footed race. Moccasins just
broadened her feet healthily, while she did not misshape them by
running with the dogs in her childhood.' But this explanation failed
utterly to allay Prince's admiration. Harrington's commercial instinct
was touched, and as he looked upon the exquisitely turned foot and
ankle, there ran through his mind the sordid list--'One rifle, one
blanket, twenty bottles of hooch.' Madeline was the wife of a king, a
king whose yellow treasure could buy outright a score of fashion's
puppets; yet in all her life her feet had known no gear save red-tanned
moosehide. At first she had looked in awe at the tiny white-satin
slippers; but she had quickly understood the admiration which shone,
manlike, in the eyes of the men. Her face flushed with pride. For the
moment she was drunken with her woman's loveliness; then she murmured,
with increased scorn, 'And one rifle, broke!' So the training went on.
Every day Malemute Kid led the girl out on long walks devoted to the
correction of her carriage and the shortening of her stride.

There was little likelihood of her identity being discovered, for Cal
Galbraith and the rest of the Old-Timers were like lost children among
the many strangers who had rushed into the land. Besides, the frost of
the North has a bitter tongue, and the tender women of the South, to
shield their cheeks from its biting caresses, were prone to the use of
canvas masks. With faces obscured and bodies lost in squirrel-skin
parkas, a mother and daughter, meeting on trail, would pass as
strangers.

The coaching progressed rapidly. At first it had been slow, but later a
sudden acceleration had manifested itself. This began from the moment
Madeline tried on the white-satin slippers, and in so doing found
herself. The pride of her renegade father, apart from any natural
self-esteem she might possess, at that instant received its birth.
Hitherto, she had deemed herself a woman of an alien breed, of inferior
stock, purchased by her lord's favor. Her husband had seemed to her a
god, who had lifted her, through no essential virtues on her part, to
his own godlike level. But she had never forgotten, even when Young Cal
was born, that she was not of his people. As he had been a god, so had
his womenkind been goddesses. She might have contrasted herself with
them, but she had never compared.

It might have been that familiarity bred contempt; however, be that as
it may, she had ultimately come to understand these roving white men,
and to weigh them.

True, her mind was dark to deliberate analysis, but she yet possessed
her woman's clarity of vision in such matters. On the night of the
slippers she had measured the bold, open admiration of her three
man-friends; and for the first time comparison had suggested itself. It
was only a foot and an ankle, but--but comparison could not, in the
nature of things, cease at that point. She judged herself by their
standards till the divinity of her white sisters was shattered. After
all, they were only women, and why should she not exalt herself to
their midst? In doing these things she learned where she lacked and
with the knowledge of her weakness came her strength. And so mightily
did she strive that her three trainers often marveled late into the
night over the eternal mystery of woman.

In this way Thanksgiving Night drew near. At irregular intervals
Bettles sent word down from Stuart River regarding the welfare of Young
Cal. The time of their return was approaching. More than once a casual
caller, hearing dance-music and the rhythmic pulse of feet, entered,
only to find Harrington scraping away and the other two beating time or
arguing noisily over a mooted step. Madeline was never in evidence,
having precipitately fled to the inner room.

On one of these nights Cal Galbraith dropped in. Encouraging news had
just come down from Stuart River, and Madeline had surpassed
herself--not in walk alone, and carriage and grace, but in womanly
roguishness. They had indulged in sharp repartee and she had defended
herself brilliantly; and then, yielding to the intoxication of the
moment, and of her own power, she had bullied, and mastered, and
wheedled, and patronized them with most astonishing success. And
instinctively, involuntarily, they had bowed, not to her beauty, her
wisdom, her wit, but to that indefinable something in woman to which
man yields yet cannot name.

The room was dizzy with sheer delight as she and Prince whirled through
the last dance of the evening. Harrington was throwing in inconceivable
flourishes, while Malemute Kid, utterly abandoned, had seized the broom
and was executing mad gyrations on his own account.

At this instant the door shook with a heavy rap-rap, and their quick
glances noted the lifting of the latch. But they had survived similar
situations before. Harrington never broke a note. Madeline shot through
the waiting door to the inner room. The broom went hurtling under the
bunk, and by the time Cal Galbraith and Louis Savoy got their heads in,
Malemute Kid and Prince were in each other's arms, wildly schottisching
down the room.

As a rule, Indian women do not make a practice of fainting on
provocation, but Madeline came as near to it as she ever had in her
life. For an hour she crouched on the floor, listening to the heavy
voices of the men rumbling up and down in mimic thunder. Like familiar
chords of childhood melodies, every intonation, every trick of her
husband's voice swept in upon her, fluttering her heart and weakening
her knees till she lay half-fainting against the door. It was well she
could neither see nor hear when he took his departure.

'When do you expect to go back to Circle City?' Malemute Kid asked
simply.

'Haven't thought much about it,' he replied. 'Don't think till after
the ice breaks.' 'And Madeline?'

He flushed at the question, and there was a quick droop to his eyes.
Malemute Kid could have despised him for that, had he known men less.
As it was, his gorge rose against the wives and daughters who had come
into the land, and not satisfied with usurping the place of the native
women, had put unclean thoughts in the heads of the men and made them
ashamed.

'I guess she's all right,' the Circle City King answered hastily, and
in an apologetic manner. 'Tom Dixon's got charge of my interests, you
know, and he sees to it that she has everything she wants.' Malemute
Kid laid hand upon his arm and hushed him suddenly. They had stepped
without. Overhead, the aurora, a gorgeous wanton, flaunted miracles of
color; beneath lay the sleeping town. Far below, a solitary dog gave
tongue.

The King again began to speak, but the Kid pressed his hand for
silence. The sound multiplied. Dog after dog took up the strain till
the full-throated chorus swayed the night.

To him who hears for the first time this weird song, is told the first
and greatest secret of the Northland; to him who has heard it often, it
is the solemn knell of lost endeavor. It is the plaint of tortured
souls, for in it is invested the heritage of the North, the suffering
of countless generations--the warning and the requiem to the world's
estrays.

Cal Galbraith shivered slightly as it died away in half-caught sobs.
The Kid read his thoughts openly, and wandered back with him through
all the weary days of famine and disease; and with him was also the
patient Madeline, sharing his pains and perils, never doubting, never
complaining. His mind's retina vibrated to a score of pictures, stern,
clear-cut, and the hand of the past drew back with heavy fingers on his
heart. It was the psychological moment. Malemute Kid was half-tempted
to play his reserve card and win the game; but the lesson was too mild
as yet, and he let it pass. The next instant they had gripped hands,
and the King's beaded moccasins were drawing protests from the outraged
snow as he crunched down the hill.

Madeline in collapse was another woman to the mischievous creature of
an hour before, whose laughter had been so infectious and whose
heightened color and flashing eyes had made her teachers for the while
forget. Weak and nerveless, she sat in the chair just as she had been
dropped there by Prince and Harrington.

Malemute Kid frowned. This would never do. When the time of meeting her
husband came to hand, she must carry things off with high-handed
imperiousness. It was very necessary she should do it after the manner
of white women, else the victory would be no victory at all. So he
talked to her, sternly, without mincing of words, and initiated her
into the weaknesses of his own sex, till she came to understand what
simpletons men were after all, and why the word of their women was law.

A few days before Thanksgiving Night, Malemute Kid made another call on
Mrs. Eppingwell. She promptly overhauled her feminine fripperies, paid
a protracted visit to the dry-goods department of the P. C. Company,
and returned with the Kid to make Madeline's acquaintance. After that
came a period such as the cabin had never seen before, and what with
cutting, and fitting, and basting, and stitching, and numerous other
wonderful and unknowable things, the male conspirators were more often
banished the premises than not. At such times the Opera House opened
its double storm-doors to them.

So often did they put their heads together, and so deeply did they
drink to curious toasts, that the loungers scented unknown creeks of
incalculable richness, and it is known that several checha-quas and at
least one Old-Timer kept their stampeding packs stored behind the bar,
ready to hit the trail at a moment's notice.

Mrs. Eppingwell was a woman of capacity; so, when she turned Madeline
over to her trainers on Thanksgiving Night she was so transformed that
they were almost afraid of her. Prince wrapped a Hudson Bay blanket
about her with a mock reverence more real than feigned, while Malemute
Kid, whose arm she had taken, found it a severe trial to resume his
wonted mentorship. Harrington, with the list of purchases still running
through his head, dragged along in the rear, nor opened his mouth once
all the way down into the town. When they came to the back door of the
Opera House they took the blanket from Madeline's shoulders and spread
it on the snow. Slipping out of Prince's moccasins, she stepped upon it
in new satin slippers. The masquerade was at its height. She hesitated,
but they jerked open the door and shoved her in. Then they ran around
to come in by the front entrance.


III

'Where is Freda?' the Old-Timers questioned, while the che-cha-quas
were equally energetic in asking who Freda was. The ballroom buzzed
with her name.

It was on everybody's lips. Grizzled 'sour-dough boys,' day-laborers at
the mines but proud of their degree, either patronized the
spruce-looking tenderfeet and lied eloquently--the 'sour-dough boys'
being specially created to toy with truth--or gave them savage looks of
indignation because of their ignorance. Perhaps forty kings of the
Upper and Lower Countries were on the floor, each deeming himself hot
on the trail and sturdily backing his judgment with the yellow dust of
the realm. An assistant was sent to the man at the scales, upon whom
had fallen the burden of weighing up the sacks, while several of the
gamblers, with the rules of chance at their finger-ends, made up
alluring books on the field and favorites.

Which was Freda? Time and again the 'Greek Dancer' was thought to have
been discovered, but each discovery brought panic to the betting ring
and a frantic registering of new wagers by those who wished to hedge.
Malemute Kid took an interest in the hunt, his advent being hailed
uproariously by the revelers, who knew him to a man. The Kid had a good
eye for the trick of a step, and ear for the lilt of a voice, and his
private choice was a marvelous creature who scintillated as the 'Aurora
Borealis.' But the Greek dancer was too subtle for even his
penetration. The majority of the gold-hunters seemed to have centered
their verdict on the 'Russian Princess,' who was the most graceful in
the room, and hence could be no other than Freda Moloof.

During a quadrille a roar of satisfaction went up. She was discovered.
At previous balls, in the figure, 'all hands round,' Freda had
displayed an inimitable step and variation peculiarly her own. As the
figure was called, the 'Russian Princess' gave the unique rhythm to
limb and body. A chorus of I-told-you-so's shook the squared
roof-beams, when lo! it was noticed that 'Aurora Borealis' and another
masque, the 'Spirit of the Pole,' were performing the same trick
equally well. And when two twin 'Sun-Dogs' and a 'Frost Queen' followed
suit, a second assistant was dispatched to the aid of the man at the
scales.

Bettles came off trail in the midst of the excitement, descending upon
them in a hurricane of frost. His rimed brows turned to cataracts as he
whirled about; his mustache, still frozen, seemed gemmed with diamonds
and turned the light in varicolored rays; while the flying feet slipped
on the chunks of ice which rattled from his moccasins and German socks.
A Northland dance is quite an informal affair, the men of the creeks
and trails having lost whatever fastidiousness they might have at one
time possessed; and only in the high official circles are conventions
at all observed. Here, caste carried no significance. Millionaires and
paupers, dog-drivers and mounted policemen joined hands with 'ladies in
the center,' and swept around the circle performing most remarkable
capers. Primitive in their pleasure, boisterous and rough, they
displayed no rudeness, but rather a crude chivalry more genuine than
the most polished courtesy.

In his quest for the 'Greek Dancer,' Cal Galbraith managed to get into
the same set with the 'Russian Princess,' toward whom popular suspicion
had turned.

But by the time he had guided her through one dance, he was willing not
only to stake his millions that she was not Freda, but that he had had
his arm about her waist before. When or where he could not tell, but
the puzzling sense of familiarity so wrought upon him that he turned
his attention to the discovery of her identity. Malemute Kid might have
aided him instead of occasionally taking the Princess for a few turns
and talking earnestly to her in low tones. But it was Jack Harrington
who paid the 'Russian Princess' the most assiduous court. Once he drew
Cal Galbraith aside and hazarded wild guesses as to who she was, and
explained to him that he was going in to win. That rankled the Circle
City King, for man is not by nature monogamic, and he forgot both
Madeline and Freda in the new quest.

It was soon noised about that the 'Russian Princess' was not Freda
Moloof. Interest deepened. Here was a fresh enigma. They knew Freda
though they could not find her, but here was somebody they had found
and did not know. Even the women could not place her, and they knew
every good dancer in the camp. Many took her for one of the official
clique, indulging in a silly escapade. Not a few asserted she would
disappear before the unmasking. Others were equally positive that she
was the woman-reporter of the Kansas City Star, come to write them up
at ninety dollars per column. And the men at the scales worked busily.

At one o'clock every couple took to the floor. The unmasking began amid
laughter and delight, like that of carefree children. There was no end
of Oh's and Ah's as mask after mask was lifted. The scintillating
'Aurora Borealis' became the brawny negress whose income from washing
the community's clothes ran at about five hundred a month. The twin
'Sun-Dogs' discovered mustaches on their upper lips, and were
recognized as brother Fraction-Kings of El Dorado. In one of the most
prominent sets, and the slowest in uncovering, was Cal Galbraith with
the 'Spirit of the Pole.' Opposite him was Jack Harrington and the
'Russian Princess.' The rest had discovered themselves, yet the 'Greek
Dancer' was still missing. All eyes were upon the group. Cal Galbraith,
in response to their cries, lifted his partner's mask. Freda's
wonderful face and brilliant eyes flashed out upon them. A roar went
up, to be squelched suddenly in the new and absorbing mystery of the
'Russian Princess.' Her face was still hidden, and Jack Harrington was
struggling with her. The dancers tittered on the tiptoes of expectancy.
He crushed her dainty costume roughly, and then--and then the revelers
exploded. The joke was on them. They had danced all night with a
tabooed native woman.

But those that knew, and they were many, ceased abruptly, and a hush
fell upon the room.

Cal Galbraith crossed over with great strides, angrily, and spoke to
Madeline in polyglot Chinook. But she retained her composure,
apparently oblivious to the fact that she was the cynosure of all eyes,
and answered him in English. She showed neither fright nor anger, and
Malemute Kid chuckled at her well-bred equanimity. The King felt
baffled, defeated; his common Siwash wife had passed beyond him.

'Come!' he said finally. 'Come on home.' 'I beg pardon,' she replied;
'I have agreed to go to supper with Mr. Harrington. Besides, there's no
end of dances promised.'

Harrington extended his arm to lead her away. He evinced not the
slightest disinclination toward showing his back, but Malemute Kid had
by this time edged in closer. The Circle City King was stunned. Twice
his hand dropped to his belt, and twice the Kid gathered himself to
spring; but the retreating couple passed through the supper-room door
where canned oysters were spread at five dollars the plate.

The crowd sighed audibly, broke up into couples, and followed them.
Freda pouted and went in with Cal Galbraith; but she had a good heart
and a sure tongue, and she spoiled his oysters for him. What she said
is of no importance, but his face went red and white at intervals, and
he swore repeatedly and savagely at himself.

The supper-room was filled with a pandemonium of voices, which ceased
suddenly as Cal Galbraith stepped over to his wife's table. Since the
unmasking considerable weights of dust had been placed as to the
outcome. Everybody watched with breathless interest.

Harrington's blue eyes were steady, but under the overhanging
tablecloth a Smith & Wesson balanced on his knee. Madeline looked up,
casually, with little interest.

'May--may I have the next round dance with you?' the King stuttered.

The wife of the King glanced at her card and inclined her head.



An Odyssey of the North

The sleds were singing their eternal lament to the creaking of the
harness and the tinkling bells of the leaders; but the men and dogs
were tired and made no sound. The trail was heavy with new-fallen snow,
and they had come far, and the runners, burdened with flint-like
quarters of frozen moose, clung tenaciously to the unpacked surface and
held back with a stubbornness almost human.

Darkness was coming on, but there was no camp to pitch that night. The
snow fell gently through the pulseless air, not in flakes, but in tiny
frost crystals of delicate design. It was very warm--barely ten below
zero--and the men did not mind. Meyers and Bettles had raised their ear
flaps, while Malemute Kid had even taken off his mittens.

The dogs had been fagged out early in the after noon, but they now
began to show new vigor. Among the more astute there was a certain
restlessness--an impatience at the restraint of the traces, an
indecisive quickness of movement, a sniffing of snouts and pricking of
ears. These became incensed at their more phlegmatic brothers, urging
them on with numerous sly nips on their hinder quarters. Those, thus
chidden, also contracted and helped spread the contagion. At last the
leader of the foremost sled uttered a sharp whine of satisfaction,
crouching lower in the snow and throwing himself against the collar.
The rest followed suit.

There was an ingathering of back hands, a tightening of traces; the
sleds leaped forward, and the men clung to the gee poles, violently
accelerating the uplift of their feet that they might escape going
under the runners. The weariness of the day fell from them, and they
whooped encouragement to the dogs. The animals responded with joyous
yelps. They were swinging through the gathering darkness at a rattling
gallop.

'Gee! Gee!' the men cried, each in turn, as their sleds abruptly left
the main trail, heeling over on single runners like luggers on the wind.

Then came a hundred yards' dash to the lighted parchment window, which
told its own story of the home cabin, the roaring Yukon stove, and the
steaming pots of tea. But the home cabin had been invaded. Threescore
huskies chorused defiance, and as many furry forms precipitated
themselves upon the dogs which drew the first sled. The door was flung
open, and a man, clad in the scarlet tunic of the Northwest Police,
waded knee-deep among the furious brutes, calmly and impartially
dispensing soothing justice with the butt end of a dog whip. After that
the men shook hands; and in this wise was Malemute Kid welcomed to his
own cabin by a stranger.

Stanley Prince, who should have welcomed him, and who was responsible
for the Yukon stove and hot tea aforementioned, was busy with his
guests. There were a dozen or so of them, as nondescript a crowd as
ever served the Queen in the enforcement of her laws or the delivery of
her mails. They were of many breeds, but their common life had formed
of them a certain type--a lean and wiry type, with trail-hardened
muscles, and sun-browned faces, and untroubled souls which gazed
frankly forth, clear-eyed and steady.

They drove the dogs of the Queen, wrought fear in the hearts of her
enemies, ate of her meager fare, and were happy. They had seen life,
and done deeds, and lived romances; but they did not know it.

And they were very much at home. Two of them were sprawled upon
Malemute Kid's bunk, singing chansons which their French forebears sang
in the days when first they entered the Northwest land and mated with
its Indian women. Bettles' bunk had suffered a similar invasion, and
three or four lusty voyageurs worked their toes among its blankets as
they listened to the tale of one who had served on the boat brigade
with Wolseley when he fought his way to Khartoum.

And when he tired, a cowboy told of courts and kings and lords and
ladies he had seen when Buffalo Bill toured the capitals of Europe. In
a corner two half-breeds, ancient comrades in a lost campaign, mended
harnesses and talked of the days when the Northwest flamed with
insurrection and Louis Riel was king.

Rough jests and rougher jokes went up and down, and great hazards by
trail and river were spoken of in the light of commonplaces, only to be
recalled by virtue of some grain of humor or ludicrous happening.
Prince was led away by these uncrowned heroes who had seen history
made, who regarded the great and the romantic as but the ordinary and
the incidental in the routine of life. He passed his precious tobacco
among them with lavish disregard, and rusty chains of reminiscence were
loosened, and forgotten odysseys resurrected for his especial benefit.

When conversation dropped and the travelers filled the last pipes and
lashed their tight-rolled sleeping furs. Prince fell back upon his
comrade for further information.

'Well, you know what the cowboy is,' Malemute Kid answered, beginning
to unlace his moccasins; 'and it's not hard to guess the British blood
in his bed partner. As for the rest, they're all children of the
coureurs du bois, mingled with God knows how many other bloods. The two
turning in by the door are the regulation 'breeds' or Boisbrules. That
lad with the worsted breech scarf--notice his eyebrows and the turn of
his jaw--shows a Scotchman wept in his mother's smoky tepee. And that
handsome looking fellow putting the capote under his head is a French
half-breed--you heard him talking; he doesn't like the two Indians
turning in next to him. You see, when the 'breeds' rose under the Riel
the full-bloods kept the peace, and they've not lost much love for one
another since.' 'But I say, what's that glum-looking fellow by the
stove? I'll swear he can't talk English. He hasn't opened his mouth all
night.' 'You're wrong. He knows English well enough. Did you follow his
eyes when he listened? I did. But he's neither kith nor kin to the
others. When they talked their own patois you could see he didn't
understand. I've been wondering myself what he is. Let's find out.'
'Fire a couple of sticks into the stove!'

Malemute Kid commanded, raising his voice and looking squarely at the
man in question.

He obeyed at once.

'Had discipline knocked into him somewhere.' Prince commented in a low
tone.

Malemute Kid nodded, took off his socks, and picked his way among
recumbent men to the stove. There he hung his damp footgear among a
score or so of mates.

'When do you expect to get to Dawson?' he asked tentatively.

The man studied him a moment before replying. 'They say seventy-five
mile. So? Maybe two days.' The very slightest accent was perceptible,
while there was no awkward hesitancy or groping for words.

'Been in the country before?' 'No.' 'Northwest Territory?' 'Yes.' 'Born
there?' 'No.'

'Well, where the devil were you born? You're none of these.' Malemute
Kid swept his hand over the dog drivers, even including the two
policemen who had turned into Prince's bunk. 'Where did you come from?
I've seen faces like yours before, though I can't remember just where.'
'I know you,' he irrelevantly replied, at once turning the drift of
Malemute Kid's questions.

'Where? Ever see me?' 'No; your partner, him priest, Pastilik, long
time ago. Him ask me if I see you, Malemute Kid. Him give me grub. I no
stop long. You hear him speak 'bout me?' 'Oh! you're the fellow that
traded the otter skins for the dogs?' The man nodded, knocked out his
pipe, and signified his disinclination for conversation by rolling up
in his furs. Malemute Kid blew out the slush lamp and crawled under the
blankets with Prince.

'Well, what is he?' 'Don't know--turned me off, somehow, and then shut
up like a clam.

'But he's a fellow to whet your curiosity. I've heard of him. All the
coast wondered about him eight years ago. Sort of mysterious, you know.
He came down out of the North in the dead of winter, many a thousand
miles from here, skirting Bering Sea and traveling as though the devil
were after him. No one ever learned where he came from, but he must
have come far. He was badly travel-worn when he got food from the
Swedish missionary on Golovin Bay and asked the way south. We heard of
all this afterward. Then he abandoned the shore line, heading right
across Norton Sound. Terrible weather, snowstorms and high winds, but
he pulled through where a thousand other men would have died, missing
St. Michaels and making the land at Pastilik. He'd lost all but two
dogs, and was nearly gone with starvation.

'He was so anxious to go on that Father Roubeau fitted him out with
grub; but he couldn't let him have any dogs, for he was only waiting my
arrival, to go on a trip himself. Mr. Ulysses knew too much to start on
without animals, and fretted around for several days. He had on his
sled a bunch of beautifully cured otter skins, sea otters, you know,
worth their weight in gold. There was also at Pastilik an old Shylock
of a Russian trader, who had dogs to kill. Well, they didn't dicker
very long, but when the Strange One headed south again, it was in the
rear of a spanking dog team. Mr. Shylock, by the way, had the otter
skins. I saw them, and they were magnificent. We figured it up and
found the dogs brought him at least five hundred apiece. And it wasn't
as if the Strange One didn't know the value of sea otter; he was an
Indian of some sort, and what little he talked showed he'd been among
white men.

'After the ice passed out of the sea, word came up from Nunivak Island
that he'd gone in there for grub. Then he dropped from sight, and this
is the first heard of him in eight years. Now where did he come from?
and what was he doing there? and why did he come from there? He's
Indian, he's been nobody knows where, and he's had discipline, which is
unusual for an Indian. Another mystery of the North for you to solve,
Prince.' 'Thanks awfully, but I've got too many on hand as it is,' he
replied.

Malemute Kid was already breathing heavily; but the young mining
engineer gazed straight up through the thick darkness, waiting for the
strange orgasm which stirred his blood to die away. And when he did
sleep, his brain worked on, and for the nonce he, too, wandered through
the white unknown, struggled with the dogs on endless trails, and saw
men live, and toil, and die like men. The next morning, hours before
daylight, the dog drivers and policemen pulled out for Dawson. But the
powers that saw to Her Majesty's interests and ruled the destinies of
her lesser creatures gave the mailmen little rest, for a week later
they appeared at Stuart River, heavily burdened with letters for Salt
Water.

However, their dogs had been replaced by fresh ones; but, then, they
were dogs.

The men had expected some sort of a layover in which to rest up;
besides, this Klondike was a new section of the Northland, and they had
wished to see a little something of the Golden City where dust flowed
like water and dance halls rang with never-ending revelry. But they
dried their socks and smoked their evening pipes with much the same
gusto as on their former visit, though one or two bold spirits
speculated on desertion and the possibility of crossing the unexplored
Rockies to the east, and thence, by the Mackenzie Valley, of gaining
their old stamping grounds in the Chippewyan country.

Two or three even decided to return to their homes by that route when
their terms of service had expired, and they began to lay plans
forthwith, looking forward to the hazardous undertaking in much the
same way a city-bred man would to a day's holiday in the woods.

He of the Otter Skins seemed very restless, though he took little
interest in the discussion, and at last he drew Malemute Kid to one
side and talked for some time in low tones.

Prince cast curious eyes in their direction, and the mystery deepened
when they put on caps and mittens and went outside. When they returned,
Malemute Kid placed his gold scales on the table, weighed out the
matter of sixty ounces, and transferred them to the Strange One's sack.
Then the chief of the dog drivers joined the conclave, and certain
business was transacted with him.

The next day the gang went on upriver, but He of the Otter Skins took
several pounds of grub and turned his steps back toward Dawson.

'Didn't know what to make of it,' said Malemute Kid in response to
Prince's queries; 'but the poor beggar wanted to be quit of the service
for some reason or other--at least it seemed a most important one to
him, though he wouldn't let on what. You see, it's just like the army:
he signed for two years, and the only way to get free was to buy
himself out. He couldn't desert and then stay here, and he was just
wild to remain in the country.

'Made up his mind when he got to Dawson, he said; but no one knew him,
hadn't a cent, and I was the only one he'd spoken two words with. So he
talked it over with the lieutenant-governor, and made arrangements in
case he could get the money from me--loan, you know. Said he'd pay back
in the year, and, if I wanted, would put me onto something rich.
Never'd seen it, but he knew it was rich.

'And talk! why, when he got me outside he was ready to weep. Begged and
pleaded; got down in the snow to me till I hauled him out of it.
Palavered around like a crazy man.

'Swore he's worked to this very end for years and years, and couldn't
bear to be disappointed now. Asked him what end, but he wouldn't say.

'Said they might keep him on the other half of the trail and he
wouldn't get to Dawson in two years, and then it would be too late.
Never saw a man take on so in my life. And when I said I'd let him have
it, had to yank him out of the snow again. Told him to consider it in
the light of a grubstake. Think he'd have it? No sir! Swore he'd give
me all he found, make me rich beyond the dreams of avarice, and all
such stuff. Now a man who puts his life and time against a grubstake
ordinarily finds it hard enough to turn over half of what he finds.
Something behind all this, Prince; just you make a note of it. We'll
hear of him if he stays in the country--' 'And if he doesn't?' 'Then my
good nature gets a shock, and I'm sixty some odd ounces out.' The cold
weather had come on with the long nights, and the sun had begun to play
his ancient game of peekaboo along the southern snow line ere aught was
heard of Malemute Kid's grubstake. And then, one bleak morning in early
January, a heavily laden dog train pulled into his cabin below Stuart
River. He of the Otter Skins was there, and with him walked a man such
as the gods have almost forgotten how to fashion. Men never talked of
luck and pluck and five-hundred-dollar dirt without bringing in the
name of Axel Gunderson; nor could tales of nerve or strength or daring
pass up and down the campfire without the summoning of his presence.
And when the conversation flagged, it blazed anew at mention of the
woman who shared his fortunes.

As has been noted, in the making of Axel Gunderson the gods had
remembered their old-time cunning and cast him after the manner of men
who were born when the world was young. Full seven feet he towered in
his picturesque costume which marked a king of Eldorado. His chest,
neck, and limbs were those of a giant. To bear his three hundred pounds
of bone and muscle, his snowshoes were greater by a generous yard than
those of other men. Rough-hewn, with rugged brow and massive jaw and
unflinching eyes of palest blue, his face told the tale of one who knew
but the law of might. Of the yellow of ripe corn silk, his
frost-incrusted hair swept like day across the night and fell far down
his coat of bearskin.

A vague tradition of the sea seemed to cling about him as he swung down
the narrow trail in advance of the dogs; and he brought the butt of his
dog whip against Malemute Kid's door as a Norse sea rover, on southern
foray, might thunder for admittance at the castle gate.

Prince bared his womanly arms and kneaded sour-dough bread, casting, as
he did so, many a glance at the three guests--three guests the like of
which might never come under a man's roof in a lifetime. The Strange
One, whom Malemute Kid had surnamed Ulysses, still fascinated him; but
his interest chiefly gravitated between Axel Gunderson and Axel
Gunderson's wife. She felt the day's journey, for she had softened in
comfortable cabins during the many days since her husband mastered the
wealth of frozen pay streaks, and she was tired. She rested against his
great breast like a slender flower against a wall, replying lazily to
Malemute Kid's good-natured banter, and stirring Prince's blood
strangely with an occasional sweep of her deep, dark eyes. For Prince
was a man, and healthy, and had seen few women in many months. And she
was older than he, and an Indian besides. But she was different from
all native wives he had met: she had traveled--had been in his country
among others, he gathered from the conversation; and she knew most of
the things the women of his own race knew, and much more that it was
not in the nature of things for them to know. She could make a meal of
sun-dried fish or a bed in the snow; yet she teased them with
tantalizing details of many-course dinners, and caused strange internal
dissensions to arise at the mention of various quondam dishes which
they had well-nigh forgotten. She knew the ways of the moose, the bear,
and the little blue fox, and of the wild amphibians of the Northern
seas; she was skilled in the lore of the woods, and the streams, and
the tale writ by man and bird and beast upon the delicate snow crust
was to her an open book; yet Prince caught the appreciative twinkle in
her eye as she read the Rules of the Camp. These rules had been
fathered by the Unquenchable Bettles at a time when his blood ran high,
and were remarkable for the terse simplicity of their humor.

Prince always turned them to the wall before the arrival of ladies; but
who could suspect that this native wife--Well, it was too late now.

This, then, was the wife of Axel Gunderson, a woman whose name and fame
had traveled with her husband's, hand in hand, through all the
Northland. At table, Malemute Kid baited her with the assurance of an
old friend, and Prince shook off the shyness of first acquaintance and
joined in. But she held her own in the unequal contest, while her
husband, slower in wit, ventured naught but applause. And he was very
proud of her; his every look and action revealed the magnitude of the
place she occupied in his life. He of the Otter Skins ate in silence,
forgotten in the merry battle; and long ere the others were done he
pushed back from the table and went out among the dogs. Yet all too
soon his fellow travelers drew on their mittens and parkas and followed
him.

There had been no snow for many days, and the sleds slipped along the
hardpacked Yukon trail as easily as if it had been glare ice. Ulysses
led the first sled; with the second came Prince and Axel Gunderson's
wife; while Malemute Kid and the yellow-haired giant brought up the
third.

'It's only a hunch, Kid,' he said, 'but I think it's straight. He's
never been there, but he tells a good story, and shows a map I heard of
when I was in the Kootenay country years ago. I'd like to have you go
along; but he's a strange one, and swore point-blank to throw it up if
anyone was brought in. But when I come back you'll get first tip, and
I'll stake you next to me, and give you a half share in the town site
besides.' 'No! no!' he cried, as the other strove to interrupt. 'I'm
running this, and before I'm done it'll need two heads.

'If it's all right, why, it'll be a second Cripple Creek, man; do you
hear?--a second Cripple Creek! It's quartz, you know, not placer; and
if we work it right we'll corral the whole thing--millions upon
millions. I've heard of the place before, and so have you. We'll build
a town--thousands of workmen--good waterways--steamship lines--big
carrying trade--light-draught steamers for head reaches--survey a
railroad, perhaps--sawmills--electric-light plant--do our own
banking--commercial company--syndicate--Say! Just you hold your hush
till I get back!' The sleds came to a halt where the trail crossed the
mouth of Stuart River. An unbroken sea of frost, its wide expanse
stretched away into the unknown east.

The snowshoes were withdrawn from the lashings of the sleds. Axel
Gunderson shook hands and stepped to the fore, his great webbed shoes
sinking a fair half yard into the feathery surface and packing the snow
so the dogs should not wallow. His wife fell in behind the last sled,
betraying long practice in the art of handling the awkward footgear.
The stillness was broken with cheery farewells; the dogs whined; and He
of the Otter Skins talked with his whip to a recalcitrant wheeler.

An hour later the train had taken on the likeness of a black pencil
crawling in a long, straight line across a mighty sheet of foolscap.


II

One night, many weeks later, Malemute Kid and Prince fell to solving
chess problems from the torn page of an ancient magazine. The Kid had
just returned from his Bonanza properties and was resting up
preparatory to a long moose hunt.

Prince, too, had been on creek and trail nearly all winter, and had
grown hungry for a blissful week of cabin life.

'Interpose the black knight, and force the king. No, that won't do.
See, the next move-'

'Why advance the pawn two squares? Bound to take it in transit, and
with the bishop out of the way-' 'But hold on! That leaves a hole,
and-' 'No; it's protected. Go ahead! You'll see it works.' It was very
interesting. Somebody knocked at the door a second time before Malemute
Kid said, 'Come in.' The door swung open. Something staggered in.

Prince caught one square look and sprang to his feet. The horror in his
eyes caused Malemute Kid to whirl about; and he, too, was startled,
though he had seen bad things before. The thing tottered blindly toward
them. Prince edged away till he reached the nail from which hung his
Smith & Wesson.

'My God! what is it?' he whispered to Malemute Kid.

'Don't know. Looks like a case of freezing and no grub,' replied the
Kid, sliding away in the opposite direction. 'Watch out! It may be
mad,' he warned, coming back from closing the door.

The thing advanced to the table. The bright flame of the slush lamp
caught its eye. It was amused, and gave voice to eldritch cackles which
betokened mirth.

Then, suddenly, he--for it was a man--swayed back, with a hitch to his
skin trousers, and began to sing a chantey, such as men lift when they
swing around the capstan circle and the sea snorts in their ears:
Yan-kee ship come down de ri-ib-er, Pull! my bully boys! Pull! D'yeh
want--to know de captain ru-uns her? Pull! my bully boys! Pull!
Jon-a-than Jones ob South Caho-li-in-a, Pull! my bully. He broke off
abruptly, tottered with a wolfish snarl to the meat shelf, and before
they could intercept was tearing with his teeth at a chunk of raw
bacon. The struggle was fierce between him and Malemute Kid; but his
mad strength left him as suddenly as it had come, and he weakly
surrendered the spoil. Between them they got him upon a stool, where he
sprawled with half his body across the table.

A small dose of whiskey strengthened him, so that he could dip a spoon
into the sugar caddy which Malemute Kid placed before him. After his
appetite had been somewhat cloyed, Prince, shuddering as he did so,
passed him a mug of weak beef tea.

The creature's eyes were alight with a somber frenzy, which blazed and
waned with every mouthful. There was very little skin to the face. The
face, for that matter, sunken and emaciated, bore little likeness to
human countenance.

Frost after frost had bitten deeply, each depositing its stratum of
scab upon the half-healed scar that went before. This dry, hard surface
was of a bloody-black color, serrated by grievous cracks wherein the
raw red flesh peeped forth. His skin garments were dirty and in
tatters, and the fur of one side was singed and burned away, showing
where he had lain upon his fire.

Malemute Kid pointed to where the sun-tanned hide had been cut away,
strip by strip--the grim signature of famine.

'Who--are--you?' slowly and distinctly enunciated the Kid.

The man paid no heed.

'Where do you come from?' 'Yan-kee ship come down de ri-ib-er,' was the
quavering response.

'Don't doubt the beggar came down the river,' the Kid said, shaking him
in an endeavor to start a more lucid flow of talk.

But the man shrieked at the contact, clapping a hand to his side in
evident pain. He rose slowly to his feet, half leaning on the table.

'She laughed at me--so--with the hate in her eye; and
she--would--not--come.' His voice died away, and he was sinking back
when Malemute Kid gripped him by the wrist and shouted, 'Who? Who would
not come?' 'She, Unga. She laughed, and struck at me, so, and so. And
then-' 'Yes?'

'And then--' 'And then what?' 'And then he lay very still in the snow a
long time. He is-still in--the--snow.' The two men looked at each other
helplessly.

'Who is in the snow?' 'She, Unga. She looked at me with the hate in her
eye, and then--'

'Yes, yes.' 'And then she took the knife, so; and once, twice--she was
weak. I traveled very slow. And there is much gold in that place, very
much gold.' 'Where is Unga?' For all Malemute Kid knew, she might be
dying a mile away. He shook the man savagely, repeating again and
again, 'Where is Unga? Who is Unga?' 'She--is--in--the--snow.' 'Go on!'
The Kid was pressing his wrist cruelly.

'So--I--would--be--in--the snow--but--I--had--a--debt--to--pay.
It--was--heavy--I--had--a-debt--to--pay--a--debt--to--pay I--had-' The
faltering monosyllables ceased as he fumbled in his pouch and drew
forth a buckskin sack. 'A--debt--to--pay--five--pounds--of--gold-grub--
stake--Mal--e--mute--Kid--I--y--' The exhausted head dropped upon the
table; nor could Malemute Kid rouse it again.

'It's Ulysses,' he said quietly, tossing the bag of dust on the table.
'Guess it's all day with Axel Gunderson and the woman. Come on, let's
get him between the blankets. He's Indian; he'll pull through and tell
a tale besides.' As they cut his garments from him, near his right
breast could be seen two unhealed, hard-lipped knife thrusts.


III

'I will talk of the things which were in my own way; but you will
understand. I will begin at the beginning, and tell of myself and the
woman, and, after that, of the man.' He of the Otter Skins drew over to
the stove as do men who have been deprived of fire and are afraid the
Promethean gift may vanish at any moment. Malemute Kid picked up the
slush lamp and placed it so its light might fall upon the face of the
narrator. Prince slid his body over the edge of the bunk and joined
them.

'I am Naass, a chief, and the son of a chief, born between a sunset and
a rising, on the dark seas, in my father's oomiak. All of a night the
men toiled at the paddles, and the women cast out the waves which threw
in upon us, and we fought with the storm. The salt spray froze upon my
mother's breast till her breath passed with the passing of the tide.
But I--I raised my voice with the wind and the storm, and lived.

'We dwelt in Akatan--' 'Where?' asked Malemute Kid.

'Akatan, which is in the Aleutians; Akatan, beyond Chignik, beyond
Kardalak, beyond Unimak. As I say, we dwelt in Akatan, which lies in
the midst of the sea on the edge of the world. We farmed the salt seas
for the fish, the seal, and the otter; and our homes shouldered about
one another on the rocky strip between the rim of the forest and the
yellow beach where our kayaks lay. We were not many, and the world was
very small. There were strange lands to the east--islands like Akatan;
so we thought all the world was islands and did not mind.

'I was different from my people. In the sands of the beach were the
crooked timbers and wave-warped planks of a boat such as my people
never built; and I remember on the point of the island which overlooked
the ocean three ways there stood a pine tree which never grew there,
smooth and straight and tall. It is said the two men came to that spot,
turn about, through many days, and watched with the passing of the
light. These two men came from out of the sea in the boat which lay in
pieces on the beach. And they were white like you, and weak as the
little children when the seal have gone away and the hunters come home
empty. I know of these things from the old men and the old women, who
got them from their fathers and mothers before them. These strange
white men did not take kindly to our ways at first, but they grew
strong, what of the fish and the oil, and fierce. And they built them
each his own house, and took the pick of our women, and in time
children came. Thus he was born who was to become the father of my
father's father.

'As I said, I was different from my people, for I carried the strong,
strange blood of this white man who came out of the sea. It is said we
had other laws in the days before these men; but they were fierce and
quarrelsome, and fought with our men till there were no more left who
dared to fight. Then they made themselves chiefs, and took away our old
laws, and gave us new ones, insomuch that the man was the son of his
father, and not his mother, as our way had been. They also ruled that
the son, first-born, should have all things which were his father's
before him, and that the brothers and sisters should shift for
themselves. And they gave us other laws. They showed us new ways in the
catching of fish and the killing of bear which were thick in the woods;
and they taught us to lay by bigger stores for the time of famine. And
these things were good.

'But when they had become chiefs, and there were no more men to face
their anger, they fought, these strange white men, each with the other.
And the one whose blood I carry drove his seal spear the length of an
arm through the other's body. Their children took up the fight, and
their children's children; and there was great hatred between them, and
black doings, even to my time, so that in each family but one lived to
pass down the blood of them that went before. Of my blood I was alone;
of the other man's there was but a girl. Unga, who lived with her
mother. Her father and my father did not come back from the fishing one
night; but afterward they washed up to the beach on the big tides, and
they held very close to each other.

'The people wondered, because of the hatred between the houses, and the
old men shook their heads and said the fight would go on when children
were born to her and children to me. They told me this as a boy, till I
came to believe, and to look upon Unga as a foe, who was to be the
mother of children which were to fight with mine. I thought of these
things day by day, and when I grew to a stripling I came to ask why
this should be so.

'And they answered, "We do not know, but that in such way your fathers
did." And I marveled that those which were to come should fight the
battles of those that were gone, and in it I could see no right. But
the people said it must be, and I was only a stripling.

'And they said I must hurry, that my blood might be the older and grow
strong before hers. This was easy, for I was head man, and the people
looked up to me because of the deeds and the laws of my fathers, and
the wealth which was mine. Any maiden would come to me, but I found
none to my liking. And the old men and the mothers of maidens told me
to hurry, for even then were the hunters bidding high to the mother of
Unga; and should her children grow strong before mine, mine would
surely die.

'Nor did I find a maiden till one night coming back from the fishing.
The sunlight was lying, so, low and full in the eyes, the wind free,
and the kayacks racing with the white seas. Of a sudden the kayak of
Unga came driving past me, and she looked upon me, so, with her black
hair flying like a cloud of night and the spray wet on her cheek. As I
say, the sunlight was full in the eyes, and I was a stripling; but
somehow it was all clear, and I knew it to be the call of kind to kind.

'As she whipped ahead she looked back within the space of two
strokes--looked as only the woman Unga could look--and again I knew it
as the call of kind. The people shouted as we ripped past the lazy
oomiaks and left them far behind. But she was quick at the paddle, and
my heart was like the belly of a sail, and I did not gain. The wind
freshened, the sea whitened, and, leaping like the seals on the
windward breech, we roared down the golden pathway of the sun.' Naass
was crouched half out of his stool, in the attitude of one driving a
paddle, as he ran the race anew. Somewhere across the stove he beheld
the tossing kayak and the flying hair of Unga. The voice of the wind
was in his ears, and its salt beat fresh upon his nostrils.

'But she made the shore, and ran up the sand, laughing, to the house of
her mother. And a great thought came to me that night--a thought worthy
of him that was chief over all the people of Akatan. So, when the moon
was up, I went down to the house of her mother, and looked upon the
goods of Yash-Noosh, which were piled by the door--the goods of
Yash-Noosh, a strong hunter who had it in mind to be the father of the
children of Unga. Other young men had piled their goods there and taken
them away again; and each young man had made a pile greater than the
one before.

'And I laughed to the moon and the stars, and went to my own house
where my wealth was stored. And many trips I made, till my pile was
greater by the fingers of one hand than the pile of Yash-Noosh. There
were fish, dried in the sun and smoked; and forty hides of the hair
seal, and half as many of the fur, and each hide was tied at the mouth
and big bellied with oil; and ten skins of bear which I killed in the
woods when they came out in the spring. And there were beads and
blankets and scarlet cloths, such as I got in trade from the people who
lived to the east, and who got them in trade from the people who lived
still beyond in the east.

'And I looked upon the pile of Yash-Noosh and laughed, for I was head
man in Akatan, and my wealth was greater than the wealth of all my
young men, and my fathers had done deeds, and given laws, and put their
names for all time in the mouths of the people.

'So, when the morning came, I went down to the beach, casting out of
the corner of my eye at the house of the mother of Unga. My offer yet
stood untouched.

'And the women smiled, and said sly things one to the other. I
wondered, for never had such a price been offered; and that night I
added more to the pile, and put beside it a kayak of well-tanned skins
which never yet had swam in the sea. But in the day it was yet there,
open to the laughter of all men. The mother of Unga was crafty, and I
grew angry at the shame in which I stood before my people. So that
night I added till it became a great pile, and I hauled up my oomiak,
which was of the value of twenty kayaks. And in the morning there was
no pile.

'Then made I preparation for the wedding, and the people that lived
even to the east came for the food of the feast and the potlatch token.
Unga was older than I by the age of four suns in the way we reckoned
the years. I was only a stripling; but then I was a chief, and the son
of a chief, and it did not matter.

'But a ship shoved her sails above the floor of the ocean, and grew
larger with the breath of the wind. From her scuppers she ran clear
water, and the men were in haste and worked hard at the pumps. On the
bow stood a mighty man, watching the depth of the water and giving
commands with a voice of thunder. His eyes were of the pale blue of the
deep waters, and his head was maned like that of a sea lion. And his
hair was yellow, like the straw of a southern harvest or the manila
rope yarns which sailormen plait.

'Of late years we had seen ships from afar, but this was the first to
come to the beach of Akatan. The feast was broken, and the women and
children fled to the houses, while we men strung our bows and waited
with spears in hand. But when the ship's forefoot smelled the beach the
strange men took no notice of us, being busy with their own work. With
the falling of the tide they careened the schooner and patched a great
hole in her bottom. So the women crept back, and the feast went on.

'When the tide rose, the sea wanderers kedged the schooner to deep
water and then came among us. They bore presents and were friendly; so
I made room for them, and out of the largeness of my heart gave them
tokens such as I gave all the guests, for it was my wedding day, and I
was head man in Akatan. And he with the mane of the sea lion was there,
so tall and strong that one looked to see the earth shake with the fall
of his feet. He looked much and straight at Unga, with his arms folded,
so, and stayed till the sun went away and the stars came out. Then he
went down to his ship. After that I took Unga by the hand and led her
to my own house. And there was singing and great laughter, and the
women said sly things, after the manner of women at such times. But we
did not care. Then the people left us alone and went home.

'The last noise had not died away when the chief of the sea wanderers
came in by the door. And he had with him black bottles, from which we
drank and made merry. You see, I was only a stripling, and had lived
all my days on the edge of the world. So my blood became as fire, and
my heart as light as the froth that flies from the surf to the cliff.
Unga sat silent among the skins in the corner, her eyes wide, for she
seemed to fear. And he with the mane of the sea lion looked upon her
straight and long. Then his men came in with bundles of goods, and he
piled before me wealth such as was not in all Akatan. There were guns,
both large and small, and powder and shot and shell, and bright axes
and knives of steel, and cunning tools, and strange things the like of
which I had never seen. When he showed me by sign that it was all mine,
I thought him a great man to be so free; but he showed me also that
Unga was to go away with him in his ship.

'Do you understand?--that Unga was to go away with him in his ship. The
blood of my fathers flamed hot on the sudden, and I made to drive him
through with my spear. But the spirit of the bottles had stolen the
life from my arm, and he took me by the neck, so, and knocked my head
against the wall of the house. And I was made weak like a newborn
child, and my legs would no more stand under me.

'Unga screamed, and she laid hold of the things of the house with her
hands, till they fell all about us as he dragged her to the door. Then
he took her in his great arms, and when she tore at his yellow hair
laughed with a sound like that of the big bull seal in the rut.

'I crawled to the beach and called upon my people, but they were
afraid. Only Yash-Noosh was a man, and they struck him on the head with
an oar, till he lay with his face in the sand and did not move. And
they raised the sails to the sound of their songs, and the ship went
away on the wind.

'The people said it was good, for there would be no more war of the
bloods in Akatan; but I said never a word, waiting till the time of the
full moon, when I put fish and oil in my kayak and went away to the
east. I saw many islands and many people, and I, who had lived on the
edge, saw that the world was very large. I talked by signs; but they
had not seen a schooner nor a man with the mane of a sea lion, and they
pointed always to the east. And I slept in queer places, and ate odd
things, and met strange faces. Many laughed, for they thought me light
of head; but sometimes old men turned my face to the light and blessed
me, and the eyes of the young women grew soft as they asked me of the
strange ship, and Unga, and the men of the sea.

'And in this manner, through rough seas and great storms, I came to
Unalaska. There were two schooners there, but neither was the one I
sought. So I passed on to the east, with the world growing ever larger,
and in the island of Unamok there was no word of the ship, nor in
Kadiak, nor in Atognak. And so I came one day to a rocky land, where
men dug great holes in the mountain. And there was a schooner, but not
my schooner, and men loaded upon it the rocks which they dug. This I
thought childish, for all the world was made of rocks; but they gave me
food and set me to work. When the schooner was deep in the water, the
captain gave me money and told me to go; but I asked which way he went,
and he pointed south. I made signs that I would go with him, and he
laughed at first, but then, being short of men, took me to help work
the ship. So I came to talk after their manner, and to heave on ropes,
and to reef the stiff sails in sudden squalls, and to take my turn at
the wheel. But it was not strange, for the blood of my fathers was the
blood of the men of the sea.

'I had thought it an easy task to find him I sought, once I got among
his own people; and when we raised the land one day, and passed between
a gateway of the sea to a port, I looked for perhaps as many schooners
as there were fingers to my hands. But the ships lay against the
wharves for miles, packed like so many little fish; and when I went
among them to ask for a man with the mane of a sea lion, they laughed,
and answered me in the tongues of many peoples. And I found that they
hailed from the uttermost parts of the earth.

'And I went into the city to look upon the face of every man. But they
were like the cod when they run thick on the banks, and I could not
count them. And the noise smote upon me till I could not hear, and my
head was dizzy with much movement. So I went on and on, through the
lands which sang in the warm sunshine; where the harvests lay rich on
the plains; and where great cities were fat with men that lived like
women, with false words in their mouths and their hearts black with the
lust of gold. And all the while my people of Akatan hunted and fished,
and were happy in the thought that the world was small.

'But the look in the eyes of Unga coming home from the fishing was with
me always, and I knew I would find her when the time was met. She
walked down quiet lanes in the dusk of the evening, or led me chases
across the thick fields wet with the morning dew, and there was a
promise in her eyes such as only the woman Unga could give.

'So I wandered through a thousand cities. Some were gentle and gave me
food, and others laughed, and still others cursed; but I kept my tongue
between my teeth, and went strange ways and saw strange sights.
Sometimes I, who was a chief and the son of a chief, toiled for
men--men rough of speech and hard as iron, who wrung gold from the
sweat and sorrow of their fellow men. Yet no word did I get of my quest
till I came back to the sea like a homing seal to the rookeries.

'But this was at another port, in another country which lay to the
north. And there I heard dim tales of the yellow-haired sea wanderer,
and I learned that he was a hunter of seals, and that even then he was
abroad on the ocean.

'So I shipped on a seal schooner with the lazy Siwashes, and followed
his trackless trail to the north where the hunt was then warm. And we
were away weary months, and spoke many of the fleet, and heard much of
the wild doings of him I sought; but never once did we raise him above
the sea. We went north, even to the Pribilofs, and killed the seals in
herds on the beach, and brought their warm bodies aboard till our
scuppers ran grease and blood and no man could stand upon the deck.
Then were we chased by a ship of slow steam, which fired upon us with
great guns. But we put sail till the sea was over our decks and washed
them clean, and lost ourselves in a fog.

'It is said, at this time, while we fled with fear at our hearts, that
the yellow-haired sea wanderer put in to the Pribilofs, right to the
factory, and while the part of his men held the servants of the
company, the rest loaded ten thousand green skins from the salt houses.
I say it is said, but I believe; for in the voyages I made on the coast
with never a meeting the northern seas rang with his wildness and
daring, till the three nations which have lands there sought him with
their ships.

'And I heard of Unga, for the captains sang loud in her praise, and she
was always with him. She had learned the ways of his people, they said,
and was happy. But I knew better--knew that her heart harked back to
her own people by the yellow beach of Akatan.

'So, after a long time, I went back to the port which is by a gateway
of the sea, and there I learned that he had gone across the girth of
the great ocean to hunt for the seal to the east of the warm land which
runs south from the Russian seas.

'And I, who was become a sailorman, shipped with men of his own race,
and went after him in the hunt of the seal. And there were few ships
off that new land; but we hung on the flank of the seal pack and
harried it north through all the spring of the year. And when the cows
were heavy with pup and crossed the Russian line, our men grumbled and
were afraid. For there was much fog, and every day men were lost in the
boats. They would not work, so the captain turned the ship back toward
the way it came. But I knew the yellow-haired sea wanderer was
unafraid, and would hang by the pack, even to the Russian Isles, where
few men go. So I took a boat, in the black of night, when the lookout
dozed on the fo'c'slehead, and went alone to the warm, long land. And I
journeyed south to meet the men by Yeddo Bay, who are wild and
unafraid. And the Yoshiwara girls were small, and bright like steel,
and good to look upon; but I could not stop, for I knew that Unga
rolled on the tossing floor by the rookeries of the north.

'The men by Yeddo Bay had met from the ends of the earth, and had
neither gods nor homes, sailing under the flag of the Japanese. And
with them I went to the rich beaches of Copper Island, where our salt
piles became high with skins.

'And in that silent sea we saw no man till we were ready to come away.
Then one day the fog lifted on the edge of a heavy wind, and there
jammed down upon us a schooner, with close in her wake the cloudy
funnels of a Russian man-of-war. We fled away on the beam of the wind,
with the schooner jamming still closer and plunging ahead three feet to
our two. And upon her poop was the man with the mane of the sea lion,
pressing the rails under with the canvas and laughing in his strength
of life. And Unga was there--I knew her on the moment--but he sent her
below when the cannons began to talk across the sea.

As I say, with three feet to our two, till we saw the rudder lift green
at every jump--and I swinging on to the wheel and cursing, with my back
to the Russian shot. For we knew he had it in mind to run before us,
that he might get away while we were caught. And they knocked our masts
out of us till we dragged into the wind like a wounded gull; but he
went on over the edge of the sky line--he and Unga.

'What could we? The fresh hides spoke for themselves. So they took us
to a Russian port, and after that to a lone country, where they set us
to work in the mines to dig salt. And some died, and--and some did not
die.' Naass swept the blanket from his shoulders, disclosing the
gnarled and twisted flesh, marked with the unmistakable striations of
the knout. Prince hastily covered him, for it was not nice to look upon.

'We were there a weary time and sometimes men got away to the south,
but they always came back. So, when we who hailed from Yeddo Bay rose
in the night and took the guns from the guards, we went to the north.
And the land was very large, with plains, soggy with water, and great
forests. And the cold came, with much snow on the ground, and no man
knew the way. Weary months we journeyed through the endless forest--I
do not remember, now, for there was little food and often we lay down
to die. But at last we came to the cold sea, and but three were left to
look upon it. One had shipped from Yeddo as captain, and he knew in his
head the lay of the great lands, and of the place where men may cross
from one to the other on the ice. And he led us--I do not know, it was
so long--till there were but two. When we came to that place we found
five of the strange people which live in that country, and they had
dogs and skins, and we were very poor. We fought in the snow till they
died, and the captain died, and the dogs and skins were mine. Then I
crossed on the ice, which was broken, and once I drifted till a gale
from the west put me upon the shore. And after that, Golovin Bay,
Pastilik, and the priest. Then south, south, to the warm sunlands where
first I wandered.

'But the sea was no longer fruitful, and those who went upon it after
the seal went to little profit and great risk. The fleets scattered,
and the captains and the men had no word of those I sought. So I turned
away from the ocean which never rests, and went among the lands, where
the trees, the houses, and the mountains sit always in one place and do
not move. I journeyed far, and came to learn many things, even to the
way of reading and writing from books. It was well I should do this,
for it came upon me that Unga must know these things, and that someday,
when the time was met--we--you understand, when the time was met.

'So I drifted, like those little fish which raise a sail to the wind
but cannot steer. But my eyes and my ears were open always, and I went
among men who traveled much, for I knew they had but to see those I
sought to remember. At last there came a man, fresh from the mountains,
with pieces of rock in which the free gold stood to the size of peas,
and he had heard, he had met, he knew them. They were rich, he said,
and lived in the place where they drew the gold from the ground.

'It was in a wild country, and very far away; but in time I came to the
camp, hidden between the mountains, where men worked night and day, out
of the sight of the sun. Yet the time was not come. I listened to the
talk of the people. He had gone away--they had gone away--to England,
it was said, in the matter of bringing men with much money together to
form companies. I saw the house they had lived in; more like a palace,
such as one sees in the old countries. In the nighttime I crept in
through a window that I might see in what manner he treated her. I went
from room to room, and in such way thought kings and queens must live,
it was all so very good. And they all said he treated her like a queen,
and many marveled as to what breed of woman she was for there was other
blood in her veins, and she was different from the women of Akatan, and
no one knew her for what she was. Aye, she was a queen; but I was a
chief, and the son of a chief, and I had paid for her an untold price
of skin and boat and bead.

'But why so many words? I was a sailorman, and knew the way of the
ships on the seas. I followed to England, and then to other countries.
Sometimes I heard of them by word of mouth, sometimes I read of them in
the papers; yet never once could I come by them, for they had much
money, and traveled fast, while I was a poor man. Then came trouble
upon them, and their wealth slipped away one day like a curl of smoke.
The papers were full of it at the time; but after that nothing was
said, and I knew they had gone back where more gold could be got from
the ground.

'They had dropped out of the world, being now poor, and so I wandered
from camp to camp, even north to the Kootenay country, where I picked
up the cold scent. They had come and gone, some said this way, and some
that, and still others that they had gone to the country of the Yukon.
And I went this way, and I went that, ever journeying from place to
place, till it seemed I must grow weary of the world which was so
large. But in the Kootenay I traveled a bad trail, and a long trail,
with a breed of the Northwest, who saw fit to die when the famine
pinched. He had been to the Yukon by an unknown way over the mountains,
and when he knew his time was near gave me the map and the secret of a
place where he swore by his gods there was much gold.

'After that all the world began to flock into the north. I was a poor
man; I sold myself to be a driver of dogs. The rest you know. I met him
and her in Dawson.

'She did not know me, for I was only a stripling, and her life had been
large, so she had no time to remember the one who had paid for her an
untold price.

'So? You bought me from my term of service. I went back to bring things
about in my own way, for I had waited long, and now that I had my hand
upon him was in no hurry.

'As I say, I had it in mind to do my own way, for I read back in my
life, through all I had seen and suffered, and remembered the cold and
hunger of the endless forest by the Russian seas. As you know, I led
him into the east--him and Unga--into the east where many have gone and
few returned. I led them to the spot where the bones and the curses of
men lie with the gold which they may not have.

'The way was long and the trail unpacked. Our dogs were many and ate
much; nor could our sleds carry till the break of spring. We must come
back before the river ran free. So here and there we cached grub, that
our sleds might be lightened and there be no chance of famine on the
back trip. At the McQuestion there were three men, and near them we
built a cache, as also did we at the Mayo, where was a hunting camp of
a dozen Pellys which had crossed the divide from the south.

'After that, as we went on into the east, we saw no men; only the
sleeping river, the moveless forest, and the White Silence of the
North. As I say, the way was long and the trail unpacked. Sometimes, in
a day's toil, we made no more than eight miles, or ten, and at night we
slept like dead men. And never once did they dream that I was Naass,
head man of Akatan, the righter of wrongs.

'We now made smaller caches, and in the nighttime it was a small matter
to go back on the trail we had broken and change them in such way that
one might deem the wolverines the thieves. Again there be places where
there is a fall to the river, and the water is unruly, and the ice
makes above and is eaten away beneath.

'In such a spot the sled I drove broke through, and the dogs; and to
him and Unga it was ill luck, but no more. And there was much grub on
that sled, and the dogs the strongest.

'But he laughed, for he was strong of life, and gave the dogs that were
left little grub till we cut them from the harnesses one by one and fed
them to their mates. We would go home light, he said, traveling and
eating from cache to cache, with neither dogs nor sleds; which was
true, for our grub was very short, and the last dog died in the traces
the night we came to the gold and the bones and the curses of men.

'To reach that place--and the map spoke true--in the heart of the great
mountains, we cut ice steps against the wall of a divide. One looked
for a valley beyond, but there was no valley; the snow spread away,
level as the great harvest plains, and here and there about us mighty
mountains shoved their white heads among the stars. And midway on that
strange plain which should have been a valley the earth and the snow
fell away, straight down toward the heart of the world.

'Had we not been sailormen our heads would have swung round with the
sight, but we stood on the dizzy edge that we might see a way to get
down. And on one side, and one side only, the wall had fallen away till
it was like the slope of the decks in a topsail breeze. I do not know
why this thing should be so, but it was so. "It is the mouth of hell,"
he said; "let us go down." And we went down.

'And on the bottom there was a cabin, built by some man, of logs which
he had cast down from above. It was a very old cabin, for men had died
there alone at different times, and on pieces of birch bark which were
there we read their last words and their curses.

'One had died of scurvy; another's partner had robbed him of his last
grub and powder and stolen away; a third had been mauled by a baldface
grizzly; a fourth had hunted for game and starved--and so it went, and
they had been loath to leave the gold, and had died by the side of it
in one way or another. And the worthless gold they had gathered
yellowed the floor of the cabin like in a dream.

'But his soul was steady, and his head clear, this man I had led thus
far. "We have nothing to eat," he said, "and we will only look upon
this gold, and see whence it comes and how much there be. Then we will
go away quick, before it gets into our eyes and steals away our
judgment. And in this way we may return in the end, with more grub, and
possess it all." So we looked upon the great vein, which cut the wall
of the pit as a true vein should, and we measured it, and traced it
from above and below, and drove the stakes of the claims and blazed the
trees in token of our rights. Then, our knees shaking with lack of
food, and a sickness in our bellies, and our hearts chugging close to
our mouths, we climbed the mighty wall for the last time and turned our
faces to the back trip.

'The last stretch we dragged Unga between us, and we fell often, but in
the end we made the cache. And lo, there was no grub. It was well done,
for he thought it the wolverines, and damned them and his gods in one
breath. But Unga was brave, and smiled, and put her hand in his, till I
turned away that I might hold myself. "We will rest by the fire," she
said, "till morning, and we will gather strength from our moccasins."
So we cut the tops of our moccasins in strips, and boiled them half of
the night, that we might chew them and swallow them. And in the morning
we talked of our chance. The next cache was five days' journey; we
could not make it. We must find game.

'"We will go forth and hunt," he said.

'"Yes," said I, "we will go forth and hunt." 'And he ruled that Unga
stay by the fire and save her strength. And we went forth, he in quest
of the moose and I to the cache I had changed. But I ate little, so
they might not see in me much strength. And in the night he fell many
times as he drew into camp. And I, too, made to suffer great weakness,
stumbling over my snowshoes as though each step might be my last. And
we gathered strength from our moccasins.

'He was a great man. His soul lifted his body to the last; nor did he
cry aloud, save for the sake of Unga. On the second day I followed him,
that I might not miss the end. And he lay down to rest often. That
night he was near gone; but in the morning he swore weakly and went
forth again. He was like a drunken man, and I looked many times for him
to give up, but his was the strength of the strong, and his soul the
soul of a giant, for he lifted his body through all the weary day. And
he shot two ptarmigan, but would not eat them. He needed no fire; they
meant life; but his thought was for Unga, and he turned toward camp.

'He no longer walked, but crawled on hand and knee through the snow. I
came to him, and read death in his eyes. Even then it was not too late
to eat of the ptarmigan. He cast away his rifle and carried the birds
in his mouth like a dog. I walked by his side, upright. And he looked
at me during the moments he rested, and wondered that I was so strong.
I could see it, though he no longer spoke; and when his lips moved,
they moved without sound.

'As I say, he was a great man, and my heart spoke for softness; but I
read back in my life, and remembered the cold and hunger of the endless
forest by the Russian seas. Besides, Unga was mine, and I had paid for
her an untold price of skin and boat and bead.

'And in this manner we came through the white forest, with the silence
heavy upon us like a damp sea mist. And the ghosts of the past were in
the air and all about us; and I saw the yellow beach of Akatan, and the
kayaks racing home from the fishing, and the houses on the rim of the
forest. And the men who had made themselves chiefs were there, the
lawgivers whose blood I bore and whose blood I had wedded in Unga. Aye,
and Yash-Noosh walked with me, the wet sand in his hair, and his war
spear, broken as he fell upon it, still in his hand. And I knew the
time was meet, and saw in the eyes of Unga the promise.

'As I say, we came thus through the forest, till the smell of the camp
smoke was in our nostrils. And I bent above him, and tore the ptarmigan
from his teeth.

'He turned on his side and rested, the wonder mounting in his eyes, and
the hand which was under slipping slow toward the knife at his hip. But
I took it from him, smiling close in his face. Even then he did not
understand. So I made to drink from black bottles, and to build high
upon the snow a pile--of goods, and to live again the things which had
happened on the night of my marriage. I spoke no word, but he
understood. Yet was he unafraid. There was a sneer to his lips, and
cold anger, and he gathered new strength with the knowledge. It was not
far, but the snow was deep, and he dragged himself very slow.

'Once he lay so long I turned him over and gazed into his eyes. And
sometimes he looked forth, and sometimes death. And when I loosed him
he struggled on again. In this way we came to the fire. Unga was at his
side on the instant. His lips moved without sound; then he pointed at
me, that Unga might understand. And after that he lay in the snow, very
still, for a long while. Even now is he there in the snow.

'I said no word till I had cooked the ptarmigan. Then I spoke to her,
in her own tongue, which she had not heard in many years. She
straightened herself, so, and her eyes were wonder-wide, and she asked
who I was, and where I had learned that speech.

'"I am Naass," I said.

'"You?" she said. "You?" And she crept close that she might look upon
me.

'"Yes," I answered; "I am Naass, head man of Akatan, the last of the
blood, as you are the last of the blood." 'And she laughed. By all the
things I have seen and the deeds I have done may I never hear such a
laugh again. It put the chill to my soul, sitting there in the White
Silence, alone with death and this woman who laughed.

'"Come!" I said, for I thought she wandered. "Eat of the food and let
us be gone. It is a far fetch from here to Akatan." 'But she shoved her
face in his yellow mane, and laughed till it seemed the heavens must
fall about our ears. I had thought she would be overjoyed at the sight
of me, and eager to go back to the memory of old times, but this seemed
a strange form to take.

'"Come!" I cried, taking her strong by the hand. "The way is long and
dark. Let us hurry!" "Where?" she asked, sitting up, and ceasing from
her strange mirth.

'"To Akatan," I answered, intent on the light to grow on her face at
the thought. But it became like his, with a sneer to the lips, and cold
anger.

'"Yes," she said; "we will go, hand in hand, to Akatan, you and I. And
we will live in the dirty huts, and eat of the fish and oil, and bring
forth a spawn--a spawn to be proud of all the days of our life. We will
forget the world and be happy, very happy. It is good, most good. Come!
Let us hurry. Let us go back to Akatan." And she ran her hand through
his yellow hair, and smiled in a way which was not good. And there was
no promise in her eyes.

'I sat silent, and marveled at the strangeness of woman. I went back to
the night when he dragged her from me and she screamed and tore at his
hair--at his hair which now she played with and would not leave. Then I
remembered the price and the long years of waiting; and I gripped her
close, and dragged her away as he had done. And she held back, even as
on that night, and fought like a she-cat for its whelp. And when the
fire was between us and the man. I loosed her, and she sat and
listened. And I told her of all that lay between, of all that had
happened to me on strange seas, of all that I had done in strange
lands; of my weary quest, and the hungry years, and the promise which
had been mine from the first. Aye, I told all, even to what had passed
that day between the man and me, and in the days yet young. And as I
spoke I saw the promise grow in her eyes, full and large like the break
of dawn. And I read pity there, the tenderness of woman, the love, the
heart and the soul of Unga. And I was a stripling again, for the look
was the look of Unga as she ran up the beach, laughing, to the home of
her mother. The stern unrest was gone, and the hunger, and the weary
waiting.

'The time was met. I felt the call of her breast, and it seemed there I
must pillow my head and forget. She opened her arms to me, and I came
against her. Then, sudden, the hate flamed in her eye, her hand was at
my hip. And once, twice, she passed the knife.

'"Dog!" she sneered, as she flung me into the snow. "Swine!" And then
she laughed till the silence cracked, and went back to her dead.

'As I say, once she passed the knife, and twice; but she was weak with
hunger, and it was not meant that I should die. Yet was I minded to
stay in that place, and to close my eyes in the last long sleep with
those whose lives had crossed with mine and led my feet on unknown
trails. But there lay a debt upon me which would not let me rest.

'And the way was long, the cold bitter, and there was little grub. The
Pellys had found no moose, and had robbed my cache. And so had the
three white men, but they lay thin and dead in their cabins as I
passed. After that I do not remember, till I came here, and found food
and fire--much fire.' As he finished, he crouched closely, even
jealously, over the stove. For a long while the slush-lamp shadows
played tragedies upon the wall.

'But Unga!' cried Prince, the vision still strong upon him.

'Unga? She would not eat of the ptarmigan. She lay with her arms about
his neck, her face deep in his yellow hair. I drew the fire close, that
she might not feel the frost, but she crept to the other side. And I
built a fire there; yet it was little good, for she would not eat. And
in this manner they still lie up there in the snow.'

'And you?' asked Malemute Kid.

'I do not know; but Akatan is small, and I have little wish to go back
and live on the edge of the world. Yet is there small use in life. I
can go to Constantine, and he will put irons upon me, and one day they
will tie a piece of rope, so, and I will sleep good. Yet--no; I do not
know.' 'But, Kid,' protested Prince, 'this is murder!' 'Hush!'
commanded Malemute Kid. 'There be things greater than our wisdom,
beyond our justice. The right and the wrong of this we cannot say, and
it is not for us to judge.' Naass drew yet closer to the fire. There
was a great silence, and in each man's eyes many pictures came and went.



The End

========================================
========================================

version by Al Haines.









The Son of the Wolf

Jack London


1900



Contains

  The White Silence
  The Son of the Wolf
  The Men of Forty Mile
  In a Far Country
  To the Man on the Trail
  The Priestly Prerogative
  The Wisdom of the Trail
  The Wife of a King
  An Odyssey of the North




The White Silence

'Carmen won't last more than a couple of days.' Mason spat out a chunk
of ice and surveyed the poor animal ruefully, then put her foot in his
mouth and proceeded to bite out the ice which clustered cruelly between
the toes.

'I never saw a dog with a highfalutin' name that ever was worth a rap,'
he said, as he concluded his task and shoved her aside. 'They just fade
away and die under the responsibility. Did ye ever see one go wrong
with a sensible name like Cassiar, Siwash, or Husky? No, sir! Take a
look at Shookum here, he's--' Snap! The lean brute flashed up, the
white teeth just missing Mason's throat.

'Ye will, will ye?' A shrewd clout behind the ear with the butt of the
dog whip stretched the animal in the snow, quivering softly, a yellow
slaver dripping from its fangs.

'As I was saying, just look at Shookum here--he's got the spirit. Bet
ye he eats Carmen before the week's out.' 'I'll bank another
proposition against that,' replied Malemute Kid, reversing the frozen
bread placed before the fire to thaw. 'We'll eat Shookum before the
trip is over. What d'ye say, Ruth?' The Indian woman settled the coffee
with a piece of ice, glanced from Malemute Kid to her husband, then at
the dogs, but vouchsafed no reply. It was such a palpable truism that
none was necessary. Two hundred miles of unbroken trail in prospect,
with a scant six days' grub for themselves and none for the dogs, could
admit no other alternative. The two men and the woman grouped about the
fire and began their meager meal. The dogs lay in their harnesses for
it was a midday halt, and watched each mouthful enviously.

'No more lunches after today,' said Malemute Kid. 'And we've got to
keep a close eye on the dogs--they're getting vicious. They'd just as
soon pull a fellow down as not, if they get a chance.' 'And I was
president of an Epworth once, and taught in the Sunday school.' Having
irrelevantly delivered himself of this, Mason fell into a dreamy
contemplation of his steaming moccasins, but was aroused by Ruth
filling his cup.

'Thank God, we've got slathers of tea! I've seen it growing, down in
Tennessee. What wouldn't I give for a hot corn pone just now! Never
mind, Ruth; you won't starve much longer, nor wear moccasins either.'
The woman threw off her gloom at this, and in her eyes welled up a
great love for her white lord--the first white man she had ever
seen--the first man whom she had known to treat a woman as something
better than a mere animal or beast of burden.

'Yes, Ruth,' continued her husband, having recourse to the macaronic
jargon in which it was alone possible for them to understand each
other; 'wait till we clean up and pull for the Outside. We'll take the
White Man's canoe and go to the Salt Water. Yes, bad water, rough
water--great mountains dance up and down all the time. And so big, so
far, so far away--you travel ten sleep, twenty sleep, forty sleep'--he
graphically enumerated the days on his fingers--'all the time water,
bad water. Then you come to great village, plenty people, just the same
mosquitoes next summer. Wigwams oh, so high--ten, twenty pines.

'Hi-yu skookum!' He paused impotently, cast an appealing glance at
Malemute Kid, then laboriously placed the twenty pines, end on end, by
sign language. Malemute Kid smiled with cheery cynicism; but Ruth's
eyes were wide with wonder, and with pleasure; for she half believed he
was joking, and such condescension pleased her poor woman's heart.

'And then you step into a--a box, and pouf! up you go.' He tossed his
empty cup in the air by way of illustration and, as he deftly caught
it, cried: 'And biff! down you come. Oh, great medicine men! You go
Fort Yukon. I go Arctic City--twenty-five sleep--big string, all the
time--I catch him string--I say, "Hello, Ruth! How are ye?"--and you
say, "Is that my good husband?"--and I say, "Yes"--and you say, "No can
bake good bread, no more soda"--then I say, "Look in cache, under
flour; good-by." You look and catch plenty soda. All the time you Fort
Yukon, me Arctic City. Hi-yu medicine man!' Ruth smiled so ingenuously
at the fairy story that both men burst into laughter. A row among the
dogs cut short the wonders of the Outside, and by the time the snarling
combatants were separated, she had lashed the sleds and all was ready
for the trail.--'Mush! Baldy! Hi! Mush on!' Mason worked his whip
smartly and, as the dogs whined low in the traces, broke out the sled
with the gee pole. Ruth followed with the second team, leaving Malemute
Kid, who had helped her start, to bring up the rear. Strong man, brute
that he was, capable of felling an ox at a blow, he could not bear to
beat the poor animals, but humored them as a dog driver rarely
does--nay, almost wept with them in their misery.

'Come, mush on there, you poor sore-footed brutes!' he murmured, after
several ineffectual attempts to start the load. But his patience was at
last rewarded, and though whimpering with pain, they hastened to join
their fellows.

No more conversation; the toil of the trail will not permit such
extravagance.

And of all deadening labors, that of the Northland trail is the worst.
Happy is the man who can weather a day's travel at the price of
silence, and that on a beaten track.  And of all heartbreaking labors,
that of breaking trail is the worst. At every step the great webbed
shoe sinks till the snow is level with the knee. Then up, straight up,
the deviation of a fraction of an inch being a certain precursor of
disaster, the snowshoe must be lifted till the surface is cleared; then
forward, down, and the other foot is raised perpendicularly for the
matter of half a yard. He who tries this for the first time, if haply
he avoids bringing his shoes in dangerous propinquity and measures not
his length on the treacherous footing, will give up exhausted at the
end of a hundred yards; he who can keep out of the way of the dogs for
a whole day may well crawl into his sleeping bag with a clear
conscience and a pride which passeth all understanding; and he who
travels twenty sleeps on the Long Trail is a man whom the gods may envy.

The afternoon wore on, and with the awe, born of the White Silence, the
voiceless travelers bent to their work. Nature has many tricks
wherewith she convinces man of his finity--the ceaseless flow of the
tides, the fury of the storm, the shock of the earthquake, the long
roll of heaven's artillery--but the most tremendous, the most
stupefying of all, is the passive phase of the White Silence. All
movement ceases, the sky clears, the heavens are as brass; the
slightest whisper seems sacrilege, and man becomes timid, affrighted at
the sound of his own voice. Sole speck of life journeying across the
ghostly wastes of a dead world, he trembles at his audacity, realizes
that his is a maggot's life, nothing more.

Strange thoughts arise unsummoned, and the mystery of all things
strives for utterance.

And the fear of death, of God, of the universe, comes over him--the
hope of the Resurrection and the Life, the yearning for immortality,
the vain striving of the imprisoned essence--it is then, if ever, man
walks alone with God.

So wore the day away. The river took a great bend, and Mason headed his
team for the cutoff across the narrow neck of land. But the dogs balked
at the high bank. Again and again, though Ruth and Malemute Kid were
shoving on the sled, they slipped back. Then came the concerted effort.
The miserable creatures, weak from hunger, exerted their last strength.
Up--up--the sled poised on the top of the bank; but the leader swung
the string of dogs behind him to the right, fouling Mason's snowshoes.
The result was grievous.

Mason was whipped off his feet; one of the dogs fell in the traces; and
the sled toppled back, dragging everything to the bottom again.

Slash! the whip fell among the dogs savagely, especially upon the one
which had fallen.

'Don't,--Mason,' entreated Malemute Kid; 'the poor devil's on its last
legs.  Wait and we'll put my team on.' Mason deliberately withheld the
whip till the last word had fallen, then out flashed the long lash,
completely curling about the offending creature's body.

Carmen--for it was Carmen--cowered in the snow, cried piteously, then
rolled over on her side.

It was a tragic moment, a pitiful incident of the trail--a dying dog,
two comrades in anger.

Ruth glanced solicitously from man to man. But Malemute Kid restrained
himself, though there was a world of reproach in his eyes, and, bending
over the dog, cut the traces. No word was spoken. The teams were
doublespanned and the difficulty overcome; the sleds were under way
again, the dying dog dragging herself along in the rear. As long as an
animal can travel, it is not shot, and this last chance is accorded
it--the crawling into camp, if it can, in the hope of a moose being
killed.

Already penitent for his angry action, but too stubborn to make amends,
Mason toiled on at the head of the cavalcade, little dreaming that
danger hovered in the air. The timber clustered thick in the sheltered
bottom, and through this they threaded their way. Fifty feet or more
from the trail towered a lofty pine. For generations it had stood
there, and for generations destiny had had this one end in
view--perhaps the same had been decreed of Mason.

He stooped to fasten the loosened thong of his moccasin. The sleds came
to a halt, and the dogs lay down in the snow without a whimper. The
stillness was weird; not a breath rustled the frost-encrusted forest;
the cold and silence of outer space had chilled the heart and smote the
trembling lips of nature. A sigh pulsed through the air--they did not
seem to actually hear it, but rather felt it, like the premonition of
movement in a motionless void. Then the great tree, burdened with its
weight of years and snow, played its last part in the tragedy of life.
He heard the warning crash and attempted to spring up but, almost
erect, caught the blow squarely on the shoulder.

The sudden danger, the quick death--how often had Malemute Kid faced
it! The pine needles were still quivering as he gave his commands and
sprang into action. Nor did the Indian girl faint or raise her voice in
idle wailing, as might many of her white sisters. At his order, she
threw her weight on the end of a quickly extemporized handspike, easing
the pressure and listening to her husband's groans, while Malemute Kid
attacked the tree with his ax. The steel rang merrily as it bit into
the frozen trunk, each stroke being accompanied by a forced, audible
respiration, the 'Huh!' 'Huh!' of the woodsman.

At last the Kid laid the pitiable thing that was once a man in the
snow. But worse than his comrade's pain was the dumb anguish in the
woman's face, the blended look of hopeful, hopeless query. Little was
said; those of the Northland are early taught the futility of words and
the inestimable value of deeds. With the temperature at sixty-five
below zero, a man cannot lie many minutes in the snow and live. So the
sled lashings were cut, and the sufferer, rolled in furs, laid on a
couch of boughs. Before him roared a fire, built of the very wood which
wrought the mishap. Behind and partially over him was stretched the
primitive fly--a piece of canvas, which caught the radiating heat and
threw it back and down upon him--a trick which men may know who study
physics at the fount.

And men who have shared their bed with death know when the call is
sounded. Mason was terribly crushed. The most cursory examination
revealed it.

His right arm, leg, and back were broken; his limbs were paralyzed from
the hips; and the likelihood of internal injuries was large. An
occasional moan was his only sign of life.

No hope; nothing to be done. The pitiless night crept slowly by--Ruth's
portion, the despairing stoicism of her race, and Malemute Kid adding
new lines to his face of bronze.

In fact, Mason suffered least of all, for he spent his time in eastern
Tennessee, in the Great Smoky Mountains, living over the scenes of his
childhood. And most pathetic was the melody of his long-forgotten
Southern vernacular, as he raved of swimming holes and coon hunts and
watermelon raids. It was as Greek to Ruth, but the Kid understood and
felt--felt as only one can feel who has been shut out for years from
all that civilization means.

Morning brought consciousness to the stricken man, and Malemute Kid
bent closer to catch his whispers.

'You remember when we foregathered on the Tanana, four years come next
ice run? I didn't care so much for her then. It was more like she was
pretty, and there was a smack of excitement about it, I think. But d'ye
know, I've come to think a heap of her. She's been a good wife to me,
always at my shoulder in the pinch. And when it comes to trading, you
know there isn't her equal. D'ye recollect the time she shot the
Moosehorn Rapids to pull you and me off that rock, the bullets whipping
the water like hailstones?--and the time of the famine at
Nuklukyeto?--when she raced the ice run to bring the news?

'Yes, she's been a good wife to me, better'n that other one. Didn't
know I'd been there?

'Never told you, eh? Well, I tried it once, down in the States. That's
why I'm here. Been raised together, too. I came away to give her a
chance for divorce. She got it.

'But that's got nothing to do with Ruth. I had thought of cleaning up
and pulling for the Outside next year--her and I--but it's too late.
Don't send her back to her people, Kid. It's beastly hard for a woman
to go back. Think of it!--nearly four years on our bacon and beans and
flour and dried fruit, and then to go back to her fish and caribou.
It's not good for her to have tried our ways, to come to know they're
better'n her people's, and then return to them. Take care of her, Kid,
why don't you--but no, you always fought shy of them--and you never
told me why you came to this country. Be kind to her, and send her back
to the States as soon as you can. But fix it so she can come
back--liable to get homesick, you know.

'And the youngster--it's drawn us closer, Kid. I only hope it is a boy.
Think of it!--flesh of my flesh, Kid. He mustn't stop in this country.
And if it's a girl, why, she can't. Sell my furs; they'll fetch at
least five thousand, and I've got as much more with the company. And
handle my interests with yours. I think that bench claim will show up.
See that he gets a good schooling; and Kid, above all, don't let him
come back. This country was not made for white men.

'I'm a gone man, Kid. Three or four sleeps at the best. You've got to
go on.  You must go on! Remember, it's my wife, it's my boy--O God! I
hope it's a boy! You can't stay by me--and I charge you, a dying man,
to pull on.'

'Give me three days,' pleaded Malemute Kid. 'You may change for the
better; something may turn up.'

'No.'

'Just three days.'

'You must pull on.'

'Two days.'

'It's my wife and my boy, Kid. You would not ask it.'

'One day.'

'No, no! I charge--'

'Only one day. We can shave it through on the grub, and I might knock
over a moose.'

'No--all right; one day, but not a minute more. And, Kid, don't--don't
leave me to face it alone. Just a shot, one pull on the trigger. You
understand. Think of it! Think of it! Flesh of my flesh, and I'll never
live to see him!

'Send Ruth here. I want to say good-by and tell her that she must think
of the boy and not wait till I'm dead. She might refuse to go with you
if I didn't. Goodby, old man; good-by.

'Kid! I say--a--sink a hole above the pup, next to the slide. I panned
out forty cents on my shovel there.

'And, Kid!' He stooped lower to catch the last faint words, the dying
man's surrender of his pride. 'I'm sorry--for--you know--Carmen.'
Leaving the girl crying softly over her man, Malemute Kid slipped into
his parka and snowshoes, tucked his rifle under his arm, and crept away
into the forest. He was no tyro in the stern sorrows of the Northland,
but never had he faced so stiff a problem as this. In the abstract, it
was a plain, mathematical proposition--three possible lives as against
one doomed one. But now he hesitated. For five years, shoulder to
shoulder, on the rivers and trails, in the camps and mines, facing
death by field and flood and famine, had they knitted the bonds of
their comradeship. So close was the tie that he had often been
conscious of a vague jealousy of Ruth, from the first time she had come
between. And now it must be severed by his own hand.

Though he prayed for a moose, just one moose, all game seemed to have
deserted the land, and nightfall found the exhausted man crawling into
camp, lighthanded, heavyhearted. An uproar from the dogs and shrill
cries from Ruth hastened him.

Bursting into the camp, he saw the girl in the midst of the snarling
pack, laying about her with an ax. The dogs had broken the iron rule of
their masters and were rushing the grub.

He joined the issue with his rifle reversed, and the hoary game of
natural selection was played out with all the ruthlessness of its
primeval environment. Rifle and ax went up and down, hit or missed with
monotonous regularity; lithe bodies flashed, with wild eyes and
dripping fangs; and man and beast fought for supremacy to the bitterest
conclusion. Then the beaten brutes crept to the edge of the firelight,
licking their wounds, voicing their misery to the stars.

The whole stock of dried salmon had been devoured, and perhaps five
pounds of flour remained to tide them over two hundred miles of
wilderness. Ruth returned to her husband, while Malemute Kid cut up the
warm body of one of the dogs, the skull of which had been crushed by
the ax. Every portion was carefully put away, save the hide and offal,
which were cast to his fellows of the moment before.

Morning brought fresh trouble. The animals were turning on each other.
Carmen, who still clung to her slender thread of life, was downed by
the pack. The lash fell among them unheeded. They cringed and cried
under the blows, but refused to scatter till the last wretched bit had
disappeared--bones, hide, hair, everything.

Malemute Kid went about his work, listening to Mason, who was back in
Tennessee, delivering tangled discourses and wild exhortations to his
brethren of other days.

Taking advantage of neighboring pines, he worked rapidly, and Ruth
watched him make a cache similar to those sometimes used by hunters to
preserve their meat from the wolverines and dogs. One after the other,
he bent the tops of two small pines toward each other and nearly to the
ground, making them fast with thongs of moosehide. Then he beat the
dogs into submission and harnessed them to two of the sleds, loading
the same with everything but the furs which enveloped Mason. These he
wrapped and lashed tightly about him, fastening either end of the robes
to the bent pines. A single stroke of his hunting knife would release
them and send the body high in the air.

Ruth had received her husband's last wishes and made no struggle. Poor
girl, she had learned the lesson of obedience well. From a child, she
had bowed, and seen all women bow, to the lords of creation, and it did
not seem in the nature of things for woman to resist. The Kid permitted
her one outburst of grief, as she kissed her husband--her own people
had no such custom--then led her to the foremost sled and helped her
into her snowshoes. Blindly, instinctively, she took the gee pole and
whip, and 'mushed' the dogs out on the trail. Then he returned to
Mason, who had fallen into a coma, and long after she was out of sight
crouched by the fire, waiting, hoping, praying for his comrade to die.

It is not pleasant to be alone with painful thoughts in the White
Silence. The silence of gloom is merciful, shrouding one as with
protection and breathing a thousand intangible sympathies; but the
bright White Silence, clear and cold, under steely skies, is pitiless.

An hour passed--two hours--but the man would not die. At high noon the
sun, without raising its rim above the southern horizon, threw a
suggestion of fire athwart the heavens, then quickly drew it back.
Malemute Kid roused and dragged himself to his comrade's side. He cast
one glance about him. The White Silence seemed to sneer, and a great
fear came upon him. There was a sharp report; Mason swung into his
aerial sepulcher, and Malemute Kid lashed the dogs into a wild gallop
as he fled across the snow.



The Son of the Wolf

Man rarely places a proper valuation upon his womankind, at least not
until deprived of them. He has no conception of the subtle atmosphere
exhaled by the sex feminine, so long as he bathes in it; but let it be
withdrawn, and an ever-growing void begins to manifest itself in his
existence, and he becomes hungry, in a vague sort of way, for a
something so indefinite that he cannot characterize it. If his comrades
have no more experience than himself, they will shake their heads
dubiously and dose him with strong physic. But the hunger will continue
and become stronger; he will lose interest in the things of his
everyday life and wax morbid; and one day, when the emptiness has
become unbearable, a revelation will dawn upon him.

In the Yukon country, when this comes to pass, the man usually
provisions a poling boat, if it is summer, and if winter, harnesses his
dogs, and heads for the Southland. A few months later, supposing him to
be possessed of a faith in the country, he returns with a wife to share
with him in that faith, and incidentally in his hardships. This but
serves to show the innate selfishness of man. It also brings us to the
trouble of 'Scruff' Mackenzie, which occurred in the old days, before
the country was stampeded and staked by a tidal-wave of the
che-cha-quas, and when the Klondike's only claim to notice was its
salmon fisheries.

'Scruff' Mackenzie bore the earmarks of a frontier birth and a frontier
life.

His face was stamped with twenty-five years of incessant struggle with
Nature in her wildest moods,--the last two, the wildest and hardest of
all, having been spent in groping for the gold which lies in the shadow
of the Arctic Circle. When the yearning sickness came upon him, he was
not surprised, for he was a practical man and had seen other men thus
stricken. But he showed no sign of his malady, save that he worked
harder. All summer he fought mosquitoes and washed the sure-thing bars
of the Stuart River for a double grubstake. Then he floated a raft of
houselogs down the Yukon to Forty Mile, and put together as comfortable
a cabin as any the camp could boast of. In fact, it showed such cozy
promise that many men elected to be his partner and to come and live
with him. But he crushed their aspirations with rough speech, peculiar
for its strength and brevity, and bought a double supply of grub from
the trading-post.

As has been noted, 'Scruff' Mackenzie was a practical man. If he wanted
a thing he usually got it, but in doing so, went no farther out of his
way than was necessary. Though a son of toil and hardship, he was
averse to a journey of six hundred miles on the ice, a second of two
thousand miles on the ocean, and still a third thousand miles or so to
his last stamping-grounds,--all in the mere quest of a wife. Life was
too short. So he rounded up his dogs, lashed a curious freight to his
sled, and faced across the divide whose westward slopes were drained by
the head-reaches of the Tanana.

He was a sturdy traveler, and his wolf-dogs could work harder and
travel farther on less grub than any other team in the Yukon. Three
weeks later he strode into a hunting-camp of the Upper Tanana Sticks.
They marveled at his temerity; for they had a bad name and had been
known to kill white men for as trifling a thing as a sharp ax or a
broken rifle.

But he went among them single-handed, his bearing being a delicious
composite of humility, familiarity, sang-froid, and insolence. It
required a deft hand and deep knowledge of the barbaric mind
effectually to handle such diverse weapons; but he was a past-master in
the art, knowing when to conciliate and when to threaten with Jove-like
wrath.

He first made obeisance to the Chief Thling-Tinneh, presenting him with
a couple of pounds of black tea and tobacco, and thereby winning his
most cordial regard. Then he mingled with the men and maidens, and that
night gave a potlach.

The snow was beaten down in the form of an oblong, perhaps a hundred
feet in length and quarter as many across. Down the center a long fire
was built, while either side was carpeted with spruce boughs. The
lodges were forsaken, and the fivescore or so members of the tribe gave
tongue to their folk-chants in honor of their guest.

'Scruff' Mackenzie's two years had taught him the not many hundred
words of their vocabulary, and he had likewise conquered their deep
gutturals, their Japanese idioms, constructions, and honorific and
agglutinative particles. So he made oration after their manner,
satisfying their instinctive poetry-love with crude flights of
eloquence and metaphorical contortions. After Thling-Tinneh and the
Shaman had responded in kind, he made trifling presents to the menfolk,
joined in their singing, and proved an expert in their fifty-two-stick
gambling game.

And they smoked his tobacco and were pleased. But among the younger men
there was a defiant attitude, a spirit of braggadocio, easily
understood by the raw insinuations of the toothless squaws and the
giggling of the maidens. They had known few white men, 'Sons of the
Wolf,' but from those few they had learned strange lessons.

Nor had 'Scruff' Mackenzie, for all his seeming carelessness, failed to
note these phenomena. In truth, rolled in his sleeping-furs, he thought
it all over, thought seriously, and emptied many pipes in mapping out a
campaign. One maiden only had caught his fancy,--none other than
Zarinska, daughter to the chief. In features, form, and poise,
answering more nearly to the white man's type of beauty, she was almost
an anomaly among her tribal sisters. He would possess her, make her his
wife, and name her--ah, he would name her Gertrude! Having thus
decided, he rolled over on his side and dropped off to sleep, a true
son of his all-conquering race, a Samson among the Philistines.

It was slow work and a stiff game; but 'Scruff' Mackenzie maneuvered
cunningly, with an unconcern which served to puzzle the Sticks. He took
great care to impress the men that he was a sure shot and a mighty
hunter, and the camp rang with his plaudits when he brought down a
moose at six hundred yards. Of a night he visited in Chief
Thling-Tinneh's lodge of moose and cariboo skins, talking big and
dispensing tobacco with a lavish hand. Nor did he fail to likewise
honor the Shaman; for he realized the medicine-man's influence with his
people, and was anxious to make of him an ally. But that worthy was
high and mighty, refused to be propitiated, and was unerringly marked
down as a prospective enemy.

Though no opening presented for an interview with Zarinska, Mackenzie
stole many a glance to her, giving fair warning of his intent. And well
she knew, yet coquettishly surrounded herself with a ring of women
whenever the men were away and he had a chance. But he was in no hurry;
besides, he knew she could not help but think of him, and a few days of
such thought would only better his suit.

At last, one night, when he deemed the time to be ripe, he abruptly
left the chief's smoky dwelling and hastened to a neighboring lodge. As
usual, she sat with squaws and maidens about her, all engaged in sewing
moccasins and beadwork. They laughed at his entrance, and badinage,
which linked Zarinska to him, ran high. But one after the other they
were unceremoniously bundled into the outer snow, whence they hurried
to spread the tale through all the camp.

His cause was well pleaded, in her tongue, for she did not know his,
and at the end of two hours he rose to go.

'So Zarinska will come to the White Man's lodge? Good! I go now to have
talk with thy father, for he may not be so minded. And I will give him
many tokens; but he must not ask too much. If he say no? Good! Zarinska
shall yet come to the White Man's lodge.'

He had already lifted the skin flap to depart, when a low exclamation
brought him back to the girl's side. She brought herself to her knees
on the bearskin mat, her face aglow with true Eve-light, and shyly
unbuckled his heavy belt. He looked down, perplexed, suspicious, his
ears alert for the slightest sound without.

But her next move disarmed his doubt, and he smiled with pleasure. She
took from her sewing bag a moosehide sheath, brave with bright
beadwork, fantastically designed. She drew his great hunting-knife,
gazed reverently along the keen edge, half tempted to try it with her
thumb, and shot it into place in its new home. Then she slipped the
sheath along the belt to its customary resting-place, just above the
hip.  For all the world, it was like a scene of olden time,--a lady and
her knight.

Mackenzie drew her up full height and swept her red lips with his
moustache, the, to her, foreign caress of the Wolf. It was a meeting of
the stone age and the steel; but she was none the less a woman, as her
crimson cheeks and the luminous softness of her eyes attested.

There was a thrill of excitement in the air as 'Scruff' Mackenzie, a
bulky bundle under his arm, threw open the flap of Thling-Tinneh's
tent. Children were running about in the open, dragging dry wood to the
scene of the potlach, a babble of women's voices was growing in
intensity, the young men were consulting in sullen groups, while from
the Shaman's lodge rose the eerie sounds of an incantation.

The chief was alone with his blear-eyed wife, but a glance sufficed to
tell Mackenzie that the news was already told. So he plunged at once
into the business, shifting the beaded sheath prominently to the fore
as advertisement of the betrothal.

'O Thling-Tinneh, mighty chief of the Sticks And the land of the
Tanana, ruler of the salmon and the bear, the moose and the cariboo!
The White Man is before thee with a great purpose. Many moons has his
lodge been empty, and he is lonely. And his heart has eaten itself in
silence, and grown hungry for a woman to sit beside him in his lodge,
to meet him from the hunt with warm fire and good food. He has heard
strange things, the patter of baby moccasins and the sound of
children's voices. And one night a vision came upon him, and he beheld
the Raven, who is thy father, the great Raven, who is the father of all
the Sticks. And the Raven spake to the lonely White Man, saying: "Bind
thou thy moccasins upon thee, and gird thy snow-shoes on, and lash thy
sled with food for many sleeps and fine tokens for the Chief
Thling-Tinneh. For thou shalt turn thy face to where the mid-spring sun
is wont to sink below the land and journey to this great chief's
hunting-grounds. There thou shalt make big presents, and Thling-Tinneh,
who is my son, shall become to thee as a father. In his lodge there is
a maiden into whom I breathed the breath of life for thee. This maiden
shalt thou take to wife." 'O Chief, thus spake the great Raven; thus do
I lay many presents at thy feet; thus am I come to take thy daughter!'
The old man drew his furs about him with crude consciousness of
royalty, but delayed reply while a youngster crept in, delivered a
quick message to appear before the council, and was gone.

'O White Man, whom we have named Moose-Killer, also known as the Wolf,
and the Son of the Wolf! We know thou comest of a mighty race; we are
proud to have thee our potlach-guest; but the king-salmon does not mate
with the dogsalmon, nor the Raven with the Wolf.' 'Not so!' cried
Mackenzie. 'The daughters of the Raven have I met in the camps of the
Wolf,--the squaw of Mortimer, the squaw of Tregidgo, the squaw of
Barnaby, who came two ice-runs back, and I have heard of other squaws,
though my eyes beheld them not.' 'Son, your words are true; but it were
evil mating, like the water with the sand, like the snow-flake with the
sun. But met you one Mason and his squaw' No?

He came ten ice-runs ago,--the first of all the Wolves. And with him
there was a mighty man, straight as a willow-shoot, and tall; strong as
the bald-faced grizzly, with a heart like the full summer moon; his-'
'Oh!' interrupted Mackenzie, recognizing the well-known Northland
figure, 'Malemute Kid!' 'The same,--a mighty man. But saw you aught of
the squaw? She was full sister to Zarinska.' 'Nay, Chief; but I have
heard. Mason--far, far to the north, a spruce-tree, heavy with years,
crushed out his life beneath. But his love was great, and he had much
gold. With this, and her boy, she journeyed countless sleeps toward the
winter's noonday sun, and there she yet lives,--no biting frost, no
snow, no summer's midnight sun, no winter's noonday night.'

A second messenger interrupted with imperative summons from the council.

As Mackenzie threw him into the snow, he caught a glimpse of the
swaying forms before the council-fire, heard the deep basses of the men
in rhythmic chant, and knew the Shaman was fanning the anger of his
people. Time pressed. He turned upon the chief.

'Come! I wish thy child. And now, see! Here are tobacco, tea, many cups
of sugar, warm blankets, handkerchiefs, both good and large; and here,
a true rifle, with many bullets and much powder.' 'Nay,' replied the
old man, struggling against the great wealth spread before him. 'Even
now are my people come together. They will not have this marriage.'

'But thou art chief.' 'Yet do my young men rage because the Wolves have
taken their maidens so that they may not marry.' 'Listen, O
Thling-Tinneh! Ere the night has passed into the day, the Wolf shall
face his dogs to the Mountains of the East and fare forth to the
Country of the Yukon. And Zarinska shall break trail for his dogs.'
'And ere the night has gained its middle, my young men may fling to the
dogs the flesh of the Wolf, and his bones be scattered in the snow till
the springtime lay them bare.' It was threat and counter-threat.
Mackenzie's bronzed face flushed darkly. He raised his voice. The old
squaw, who till now had sat an impassive spectator, made to creep by
him for the door.

The song of the men broke suddenly and there was a hubbub of many
voices as he whirled the old woman roughly to her couch of skins.

'Again I cry--listen, O Thling-Tinneh! The Wolf dies with teeth
fast-locked, and with him there shall sleep ten of thy strongest
men,--men who are needed, for the hunting is not begun, and the fishing
is not many moons away. And again, of what profit should I die? I know
the custom of thy people; thy share of my wealth shall be very small.
Grant me thy child, and it shall all be thine. And yet again, my
brothers will come, and they are many, and their maws are never filled;
and the daughters of the Raven shall bear children in the lodges of the
Wolf. My people are greater than thy people. It is destiny. Grant, and
all this wealth is thine.' Moccasins were crunching the snow without.
Mackenzie threw his rifle to cock, and loosened the twin Colts in his
belt.

'Grant, O Chief!' 'And yet will my people say no.' 'Grant, and the
wealth is thine. Then shall I deal with thy people after.' 'The Wolf
will have it so. I will take his tokens,--but I would warn him.'
Mackenzie passed over the goods, taking care to clog the rifle's
ejector, and capping the bargain with a kaleidoscopic silk kerchief.
The Shaman and half a dozen young braves entered, but he shouldered
boldly among them and passed out.

'Pack!' was his laconic greeting to Zarinska as he passed her lodge and
hurried to harness his dogs. A few minutes later he swept into the
council at the head of the team, the woman by his side. He took his
place at the upper end of the oblong, by the side of the chief. To his
left, a step to the rear, he stationed Zarinska, her proper place.
Besides, the time was ripe for mischief, and there was need to guard
his back.

On either side, the men crouched to the fire, their voices lifted in a
folk-chant out of the forgotten past. Full of strange, halting cadences
and haunting recurrences, it was not beautiful. 'Fearful' may
inadequately express it. At the lower end, under the eye of the Shaman,
danced half a score of women. Stern were his reproofs of those who did
not wholly abandon themselves to the ecstasy of the rite. Half hidden
in their heavy masses of raven hair, all dishevelled and falling to
their waists, they slowly swayed to and fro, their forms rippling to an
ever-changing rhythm.

It was a weird scene; an anachronism. To the south, the nineteenth
century was reeling off the few years of its last decade; here
flourished man primeval, a shade removed from the prehistoric
cave-dweller, forgotten fragment of the Elder World. The tawny
wolf-dogs sat between their skin-clad masters or fought for room, the
firelight cast backward from their red eyes and dripping fangs. The
woods, in ghostly shroud, slept on unheeding.

The White Silence, for the moment driven to the rimming forest, seemed
ever crushing inward; the stars danced with great leaps, as is their
wont in the time of the Great Cold; while the Spirits of the Pole
trailed their robes of glory athwart the heavens.

'Scruff' Mackenzie dimly realized the wild grandeur of the setting as
his eyes ranged down the fur-fringed sides in quest of missing faces.
They rested for a moment on a newborn babe, suckling at its mother's
naked breast. It was forty below,--seven and odd degrees of frost. He
thought of the tender women of his own race and smiled grimly. Yet from
the loins of some such tender woman had he sprung with a kingly
inheritance,--an inheritance which gave to him and his dominance over
the land and sea, over the animals and the peoples of all the zones.
Single-handed against fivescore, girt by the Arctic winter, far from
his own, he felt the prompting of his heritage, the desire to possess,
the wild danger--love, the thrill of battle, the power to conquer or to
die.

The singing and the dancing ceased, and the Shaman flared up in rude
eloquence.

Through the sinuosities of their vast mythology, he worked cunningly
upon the credulity of his people. The case was strong. Opposing the
creative principles as embodied in the Crow and the Raven, he
stigmatized Mackenzie as the Wolf, the fighting and the destructive
principle. Not only was the combat of these forces spiritual, but men
fought, each to his totem. They were the children of Jelchs, the Raven,
the Promethean fire-bringer; Mackenzie was the child of the Wolf, or in
other words, the Devil. For them to bring a truce to this perpetual
warfare, to marry their daughters to the arch-enemy, were treason and
blasphemy of the highest order. No phrase was harsh nor figure vile
enough in branding Mackenzie as a sneaking interloper and emissary of
Satan. There was a subdued, savage roar in the deep chests of his
listeners as he took the swing of his peroration.

'Aye, my brothers, Jelchs is all-powerful! Did he not bring
heaven-borne fire that we might be warm? Did he not draw the sun, moon,
and stars, from their holes that we might see? Did he not teach us that
we might fight the Spirits of Famine and of Frost? But now Jelchs is
angry with his children, and they are grown to a handful, and he will
not help.

'For they have forgotten him, and done evil things, and trod bad
trails, and taken his enemies into their lodges to sit by their fires.
And the Raven is sorrowful at the wickedness of his children; but when
they shall rise up and show they have come back, he will come out of
the darkness to aid them. O brothers! the Fire-Bringer has whispered
messages to thy Shaman; the same shall ye hear. Let the young men take
the young women to their lodges; let them fly at the throat of the
Wolf; let them be undying in their enmity! Then shall their women
become fruitful and they shall multiply into a mighty people! And the
Raven shall lead great tribes of their fathers and their fathers'
fathers from out of the North; and they shall beat back the Wolves till
they are as last year's campfires; and they shall again come to rule
over all the land! 'Tis the message of Jelchs, the Raven.' This
foreshadowing of the Messiah's coming brought a hoarse howl from the
Sticks as they leaped to their feet. Mackenzie slipped the thumbs of
his mittens and waited. There was a clamor for the 'Fox,' not to be
stilled till one of the young men stepped forward to speak.

'Brothers! The Shaman has spoken wisely. The Wolves have taken our
women, and our men are childless. We are grown to a handful. The Wolves
have taken our warm furs and given for them evil spirits which dwell in
bottles, and clothes which come not from the beaver or the lynx, but
are made from the grass.

And they are not warm, and our men die of strange sicknesses. I, the
Fox, have taken no woman to wife; and why? Twice have the maidens which
pleased me gone to the camps of the Wolf. Even now have I laid by skins
of the beaver, of the moose, of the cariboo, that I might win favor in
the eyes of Thling-Tinneh, that I might marry Zarinska, his daughter.
Even now are her snow-shoes bound to her feet, ready to break trail for
the dogs of the Wolf. Nor do I speak for myself alone.

As I have done, so has the Bear. He, too, had fain been the father of
her children, and many skins has he cured thereto. I speak for all the
young men who know not wives. The Wolves are ever hungry. Always do
they take the choice meat at the killing. To the Ravens are left the
leavings.

'There is Gugkla,' he cried, brutally pointing out one of the women,
who was a cripple.

'Her legs are bent like the ribs of a birch canoe. She cannot gather
wood nor carry the meat of the hunters. Did the Wolves choose her?'
'Ai! ai!' vociferated his tribesmen.

'There is Moyri, whose eyes are crossed by the Evil Spirit. Even the
babes are affrighted when they gaze upon her, and it is said the
bald-face gives her the trail.

'Was she chosen?' Again the cruel applause rang out.

'And there sits Pischet. She does not hearken to my words. Never has
she heard the cry of the chit-chat, the voice of her husband, the
babble of her child.

'She lives in the White Silence. Cared the Wolves aught for her? No!
Theirs is the choice of the kill; ours is the leavings.

'Brothers, it shall not be! No more shall the Wolves slink among our
campfires. The time is come.' A great streamer of fire, the aurora
borealis, purple, green, and yellow, shot across the zenith, bridging
horizon to horizon. With head thrown back and arms extended, he swayed
to his climax.

'Behold! The spirits of our fathers have arisen and great deeds are
afoot this night!' He stepped back, and another young man somewhat
diffidently came forward, pushed on by his comrades. He towered a full
head above them, his broad chest defiantly bared to the frost. He swung
tentatively from one foot to the other.

Words halted upon his tongue, and he was ill at ease. His face was
horrible to look upon, for it had at one time been half torn away by
some terrific blow. At last he struck his breast with his clenched
fist, drawing sound as from a drum, and his voice rumbled forth as does
the surf from an ocean cavern.

'I am the Bear,--the Silver-Tip and the Son of the Silver-Tip! When my
voice was yet as a girl's, I slew the lynx, the moose, and the cariboo;
when it whistled like the wolverines from under a cache, I crossed the
Mountains of the South and slew three of the White Rivers; when it
became as the roar of the Chinook, I met the bald-faced grizzly, but
gave no trail.' At this he paused, his hand significantly sweeping
across his hideous scars.

'I am not as the Fox. My tongue is frozen like the river. I cannot make
great talk. My words are few. The Fox says great deeds are afoot this
night. Good! Talk flows from his tongue like the freshets of the
spring, but he is chary of deeds.

'This night shall I do battle with the Wolf. I shall slay him, and
Zarinska shall sit by my fire. The Bear has spoken.' Though pandemonium
raged about him, 'Scruff' Mackenzie held his ground.

Aware how useless was the rifle at close quarters, he slipped both
holsters to the fore, ready for action, and drew his mittens till his
hands were barely shielded by the elbow gauntlets. He knew there was no
hope in attack en masse, but true to his boast, was prepared to die
with teeth fast-locked. But the Bear restrained his comrades, beating
back the more impetuous with his terrible fist. As the tumult began to
die away, Mackenzie shot a glance in the direction of Zarinska. It was
a superb picture. She was leaning forward on her snow-shoes, lips apart
and nostrils quivering, like a tigress about to spring. Her great black
eyes were fixed upon her tribesmen, in fear and defiance. So extreme
the tension, she had forgotten to breathe. With one hand pressed
spasmodically against her breast and the other as tightly gripped about
the dog-whip, she was as turned to stone. Even as he looked, relief
came to her. Her muscles loosened; with a heavy sigh she settled back,
giving him a look of more than love--of worship.

Thling-Tinneh was trying to speak, but his people drowned his voice.
Then Mackenzie strode forward. The Fox opened his mouth to a piercing
yell, but so savagely did Mackenzie whirl upon him that he shrank back,
his larynx all agurgle with suppressed sound. His discomfiture was
greeted with roars of laughter, and served to soothe his fellows to a
listening mood.

'Brothers! The White Man, whom ye have chosen to call the Wolf, came
among you with fair words. He was not like the Innuit; he spoke not
lies. He came as a friend, as one who would be a brother. But your men
have had their say, and the time for soft words is past.

'First, I will tell you that the Shaman has an evil tongue and is a
false prophet, that the messages he spake are not those of the
Fire-Bringer. His ears are locked to the voice of the Raven, and out of
his own head he weaves cunning fancies, and he has made fools of you.
He has no power.

'When the dogs were killed and eaten, and your stomachs were heavy with
untanned hide and strips of moccasins; when the old men died, and the
old women died, and the babes at the dry dugs of the mothers died; when
the land was dark, and ye perished as do the salmon in the fall; aye,
when the famine was upon you, did the Shaman bring reward to your
hunters? did the Shaman put meat in your bellies? Again I say, the
Shaman is without power. Thus I spit upon his face!' Though taken aback
by the sacrilege, there was no uproar. Some of the women were even
frightened, but among the men there was an uplifting, as though in
preparation or anticipation of the miracle. All eyes were turned upon
the two central figures. The priest realized the crucial moment, felt
his power tottering, opened his mouth in denunciation, but fled
backward before the truculent advance, upraised fist, and flashing
eyes, of Mackenzie. He sneered and resumed.

'Was I stricken dead? Did the lightning burn me? Did the stars fall
from the sky and crush me? Pish! I have done with the dog. Now will I
tell you of my people, who are the mightiest of all the peoples, who
rule in all the lands. At first we hunt as I hunt, alone.

'After that we hunt in packs; and at last, like the cariboo-run, we
sweep across all the land.

'Those whom we take into our lodges live; those who will not come die.
Zarinska is a comely maiden, full and strong, fit to become the mother
of Wolves. Though I die, such shall she become; for my brothers are
many, and they will follow the scent of my dogs.

'Listen to the Law of the Wolf: Whoso taketh the life of one Wolf, the
forfeit shall ten of his people pay. In many lands has the price been
paid; in many lands shall it yet be paid.

'Now will I deal with the Fox and the Bear. It seems they have cast
eyes upon the maiden. So? Behold, I have bought her! Thling-Tinneh
leans upon the rifle; the goods of purchase are by his fire. Yet will I
be fair to the young men. To the Fox, whose tongue is dry with many
words, will I give of tobacco five long plugs.

'Thus will his mouth be wetted that he may make much noise in the
council. But to the Bear, of whom I am well proud, will I give of
blankets two; of flour, twenty cups; of tobacco, double that of the
Fox; and if he fare with me over the Mountains of the East, then will I
give him a rifle, mate to Thling-Tinneh's. If not? Good! The Wolf is
weary of speech. Yet once again will he say the Law: Whoso taketh the
life of one Wolf, the forfeit shall ten of his people pay.'

Mackenzie smiled as he stepped back to his old position, but at heart
he was full of trouble. The night was yet dark. The girl came to his
side, and he listened closely as she told of the Bear's battle-tricks
with the knife.

The decision was for war. In a trice, scores of moccasins were widening
the space of beaten snow by the fire. There was much chatter about the
seeming defeat of the Shaman; some averred he had but withheld his
power, while others conned past events and agreed with the Wolf. The
Bear came to the center of the battle-ground, a long naked
hunting-knife of Russian make in his hand. The Fox called attention to
Mackenzie's revolvers; so he stripped his belt, buckling it about
Zarinska, into whose hands he also entrusted his rifle. She shook her
head that she could not shoot,--small chance had a woman to handle such
precious things.

'Then, if danger come by my back, cry aloud, "My husband!" No; thus,
"My husband!"'

He laughed as she repeated it, pinched her cheek, and reentered the
circle. Not only in reach and stature had the Bear the advantage of
him, but his blade was longer by a good two inches. 'Scruff' Mackenzie
had looked into the eyes of men before, and he knew it was a man who
stood against him; yet he quickened to the glint of light on the steel,
to the dominant pulse of his race.

Time and again he was forced to the edge of the fire or the deep snow,
and time and again, with the foot tactics of the pugilist, he worked
back to the center.  Not a voice was lifted in encouragement, while his
antagonist was heartened with applause, suggestions, and warnings. But
his teeth only shut the tighter as the knives clashed together, and he
thrust or eluded with a coolness born of conscious strength. At first
he felt compassion for his enemy; but this fled before the primal
instinct of life, which in turn gave way to the lust of slaughter. The
ten thousand years of culture fell from him, and he was a cave-dweller,
doing battle for his female.

Twice he pricked the Bear, getting away unscathed; but the third time
caught, and to save himself, free hands closed on fighting hands, and
they came together.

Then did he realize the tremendous strength of his opponent. His
muscles were knotted in painful lumps, and cords and tendons threatened
to snap with the strain; yet nearer and nearer came the Russian steel.
He tried to break away, but only weakened himself. The fur-clad circle
closed in, certain of and anxious to see the final stroke. But with
wrestler's trick, swinging partly to the side, he struck at his
adversary with his head. Involuntarily the Bear leaned back, disturbing
his center of gravity. Simultaneous with this, Mackenzie tripped
properly and threw his whole weight forward, hurling him clear through
the circle into the deep snow. The Bear floundered out and came back
full tilt.

'O my husband!' Zarinska's voice rang out, vibrant with danger.

To the twang of a bow-string, Mackenzie swept low to the ground, and a
bonebarbed arrow passed over him into the breast of the Bear, whose
momentum carried him over his crouching foe. The next instant Mackenzie
was up and about. The bear lay motionless, but across the fire was the
Shaman, drawing a second arrow. Mackenzie's knife leaped short in the
air. He caught the heavy blade by the point. There was a flash of light
as it spanned the fire. Then the Shaman, the hilt alone appearing
without his throat, swayed and pitched forward into the glowing embers.

Click! Click!--the Fox had possessed himself of Thling-Tinneh's rifle
and was vainly trying to throw a shell into place. But he dropped it at
the sound of Mackenzie's laughter.

'So the Fox has not learned the way of the plaything? He is yet a woman.

'Come! Bring it, that I may show thee!' The Fox hesitated.

'Come, I say!' He slouched forward like a beaten cur.

'Thus, and thus; so the thing is done.' A shell flew into place and the
trigger was at cock as Mackenzie brought it to shoulder.

'The Fox has said great deeds were afoot this night, and he spoke true.
There have been great deeds, yet least among them were those of the
Fox. Is he still intent to take Zarinska to his lodge? Is he minded to
tread the trail already broken by the Shaman and the Bear?

'No? Good!'

Mackenzie turned contemptuously and drew his knife from the priest's
throat.

'Are any of the young men so minded? If so, the Wolf will take them by
two and three till none are left. No? Good! Thling-Tinneh, I now give
thee this rifle a second time. If, in the days to come, thou shouldst
journey to the Country of the Yukon, know thou that there shall always
be a place and much food by the fire of the Wolf. The night is now
passing into the day. I go, but I may come again. And for the last
time, remember the Law of the Wolf!' He was supernatural in their sight
as he rejoined Zarinska. She took her place at the head of the team,
and the dogs swung into motion. A few moments later they were swallowed
up by the ghostly forest. Till now Mackenzie had waited; he slipped
into his snow-shoes to follow.

'Has the Wolf forgotten the five long plugs?' Mackenzie turned upon the
Fox angrily; then the humor of it struck him.

'I will give thee one short plug.' 'As the Wolf sees fit,' meekly
responded the Fox, stretching out his hand.



The Men of Forty Mile

When Big Jim Belden ventured the apparently innocuous proposition that
mush-ice was 'rather pecooliar,' he little dreamed of what it would
lead to.

Neither did Lon McFane, when he affirmed that anchor-ice was even more
so; nor did Bettles, as he instantly disagreed, declaring the very
existence of such a form to be a bugaboo.

'An' ye'd be tellin' me this,' cried Lon, 'after the years ye've spint
in the land! An' we atin' out the same pot this many's the day!' 'But
the thing's agin reasin,' insisted Bettles.

'Look you, water's warmer than ice--' 'An' little the difference, once
ye break through.'

'Still it's warmer, because it ain't froze. An' you say it freezes on
the bottom?' 'Only the anchor-ice, David, only the anchor-ice. An' have
ye niver drifted along, the water clear as glass, whin suddin, belike a
cloud over the sun, the mushy-ice comes bubblin' up an' up till from
bank to bank an' bind to bind it's drapin' the river like a first
snowfall?' 'Unh, hunh! more'n once when I took a doze at the
steering-oar. But it allus come out the nighest side-channel, an' not
bubblin' up an' up.' 'But with niver a wink at the helm?'

'No; nor you. It's agin reason. I'll leave it to any man!' Bettles
appealed to the circle about the stove, but the fight was on between
himself and Lon McFane.

'Reason or no reason, it's the truth I'm tellin' ye. Last fall, a year
gone, 'twas Sitka Charley and meself saw the sight, droppin' down the
riffle ye'll remember below Fort Reliance. An' regular fall weather it
was--the glint o' the sun on the golden larch an' the quakin' aspens;
an' the glister of light on ivery ripple; an' beyand, the winter an'
the blue haze of the North comin' down hand in hand. It's well ye know
the same, with a fringe to the river an' the ice formin' thick in the
eddies--an' a snap an' sparkle to the air, an' ye a-feelin' it through
all yer blood, a-takin' new lease of life with ivery suck of it. 'Tis
then, me boy, the world grows small an' the wandtherlust lays ye by the
heels.

'But it's meself as wandthers. As I was sayin', we a-paddlin', with
niver a sign of ice, barrin' that by the eddies, when the Injun lifts
his paddle an' sings out, "Lon McFane! Look ye below!" So have I heard,
but niver thought to see! As ye know, Sitka Charley, like meself, niver
drew first breath in the land; so the sight was new. Then we drifted,
with a head over ayther side, peerin' down through the sparkly water.
For the world like the days I spint with the pearlers, watchin' the
coral banks a-growin' the same as so many gardens under the sea. There
it was, the anchor-ice, clingin' an' clusterin' to ivery rock, after
the manner of the white coral.

'But the best of the sight was to come. Just after clearin' the tail of
the riffle, the water turns quick the color of milk, an' the top of it
in wee circles, as when the graylin' rise in the spring, or there's a
splatter of wet from the sky. 'Twas the anchor-ice comin' up. To the
right, to the lift, as far as iver a man cud see, the water was covered
with the same.

An' like so much porridge it was, slickin' along the bark of the canoe,
stickin' like glue to the paddles. It's many's the time I shot the
self-same riffle before, and it's many's the time after, but niver a
wink of the same have I seen. 'Twas the sight of a lifetime.' 'Do
tell!' dryly commented Bettles. 'D'ye think I'd b'lieve such a yarn?
I'd ruther say the glister of light'd gone to your eyes, and the snap
of the air to your tongue.' ''Twas me own eyes that beheld it, an' if
Sitka Charley was here, he'd be the lad to back me.' 'But facts is
facts, an' they ain't no gettin' round 'em. It ain't in the nature of
things for the water furtherest away from the air to freeze first.'
'But me own eyes-' 'Don't git het up over it,' admonished Bettles, as
the quick Celtic anger began to mount.

'Then yer not after belavin' me?' 'Sence you're so blamed forehanded
about it, no; I'd b'lieve nature first, and facts.'

'Is it the lie ye'd be givin' me?' threatened Lon. 'Ye'd better be
askin' that Siwash wife of yours. I'll lave it to her, for the truth I
spake.' Bettles flared up in sudden wrath. The Irishman had unwittingly
wounded him; for his wife was the half-breed daughter of a Russian
fur-trader, married to him in the Greek Mission of Nulato, a thousand
miles or so down the Yukon, thus being of much higher caste than the
common Siwash, or native, wife. It was a mere Northland nuance, which
none but the Northland adventurer may understand.

'I reckon you kin take it that way,' was his deliberate affirmation.

The next instant Lon McFane had stretched him on the floor, the circle
was broken up, and half a dozen men had stepped between.

Bettles came to his feet, wiping the blood from his mouth. 'It hain't
new, this takin' and payin' of blows, and don't you never think but
that this will be squared.' 'An' niver in me life did I take the lie
from mortal man,' was the retort courteous. 'An' it's an avil day I'll
not be to hand, waitin' an' willin' to help ye lift yer debts, barrin'
no manner of way.'

'Still got that 38-55?' Lon nodded.

'But you'd better git a more likely caliber. Mine'll rip holes through
you the size of walnuts.'

'Niver fear; it's me own slugs smell their way with soft noses, an'
they'll spread like flapjacks against the coming out beyand. An'
when'll I have the pleasure of waitin' on ye? The waterhole's a
strikin' locality.' ''Tain't bad. Jest be there in an hour, and you
won't set long on my coming.' Both men mittened and left the Post,
their ears closed to the remonstrances of their comrades. It was such a
little thing; yet with such men, little things, nourished by quick
tempers and stubborn natures, soon blossomed into big things.

Besides, the art of burning to bedrock still lay in the womb of the
future, and the men of Forty-Mile, shut in by the long Arctic winter,
grew high-stomached with overeating and enforced idleness, and became
as irritable as do the bees in the fall of the year when the hives are
overstocked with honey.

There was no law in the land. The mounted police was also a thing of
the future. Each man measured an offense, and meted out the punishment
inasmuch as it affected himself.

Rarely had combined action been necessary, and never in all the dreary
history of the camp had the eighth article of the Decalogue been
violated.

Big Jim Belden called an impromptu meeting. Scruff Mackenzie was placed
as temporary chairman, and a messenger dispatched to solicit Father
Roubeau's good offices. Their position was paradoxical, and they knew
it. By the right of might could they interfere to prevent the duel; yet
such action, while in direct line with their wishes, went counter to
their opinions. While their rough-hewn, obsolete ethics recognized the
individual prerogative of wiping out blow with blow, they could not
bear to think of two good comrades, such as Bettles and McFane, meeting
in deadly battle. Deeming the man who would not fight on provocation a
dastard, when brought to the test it seemed wrong that he should fight.

But a scurry of moccasins and loud cries, rounded off with a
pistol-shot, interrupted the discussion. Then the storm-doors opened
and Malemute Kid entered, a smoking Colt's in his hand, and a merry
light in his eye.

'I got him.' He replaced the empty shell, and added, 'Your dog,
Scruff.' 'Yellow Fang?'

Mackenzie asked.

'No; the lop-eared one.' 'The devil! Nothing the matter with him.'
'Come out and take a look.' 'That's all right after all. Buess he's got
'em, too. Yellow Fang came back this morning and took a chunk out of
him, and came near to making a widower of me. Made a rush for Zarinska,
but she whisked her skirts in his face and escaped with the loss of the
same and a good roll in the snow. Then he took to the woods again. Hope
he don't come back. Lost any yourself?' 'One--the best one of the
pack--Shookum. Started amuck this morning, but didn't get very far. Ran
foul of Sitka Charley's team, and they scattered him all over the
street. And now two of them are loose, and raging mad; so you see he
got his work in. The dog census will be small in the spring if we don't
do something.'

'And the man census, too.' 'How's that? Who's in trouble now?' 'Oh,
Bettles and Lon McFane had an argument, and they'll be down by the
waterhole in a few minutes to settle it.' The incident was repeated for
his benefit, and Malemute Kid, accustomed to an obedience which his
fellow men never failed to render, took charge of the affair. His
quickly formulated plan was explained, and they promised to follow his
lead implicitly.

'So you see,' he concluded, 'we do not actually take away their
privilege of fighting; and yet I don't believe they'll fight when they
see the beauty of the scheme. Life's a game and men the gamblers.
They'll stake their whole pile on the one chance in a thousand.

'Take away that one chance, and--they won't play.' He turned to the man
in charge of the Post. 'Storekeeper, weight out three fathoms of your
best half-inch manila.

'We'll establish a precedent which will last the men of Forty-Mile to
the end of time,' he prophesied. Then he coiled the rope about his arm
and led his followers out of doors, just in time to meet the principals.

'What danged right'd he to fetch my wife in?' thundered Bettles to the
soothing overtures of a friend. ''Twa'n't called for,' he concluded
decisively. ''Twa'n't called for,' he reiterated again and again,
pacing up and down and waiting for Lon McFane.

And Lon McFane--his face was hot and tongue rapid as he flaunted
insurrection in the face of the Church. 'Then, father,' he cried, 'it's
with an aisy heart I'll roll in me flamy blankets, the broad of me back
on a bed of coals. Niver shall it be said that Lon McFane took a lie
'twixt the teeth without iver liftin' a hand! An' I'll not ask a
blessin'. The years have been wild, but it's the heart was in the right
place.' 'But it's not the heart, Lon,' interposed Father Roubeau; 'It's
pride that bids you forth to slay your fellow man.' 'Yer Frinch,' Lon
replied. And then, turning to leave him, 'An' will ye say a mass if the
luck is against me?' But the priest smiled, thrust his moccasined feet
to the fore, and went out upon the white breast of the silent river. A
packed trail, the width of a sixteen-inch sled, led out to the
waterhole. On either side lay the deep, soft snow. The men trod in
single file, without conversation; and the black-stoled priest in their
midst gave to the function the solemn aspect of a funeral. It was a
warm winter's day for Forty-Mile--a day in which the sky, filled with
heaviness, drew closer to the earth, and the mercury sought the
unwonted level of twenty below. But there was no cheer in the warmth.
There was little air in the upper strata, and the clouds hung
motionless, giving sullen promise of an early snowfall. And the earth,
unresponsive, made no preparation, content in its hibernation.

When the waterhole was reached, Bettles, having evidently reviewed the
quarrel during the silent walk, burst out in a final ''Twa'n't called
for,' while Lon McFane kept grim silence. Indignation so choked him
that he could not speak.

Yet deep down, whenever their own wrongs were not uppermost, both men
wondered at their comrades. They had expected opposition, and this
tacit acquiescence hurt them. It seemed more was due them from the men
they had been so close with, and they felt a vague sense of wrong,
rebelling at the thought of so many of their brothers coming out, as on
a gala occasion, without one word of protest, to see them shoot each
other down. It appeared their worth had diminished in the eyes of the
community. The proceedings puzzled them.

'Back to back, David. An' will it be fifty paces to the man, or double
the quantity?'

'Fifty,' was the sanguinary reply, grunted out, yet sharply cut.

But the new manila, not prominently displayed, but casually coiled
about Malemute Kid's arm, caught the quick eye of the Irishman, and
thrilled him with a suspicious fear.

'An' what are ye doin' with the rope?' 'Hurry up!' Malemute Kid glanced
at his watch.

'I've a batch of bread in the cabin, and I don't want it to fall.
Besides, my feet are getting cold.' The rest of the men manifested
their impatience in various suggestive ways.

'But the rope, Kid' It's bran' new, an' sure yer bread's not that heavy
it needs raisin' with the like of that?' Bettles by this time had faced
around. Father Roubeau, the humor of the situation just dawning on him,
hid a smile behind his mittened hand.

'No, Lon; this rope was made for a man.' Malemute Kid could be very
impressive on occasion.

'What man?' Bettles was becoming aware of a personal interest.

'The other man.' 'An' which is the one ye'd mane by that?' 'Listen,
Lon--and you, too, Bettles! We've been talking this little trouble of
yours over, and we've come to one conclusion. We know we have no right
to stop your fighting-' 'True for ye, me lad!' 'And we're not going to.
But this much we can do, and shall do--make this the only duel in the
history of Forty-Mile, set an example for every che-cha-qua that comes
up or down the Yukon. The man who escapes killing shall be hanged to
the nearest tree. Now, go ahead!'

Lon smiled dubiously, then his face lighted up. 'Pace her off,
David--fifty paces, wheel, an' niver a cease firin' till a lad's down
for good. 'Tis their hearts'll niver let them do the deed, an' it's
well ye should know it for a true Yankee bluff.'

He started off with a pleased grin on his face, but Malemute Kid halted
him.

'Lon! It's a long while since you first knew me?' 'Many's the day.'
'And you, Bettles?'

'Five year next June high water.' 'And have you once, in all that time,
known me to break my word' Or heard of me breaking it?' Both men shook
their heads, striving to fathom what lay beyond.

'Well, then, what do you think of a promise made by me?' 'As good as
your bond,' from Bettles.

'The thing to safely sling yer hopes of heaven by,' promptly endorsed
Lon McFane.

'Listen! I, Malemute Kid, give you my word--and you know what that
means that the man who is not shot stretches rope within ten minutes
after the shooting.' He stepped back as Pilate might have done after
washing his hands.

A pause and a silence came over the men of Forty-Mile. The sky drew
still closer, sending down a crystal flight of frost--little geometric
designs, perfect, evanescent as a breath, yet destined to exist till
the returning sun had covered half its northern journey.

Both men had led forlorn hopes in their time--led with a curse or a
jest on their tongues, and in their souls an unswerving faith in the
God of Chance. But that merciful deity had been shut out from the
present deal. They studied the face of Malemute Kid, but they studied
as one might the Sphinx. As the quiet minutes passed, a feeling that
speech was incumbent on them began to grow. At last the howl of a
wolf-dog cracked the silence from the direction of Forty-Mile. The
weird sound swelled with all the pathos of a breaking heart, then died
away in a long-drawn sob.

'Well I be danged!' Bettles turned up the collar of his mackinaw jacket
and stared about him helplessly.

'It's a gloryus game yer runnin', Kid,' cried Lon McFane. 'All the
percentage of the house an' niver a bit to the man that's buckin'. The
Devil himself'd niver tackle such a cinch--and damned if I do.' There
were chuckles, throttled in gurgling throats, and winks brushed away
with the frost which rimed the eyelashes, as the men climbed the
ice-notched bank and started across the street to the Post. But the
long howl had drawn nearer, invested with a new note of menace. A woman
screamed round the corner. There was a cry of, 'Here he comes!' Then an
Indian boy, at the head of half a dozen frightened dogs, racing with
death, dashed into the crowd. And behind came Yellow Fang, a bristle of
hair and a flash of gray. Everybody but the Yankee fled.

The Indian boy had tripped and fallen. Bettles stopped long enough to
grip him by the slack of his furs, then headed for a pile of cordwood
already occupied by a number of his comrades. Yellow Fang, doubling
after one of the dogs, came leaping back. The fleeing animal, free of
the rabies, but crazed with fright, whipped Bettles off his feet and
flashed on up the street. Malemute Kid took a flying shot at Yellow
Fang. The mad dog whirled a half airspring, came down on his back,
then, with a single leap, covered half the distance between himself and
Bettles.

But the fatal spring was intercepted. Lon McFane leaped from the
woodpile, countering him in midair. Over they rolled, Lon holding him
by the throat at arm's length, blinking under the fetid slaver which
sprayed his face. Then Bettles, revolver in hand and coolly waiting a
chance, settled the combat.

''Twas a square game, Kid,' Lon remarked, rising to his feet and
shaking the snow from out his sleeves; 'with a fair percentage to
meself that bucked it.' That night, while Lon McFane sought the
forgiving arms of the Church in the direction of Father Roubeau's
cabin, Malemute Kid talked long to little purpose.

'But would you,' persisted Mackenzie, 'supposing they had fought?'
'Have I ever broken my word?' 'No; but that isn't the point. Answer the
question. Would you?' Malemute Kid straightened up. 'Scruff, I've been
asking myself that question ever since, and--'

'Well?'

'Well, as yet, I haven't found the answer.'



In a Far Country

When a man journeys into a far country, he must be prepared to forget
many of the things he has learned, and to acquire such customs as are
inherent with existence in the new land; he must abandon the old ideals
and the old gods, and oftentimes he must reverse the very codes by
which his conduct has hitherto been shaped. To those who have the
protean faculty of adaptability, the novelty of such change may even be
a source of pleasure; but to those who happen to be hardened to the
ruts in which they were created, the pressure of the altered
environment is unbearable, and they chafe in body and in spirit under
the new restrictions which they do not understand. This chafing is
bound to act and react, producing divers evils and leading to various
misfortunes. It were better for the man who cannot fit himself to the
new groove to return to his own country; if he delay too long, he will
surely die.

The man who turns his back upon the comforts of an elder civilization,
to face the savage youth, the primordial simplicity of the North, may
estimate success at an inverse ratio to the quantity and quality of his
hopelessly fixed habits. He will soon discover, if he be a fit
candidate, that the material habits are the less important. The
exchange of such things as a dainty menu for rough fare, of the stiff
leather shoe for the soft, shapeless moccasin, of the feather bed for a
couch in the snow, is after all a very easy matter. But his pinch will
come in learning properly to shape his mind's attitude toward all
things, and especially toward his fellow man. For the courtesies of
ordinary life, he must substitute unselfishness, forbearance, and
tolerance. Thus, and thus only, can he gain that pearl of great
price--true comradeship. He must not say 'thank you'; he must mean it
without opening his mouth, and prove it by responding in kind. In
short, he must substitute the deed for the word, the spirit for the
letter.

When the world rang with the tale of Arctic gold, and the lure of the
North gripped the heartstrings of men, Carter Weatherbee threw up his
snug clerkship, turned the half of his savings over to his wife, and
with the remainder bought an outfit. There was no romance in his
nature--the bondage of commerce had crushed all that; he was simply
tired of the ceaseless grind, and wished to risk great hazards in view
of corresponding returns. Like many another fool, disdaining the old
trails used by the Northland pioneers for a score of years, he hurried
to Edmonton in the spring of the year; and there, unluckily for his
soul's welfare, he allied himself with a party of men.

There was nothing unusual about this party, except its plans. Even its
goal, like that of all the other parties, was the Klondike. But the
route it had mapped out to attain that goal took away the breath of the
hardiest native, born and bred to the vicissitudes of the Northwest.
Even Jacques Baptiste, born of a Chippewa woman and a renegade voyageur
(having raised his first whimpers in a deerskin lodge north of the
sixty-fifth parallel, and had the same hushed by blissful sucks of raw
tallow), was surprised. Though he sold his services to them and agreed
to travel even to the never-opening ice, he shook his head ominously
whenever his advice was asked.

Percy Cuthfert's evil star must have been in the ascendant, for he,
too, joined this company of argonauts. He was an ordinary man, with a
bank account as deep as his culture, which is saying a good deal. He
had no reason to embark on such a venture--no reason in the world save
that he suffered from an abnormal development of sentimentality. He
mistook this for the true spirit of romance and adventure. Many another
man has done the like, and made as fatal a mistake.

The first break-up of spring found the party following the ice-run of
Elk River. It was an imposing fleet, for the outfit was large, and they
were accompanied by a disreputable contingent of half-breed voyageurs
with their women and children. Day in and day out, they labored with
the bateaux and canoes, fought mosquitoes and other kindred pests, or
sweated and swore at the portages. Severe toil like this lays a man
naked to the very roots of his soul, and ere Lake Athabasca was lost in
the south, each member of the party had hoisted his true colors.

The two shirks and chronic grumblers were Carter Weatherbee and Percy
Cuthfert. The whole party complained less of its aches and pains than
did either of them. Not once did they volunteer for the thousand and
one petty duties of the camp. A bucket of water to be brought, an extra
armful of wood to be chopped, the dishes to be washed and wiped, a
search to be made through the outfit for some suddenly indispensable
article--and these two effete scions of civilization discovered sprains
or blisters requiring instant attention.

They were the first to turn in at night, with score of tasks yet
undone; the last to turn out in the morning, when the start should be
in readiness before the breakfast was begun.

They were the first to fall to at mealtime, the last to have a hand in
the cooking; the first to dive for a slim delicacy, the last to
discover they had added to their own another man's share. If they
toiled at the oars, they slyly cut the water at each stroke and allowed
the boat's momentum to float up the blade. They thought nobody noticed;
but their comrades swore under their breaths and grew to hate them,
while Jacques Baptiste sneered openly and damned them from morning till
night. But Jacques Baptiste was no gentleman.

At the Great Slave, Hudson Bay dogs were purchased, and the fleet sank
to the guards with its added burden of dried fish and pemican. Then
canoe and bateau answered to the swift current of the Mackenzie, and
they plunged into the Great Barren Ground. Every likely-looking
'feeder' was prospected, but the elusive 'pay-dirt' danced ever to the
north. At the Great Bear, overcome by the common dread of the Unknown
Lands, their voyageurs began to desert, and Fort of Good Hope saw the
last and bravest bending to the towlines as they bucked the current
down which they had so treacherously glided.

Jacques Baptiste alone remained. Had he not sworn to travel even to the
never-opening ice? The lying charts, compiled in main from hearsay,
were now constantly consulted.

And they felt the need of hurry, for the sun had already passed its
northern solstice and was leading the winter south again. Skirting the
shores of the bay, where the Mackenzie disembogues into the Arctic
Ocean, they entered the mouth of the Little Peel River. Then began the
arduous up-stream toil, and the two Incapables fared worse than ever.
Towline and pole, paddle and tumpline, rapids and portages--such
tortures served to give the one a deep disgust for great hazards, and
printed for the other a fiery text on the true romance of adventure.
One day they waxed mutinous, and being vilely cursed by Jacques
Baptiste, turned, as worms sometimes will. But the half-breed thrashed
the twain, and sent them, bruised and bleeding, about their work. It
was the first time either had been manhandled.

Abandoning their river craft at the headwaters of the Little Peel, they
consumed the rest of the summer in the great portage over the Mackenzie
watershed to the West Rat. This little stream fed the Porcupine, which
in turn joined the Yukon where that mighty highway of the North
countermarches on the Arctic Circle.

But they had lost in the race with winter, and one day they tied their
rafts to the thick eddy-ice and hurried their goods ashore. That night
the river jammed and broke several times; the following morning it had
fallen asleep for good. 'We can't be more'n four hundred miles from the
Yukon,' concluded Sloper, multiplying his thumb nails by the scale of
the map. The council, in which the two Incapables had whined to
excellent disadvantage, was drawing to a close.

'Hudson Bay Post, long time ago. No use um now.' Jacques Baptiste's
father had made the trip for the Fur Company in the old days,
incidentally marking the trail with a couple of frozen toes.

Sufferin' cracky!' cried another of the party. 'No whites?' 'Nary
white,' Sloper sententiously affirmed; 'but it's only five hundred more
up the Yukon to Dawson. Call it a rough thousand from here.' Weatherbee
and Cuthfert groaned in chorus.

'How long'll that take, Baptiste?' The half-breed figured for a moment.
'Workum like hell, no man play out, ten--twenty--forty--fifty days. Um
babies come' (designating the Incapables), 'no can tell. Mebbe when
hell freeze over; mebbe not then.' The manufacture of snowshoes and
moccasins ceased. Somebody called the name of an absent member, who
came out of an ancient cabin at the edge of the campfire and joined
them. The cabin was one of the many mysteries which lurk in the vast
recesses of the North. Built when and by whom, no man could tell.

Two graves in the open, piled high with stones, perhaps contained the
secret of those early wanderers. But whose hand had piled the stones?
The moment had come. Jacques Baptiste paused in the fitting of a
harness and pinned the struggling dog in the snow. The cook made mute
protest for delay, threw a handful of bacon into a noisy pot of beans,
then came to attention. Sloper rose to his feet. His body was a
ludicrous contrast to the healthy physiques of the Incapables. Yellow
and weak, fleeing from a South American fever-hole, he had not broken
his flight across the zones, and was still able to toil with men. His
weight was probably ninety pounds, with the heavy hunting knife thrown
in, and his grizzled hair told of a prime which had ceased to be. The
fresh young muscles of either Weatherbee or Cuthfert were equal to ten
times the endeavor of his; yet he could walk them into the earth in a
day's journey. And all this day he had whipped his stronger comrades
into venturing a thousand miles of the stiffest hardship man can
conceive. He was the incarnation of the unrest of his race, and the old
Teutonic stubbornness, dashed with the quick grasp and action of the
Yankee, held the flesh in the bondage of the spirit.

'All those in favor of going on with the dogs as soon as the ice sets,
say ay.' 'Ay!' rang out eight voices--voices destined to string a trail
of oaths along many a hundred miles of pain.

'Contrary minded?' 'No!' For the first time the Incapables were united
without some compromise of personal interests.

'And what are you going to do about it?' Weatherbee added belligerently.

'Majority rule! Majority rule!' clamored the rest of the party.

'I know the expedition is liable to fall through if you don't come,'
Sloper replied sweetly; 'but I guess, if we try real hard, we can
manage to do without you.

What do you say, boys?' The sentiment was cheered to the echo.

'But I say, you know,' Cuthfert ventured apprehensively; 'what's a chap
like me to do?'

'Ain't you coming with us.' 'No--o.' 'Then do as you damn well please.
We won't have nothing to say.' 'Kind o' calkilate yuh might settle it
with that canoodlin' pardner of yourn,' suggested a heavy-going
Westerner from the Dakotas, at the same time pointing out Weatherbee.
'He'll be shore to ask yuh what yur a-goin' to do when it comes to
cookin' an' gatherin' the wood.' 'Then we'll consider it all arranged,'
concluded Sloper.

'We'll pull out tomorrow, if we camp within five miles--just to get
everything in running order and remember if we've forgotten anything.'
The sleds groaned by on their steel-shod runners, and the dogs strained
low in the harnesses in which they were born to die.

Jacques Baptiste paused by the side of Sloper to get a last glimpse of
the cabin. The smoke curled up pathetically from the Yukon stovepipe.
The two Incapables were watching them from the doorway.

Sloper laid his hand on the other's shoulder.

'Jacques Baptiste, did you ever hear of the Kilkenny cats?' The
half-breed shook his head.

'Well, my friend and good comrade, the Kilkenny cats fought till
neither hide, nor hair, nor yowl, was left. You understand?--till
nothing was left. Very good.

Now, these two men don't like work. They'll be all alone in that cabin
all winter--a mighty long, dark winter. Kilkenny cats--well?' The
Frenchman in Baptiste shrugged his shoulders, but the Indian in him was
silent. Nevertheless, it was an eloquent shrug, pregnant with prophecy.
Things prospered in the little cabin at first. The rough badinage of
their comrades had made Weatherbee and Cuthfert conscious of the mutual
responsibility which had devolved upon them; besides, there was not so
much work after all for two healthy men. And the removal of the cruel
whiphand, or in other words the bulldozing half-breed, had brought with
it a joyous reaction. At first, each strove to outdo the other, and
they performed petty tasks with an unction which would have opened the
eyes of their comrades who were now wearing out bodies and souls on the
Long Trail.

All care was banished. The forest, which shouldered in upon them from
three sides, was an inexhaustible woodyard. A few yards from their door
slept the Porcupine, and a hole through its winter robe formed a
bubbling spring of water, crystal clear and painfully cold. But they
soon grew to find fault with even that. The hole would persist in
freezing up, and thus gave them many a miserable hour of ice-chopping.
The unknown builders of the cabin had extended the sidelogs so as to
support a cache at the rear. In this was stored the bulk of the party's
provisions.

Food there was, without stint, for three times the men who were fated
to live upon it. But the most of it was the kind which built up brawn
and sinew, but did not tickle the palate.

True, there was sugar in plenty for two ordinary men; but these two
were little else than children. They early discovered the virtues of
hot water judiciously saturated with sugar, and they prodigally swam
their flapjacks and soaked their crusts in the rich, white syrup.

Then coffee and tea, and especially the dried fruits, made disastrous
inroads upon it. The first words they had were over the sugar question.
And it is a really serious thing when two men, wholly dependent upon
each other for company, begin to quarrel.

Weatherbee loved to discourse blatantly on politics, while Cuthfert,
who had been prone to clip his coupons and let the commonwealth jog on
as best it might, either ignored the subject or delivered himself of
startling epigrams. But the clerk was too obtuse to appreciate the
clever shaping of thought, and this waste of ammunition irritated
Cuthfert.

He had been used to blinding people by his brilliancy, and it worked
him quite a hardship, this loss of an audience. He felt personally
aggrieved and unconsciously held his muttonhead companion responsible
for it.

Save existence, they had nothing in common--came in touch on no single
point.

Weatherbee was a clerk who had known naught but clerking all his life;
Cuthfert was a master of arts, a dabbler in oils, and had written not a
little. The one was a lower-class man who considered himself a
gentleman, and the other was a gentleman who knew himself to be such.
From this it may be remarked that a man can be a gentleman without
possessing the first instinct of true comradeship. The clerk was as
sensuous as the other was aesthetic, and his love adventures, told at
great length and chiefly coined from his imagination, affected the
supersensitive master of arts in the same way as so many whiffs of
sewer gas. He deemed the clerk a filthy, uncultured brute, whose place
was in the muck with the swine, and told him so; and he was
reciprocally informed that he was a milk-and-water sissy and a cad.
Weatherbee could not have defined 'cad' for his life; but it satisfied
its purpose, which after all seems the main point in life.

Weatherbee flatted every third note and sang such songs as 'The Boston
Burglar' and 'the Handsome Cabin Boy,' for hours at a time, while
Cuthfert wept with rage, till he could stand it no longer and fled into
the outer cold. But there was no escape. The intense frost could not be
endured for long at a time, and the little cabin crowded them--beds,
stove, table, and all--into a space of ten by twelve. The very presence
of either became a personal affront to the other, and they lapsed into
sullen silences which increased in length and strength as the days went
by. Occasionally, the flash of an eye or the curl of a lip got the
better of them, though they strove to wholly ignore each other during
these mute periods.

And a great wonder sprang up in the breast of each, as to how God had
ever come to create the other.

With little to do, time became an intolerable burden to them. This
naturally made them still lazier. They sank into a physical lethargy
which there was no escaping, and which made them rebel at the
performance of the smallest chore. One morning when it was his turn to
cook the common breakfast, Weatherbee rolled out of his blankets, and
to the snoring of his companion, lighted first the slush lamp and then
the fire. The kettles were frozen hard, and there was no water in the
cabin with which to wash. But he did not mind that. Waiting for it to
thaw, he sliced the bacon and plunged into the hateful task of
bread-making. Cuthfert had been slyly watching through his half-closed
lids.

Consequently there was a scene, in which they fervently blessed each
other, and agreed, henceforth, that each do his own cooking. A week
later, Cuthfert neglected his morning ablutions, but none the less
complacently ate the meal which he had cooked. Weatherbee grinned.
After that the foolish custom of washing passed out of their lives.

As the sugar-pile and other little luxuries dwindled, they began to be
afraid they were not getting their proper shares, and in order that
they might not be robbed, they fell to gorging themselves. The luxuries
suffered in this gluttonous contest, as did also the men.

In the absence of fresh vegetables and exercise, their blood became
impoverished, and a loathsome, purplish rash crept over their bodies.
Yet they refused to heed the warning.

Next, their muscles and joints began to swell, the flesh turning black,
while their mouths, gums, and lips took on the color of rich cream.
Instead of being drawn together by their misery, each gloated over the
other's symptoms as the scurvy took its course.

They lost all regard for personal appearance, and for that matter,
common decency. The cabin became a pigpen, and never once were the beds
made or fresh pine boughs laid underneath. Yet they could not keep to
their blankets, as they would have wished; for the frost was
inexorable, and the fire box consumed much fuel. The hair of their
heads and faces grew long and shaggy, while their garments would have
disgusted a ragpicker. But they did not care. They were sick, and there
was no one to see; besides, it was very painful to move about.

To all this was added a new trouble--the Fear of the North. This Fear
was the joint child of the Great Cold and the Great Silence, and was
born in the darkness of December, when the sun dipped below the horizon
for good. It affected them according to their natures.

Weatherbee fell prey to the grosser superstitions, and did his best to
resurrect the spirits which slept in the forgotten graves. It was a
fascinating thing, and in his dreams they came to him from out of the
cold, and snuggled into his blankets, and told him of their toils and
troubles ere they died. He shrank away from the clammy contact as they
drew closer and twined their frozen limbs about him, and when they
whispered in his ear of things to come, the cabin rang with his
frightened shrieks. Cuthfert did not understand--for they no longer
spoke--and when thus awakened he invariably grabbed for his revolver.
Then he would sit up in bed, shivering nervously, with the weapon
trained on the unconscious dreamer. Cuthfert deemed the man going mad,
and so came to fear for his life.

His own malady assumed a less concrete form. The mysterious artisan who
had laid the cabin, log by log, had pegged a wind-vane to the
ridgepole. Cuthfert noticed it always pointed south, and one day,
irritated by its steadfastness of purpose, he turned it toward the
east. He watched eagerly, but never a breath came by to disturb it.
Then he turned the vane to the north, swearing never again to touch it
till the wind did blow. But the air frightened him with its unearthly
calm, and he often rose in the middle of the night to see if the vane
had veered--ten degrees would have satisfied him. But no, it poised
above him as unchangeable as fate.

His imagination ran riot, till it became to him a fetish. Sometimes he
followed the path it pointed across the dismal dominions, and allowed
his soul to become saturated with the Fear. He dwelt upon the unseen
and the unknown till the burden of eternity appeared to be crushing
him. Everything in the Northland had that crushing effect--the absence
of life and motion; the darkness; the infinite peace of the brooding
land; the ghastly silence, which made the echo of each heartbeat a
sacrilege; the solemn forest which seemed to guard an awful,
inexpressible something, which neither word nor thought could compass.

The world he had so recently left, with its busy nations and great
enterprises, seemed very far away. Recollections occasionally
obtruded--recollections of marts and galleries and crowded
thoroughfares, of evening dress and social functions, of good men and
dear women he had known--but they were dim memories of a life he had
lived long centuries agone, on some other planet. This phantasm was the
Reality. Standing beneath the wind-vane, his eyes fixed on the polar
skies, he could not bring himself to realize that the Southland really
existed, that at that very moment it was a-roar with life and action.

There was no Southland, no men being born of women, no giving and
taking in marriage.

Beyond his bleak skyline there stretched vast solitudes, and beyond
these still vaster solitudes.

There were no lands of sunshine, heavy with the perfume of flowers.
Such things were only old dreams of paradise. The sunlands of the West
and the spicelands of the East, the smiling Arcadias and blissful
Islands of the Blest--ha! ha! His laughter split the void and shocked
him with its unwonted sound. There was no sun.

This was the Universe, dead and cold and dark, and he its only citizen.
Weatherbee? At such moments Weatherbee did not count. He was a Caliban,
a monstrous phantom, fettered to him for untold ages, the penalty of
some forgotten crime.

He lived with Death among the dead, emasculated by the sense of his own
insignificance, crushed by the passive mastery of the slumbering ages.
The magnitude of all things appalled him. Everything partook of the
superlative save himself--the perfect cessation of wind and motion, the
immensity of the snow-covered wildness, the height of the sky and the
depth of the silence. That wind-vane--if it would only move. If a
thunderbolt would fall, or the forest flare up in flame.

The rolling up of the heavens as a scroll, the crash of Doom--anything,
anything! But no, nothing moved; the Silence crowded in, and the Fear
of the North laid icy fingers on his heart.

Once, like another Crusoe, by the edge of the river he came upon a
track--the faint tracery of a snowshoe rabbit on the delicate
snow-crust. It was a revelation.

There was life in the Northland. He would follow it, look upon it,
gloat over it.

He forgot his swollen muscles, plunging through the deep snow in an
ecstasy of anticipation. The forest swallowed him up, and the brief
midday twilight vanished; but he pursued his quest till exhausted
nature asserted itself and laid him helpless in the snow.

There he groaned and cursed his folly, and knew the track to be the
fancy of his brain; and late that night he dragged himself into the
cabin on hands and knees, his cheeks frozen and a strange numbness
about his feet. Weatherbee grinned malevolently, but made no offer to
help him. He thrust needles into his toes and thawed them out by the
stove. A week later mortification set in.

But the clerk had his own troubles. The dead men came out of their
graves more frequently now, and rarely left him, waking or sleeping. He
grew to wait and dread their coming, never passing the twin cairns
without a shudder. One night they came to him in his sleep and led him
forth to an appointed task. Frightened into inarticulate horror, he
awoke between the heaps of stones and fled wildly to the cabin. But he
had lain there for some time, for his feet and cheeks were also frozen.

Sometimes he became frantic at their insistent presence, and danced
about the cabin, cutting the empty air with an axe, and smashing
everything within reach.

During these ghostly encounters, Cuthfert huddled into his blankets and
followed the madman about with a cocked revolver, ready to shoot him if
he came too near.

But, recovering from one of these spells, the clerk noticed the weapon
trained upon him.

His suspicions were aroused, and thenceforth he, too, lived in fear of
his life. They watched each other closely after that, and faced about
in startled fright whenever either passed behind the other's back. The
apprehensiveness became a mania which controlled them even in their
sleep. Through mutual fear they tacitly let the slush-lamp burn all
night, and saw to a plentiful supply of bacon-grease before retiring.
The slightest movement on the part of one was sufficient to arouse the
other, and many a still watch their gazes countered as they shook
beneath their blankets with fingers on the trigger-guards.

What with the Fear of the North, the mental strain, and the ravages of
the disease, they lost all semblance of humanity, taking on the
appearance of wild beasts, hunted and desperate. Their cheeks and
noses, as an aftermath of the freezing, had turned black.

Their frozen toes had begun to drop away at the first and second
joints. Every movement brought pain, but the fire box was insatiable,
wringing a ransom of torture from their miserable bodies. Day in, day
out, it demanded its food--a veritable pound of flesh--and they dragged
themselves into the forest to chop wood on their knees. Once, crawling
thus in search of dry sticks, unknown to each other they entered a
thicket from opposite sides.

Suddenly, without warning, two peering death's-heads confronted each
other. Suffering had so transformed them that recognition was
impossible. They sprang to their feet, shrieking with terror, and
dashed away on their mangled stumps; and falling at the cabin's door,
they clawed and scratched like demons till they discovered their
mistake.

Occasionally they lapsed normal, and during one of these sane
intervals, the chief bone of contention, the sugar, had been divided
equally between them. They guarded their separate sacks, stored up in
the cache, with jealous eyes; for there were but a few cupfuls left,
and they were totally devoid of faith in each other.

But one day Cuthfert made a mistake. Hardly able to move, sick with
pain, with his head swimming and eyes blinded, he crept into the cache,
sugar canister in hand, and mistook Weatherbee's sack for his own.

January had been born but a few days when this occurred. The sun had
some time since passed its lowest southern declination, and at meridian
now threw flaunting streaks of yellow light upon the northern sky. On
the day following his mistake with the sugar-bag, Cuthfert found
himself feeling better, both in body and in spirit. As noontime drew
near and the day brightened, he dragged himself outside to feast on the
evanescent glow, which was to him an earnest of the sun's future
intentions. Weatherbee was also feeling somewhat better, and crawled
out beside him. They propped themselves in the snow beneath the
moveless wind-vane, and waited.

The stillness of death was about them. In other climes, when nature
falls into such moods, there is a subdued air of expectancy, a waiting
for some small voice to take up the broken strain. Not so in the North.
The two men had lived seeming eons in this ghostly peace.

They could remember no song of the past; they could conjure no song of
the future. This unearthly calm had always been--the tranquil silence
of eternity.

Their eyes were fixed upon the north. Unseen, behind their backs,
behind the towering mountains to the south, the sun swept toward the
zenith of another sky than theirs. Sole spectators of the mighty
canvas, they watched the false dawn slowly grow. A faint flame began to
glow and smoulder. It deepened in intensity, ringing the changes of
reddish-yellow, purple, and saffron. So bright did it become that
Cuthfert thought the sun must surely be behind it--a miracle, the sun
rising in the north! Suddenly, without warning and without fading, the
canvas was swept clean. There was no color in the sky. The light had
gone out of the day.

They caught their breaths in half-sobs. But lo! the air was aglint with
particles of scintillating frost, and there, to the north, the
wind-vane lay in vague outline of the snow.

A shadow! A shadow! It was exactly midday. They jerked their heads
hurriedly to the south. A golden rim peeped over the mountain's snowy
shoulder, smiled upon them an instant, then dipped from sight again.

There were tears in their eyes as they sought each other. A strange
softening came over them. They felt irresistibly drawn toward each
other. The sun was coming back again. It would be with them tomorrow,
and the next day, and the next.

And it would stay longer every visit, and a time would come when it
would ride their heaven day and night, never once dropping below the
skyline. There would be no night.

The ice-locked winter would be broken; the winds would blow and the
forests answer; the land would bathe in the blessed sunshine, and life
renew.

Hand in hand, they would quit this horrid dream and journey back to the
Southland. They lurched blindly forward, and their hands met--their
poor maimed hands, swollen and distorted beneath their mittens.

But the promise was destined to remain unfulfilled. The Northland is
the Northland, and men work out their souls by strange rules, which
other men, who have not journeyed into far countries, cannot come to
understand.

An hour later, Cuthfert put a pan of bread into the oven, and fell to
speculating on what the surgeons could do with his feet when he got
back. Home did not seem so very far away now. Weatherbee was rummaging
in the cache. Of a sudden, he raised a whirlwind of blasphemy, which in
turn ceased with startling abruptness. The other man had robbed his
sugar-sack. Still, things might have happened differently, had not the
two dead men come out from under the stones and hushed the hot words in
his throat. They led him quite gently from the cache, which he forgot
to close. That consummation was reached; that something they had
whispered to him in his dreams was about to happen. They guided him
gently, very gently, to the woodpile, where they put the axe in his
hands.

Then they helped him shove open the cabin door, and he felt sure they
shut it after him--at least he heard it slam and the latch fall sharply
into place. And he knew they were waiting just without, waiting for him
to do his task.

'Carter! I say, Carter!' Percy Cuthfert was frightened at the look on
the clerk's face, and he made haste to put the table between them.

Carter Weatherbee followed, without haste and without enthusiasm. There
was neither pity nor passion in his face, but rather the patient,
stolid look of one who has certain work to do and goes about it
methodically.

'I say, what's the matter?'

The clerk dodged back, cutting off his retreat to the door, but never
opening his mouth.

'I say, Carter, I say; let's talk. There's a good chap.' The master of
arts was thinking rapidly, now, shaping a skillful flank movement on
the bed where his Smith & Wesson lay. Keeping his eyes on the madman,
he rolled backward on the bunk, at the same time clutching the pistol.

'Carter!' The powder flashed full in Weatherbee's face, but he swung
his weapon and leaped forward. The axe bit deeply at the base of the
spine, and Percy Cuthfert felt all consciousness of his lower limbs
leave him. Then the clerk fell heavily upon him, clutching him by the
throat with feeble fingers. The sharp bite of the axe had caused
Cuthfert to drop the pistol, and as his lungs panted for release, he
fumbled aimlessly for it among the blankets. Then he remembered. He
slid a hand up the clerk's belt to the sheath-knife; and they drew very
close to each other in that last clinch.

Percy Cuthfert felt his strength leave him. The lower portion of his
body was useless, The inert weight of Weatherbee crushed him--crushed
him and pinned him there like a bear under a trap. The cabin became
filled with a familiar odor, and he knew the bread to be burning. Yet
what did it matter? He would never need it. And there were all of six
cupfuls of sugar in the cache--if he had foreseen this he would not
have been so saving the last several days. Would the wind-vane ever
move? Why not' Had he not seen the sun today? He would go and see. No;
it was impossible to move. He had not thought the clerk so heavy a man.

How quickly the cabin cooled! The fire must be out. The cold was
forcing in.

It must be below zero already, and the ice creeping up the inside of
the door. He could not see it, but his past experience enabled him to
gauge its progress by the cabin's temperature. The lower hinge must be
white ere now. Would the tale of this ever reach the world? How would
his friends take it? They would read it over their coffee, most likely,
and talk it over at the clubs. He could see them very clearly, 'Poor
Old Cuthfert,' they murmured; 'not such a bad sort of a chap, after
all.' He smiled at their eulogies, and passed on in search of a Turkish
bath. It was the same old crowd upon the streets.

Strange, they did not notice his moosehide moccasins and tattered
German socks! He would take a cab. And after the bath a shave would not
be bad. No; he would eat first.

Steak, and potatoes, and green things how fresh it all was! And what
was that? Squares of honey, streaming liquid amber! But why did they
bring so much? Ha! ha! he could never eat it all.

Shine! Why certainly. He put his foot on the box. The bootblack looked
curiously up at him, and he remembered his moosehide moccasins and went
away hastily.

Hark! The wind-vane must be surely spinning. No; a mere singing in his
ears.

That was all--a mere singing. The ice must have passed the latch by
now. More likely the upper hinge was covered. Between the moss-chinked
roof-poles, little points of frost began to appear. How slowly they
grew! No; not so slowly. There was a new one, and there another.
Two--three--four; they were coming too fast to count. There were two
growing together. And there, a third had joined them.

Why, there were no more spots. They had run together and formed a sheet.

Well, he would have company. If Gabriel ever broke the silence of the
North, they would stand together, hand in hand, before the great White
Throne. And God would judge them, God would judge them!

Then Percy Cuthfert closed his eyes and dropped off to sleep.



To the Man on the Trail

'Dump it in!.' 'But I say, Kid, isn't that going it a little too
strong? Whisky and alcohol's bad enough; but when it comes to brandy
and pepper sauce and-' 'Dump it in. Who's making this punch, anyway?'
And Malemute Kid smiled benignantly through the clouds of steam. 'By
the time you've been in this country as long as I have, my son, and
lived on rabbit tracks and salmon belly, you'll learn that Christmas
comes only once per annum.

And a Christmas without punch is sinking a hole to bedrock with nary a
pay streak.'

'Stack up on that fer a high cyard,' approved Big Jim Belden, who had
come down from his claim on Mazy May to spend Christmas, and who, as
everyone knew, had been living the two months past on straight moose
meat. 'Hain't fergot the hooch we-uns made on the Tanana, hey yeh?'
'Well, I guess yes. Boys, it would have done your hearts good to see
that whole tribe fighting drunk--and all because of a glorious ferment
of sugar and sour dough. That was before your time,' Malemute Kid said
as he turned to Stanley Prince, a young mining expert who had been in
two years. 'No white women in the country then, and Mason wanted to get
married. Ruth's father was chief of the Tananas, and objected, like the
rest of the tribe. Stiff? Why, I used my last pound of sugar; finest
work in that line I ever did in my life. You should have seen the
chase, down the river and across the portage.' 'But the squaw?' asked
Louis Savoy, the tall French Canadian, becoming interested; for he had
heard of this wild deed when at Forty Mile the preceding winter.

Then Malemute Kid, who was a born raconteur, told the unvarnished tale
of the Northland Lochinvar. More than one rough adventurer of the North
felt his heartstrings draw closer and experienced vague yearnings for
the sunnier pastures of the Southland, where life promised something
more than a barren struggle with cold and death.

'We struck the Yukon just behind the first ice run,' he concluded, 'and
the tribe only a quarter of an hour behind. But that saved us; for the
second run broke the jam above and shut them out. When they finally got
into Nuklukyeto, the whole post was ready for them.

'And as to the forgathering, ask Father Roubeau here: he performed the
ceremony.' The Jesuit took the pipe from his lips but could only
express his gratification with patriarchal smiles, while Protestant and
Catholic vigorously applauded.

'By gar!' ejaculated Louis Savoy, who seemed overcome by the romance of
it. 'La petite squaw: mon Mason brav. By gar!' Then, as the first tin
cups of punch went round, Bettles the Unquenchable sprang to his feet
and struck up his favorite drinking song: 'There's Henry Ward Beecher
And Sunday-school teachers, All drink of the sassafras root; But you
bet all the same, If it had its right name, It's the juice of the
forbidden fruit.'

'Oh, the juice of the forbidden fruit,' roared out the bacchanalian
chorus, 'Oh, the juice of the forbidden fruit; But you bet all the
same, If it had its right name, It's the juice of the forbidden fruit.'

Malemute Kid's frightful concoction did its work; the men of the camps
and trails unbent in its genial glow, and jest and song and tales of
past adventure went round the board.

Aliens from a dozen lands, they toasted each and all. It was the
Englishman, Prince, who pledged 'Uncle Sam, the precocious infant of
the New World'; the Yankee, Bettles, who drank to 'The Queen, God bless
her'; and together, Savoy and Meyers, the German trader, clanged their
cups to Alsace and Lorraine.

Then Malemute Kid arose, cup in hand, and glanced at the greased-paper
window, where the frost stood full three inches thick. 'A health to the
man on trail this night; may his grub hold out; may his dogs keep their
legs; may his matches never miss fire.' Crack!

Crack! heard the familiar music of the dog whip, the whining howl of
the Malemutes, and the crunch of a sled as it drew up to the cabin.
Conversation languished while they waited the issue.

'An old-timer; cares for his dogs and then himself,' whispered Malemute
Kid to Prince as they listened to the snapping jaws and the wolfish
snarls and yelps of pain which proclaimed to their practiced ears that
the stranger was beating back their dogs while he fed his own.

Then came the expected knock, sharp and confident, and the stranger
entered.

Dazzled by the light, he hesitated a moment at the door, giving to all
a chance for scrutiny. He was a striking personage, and a most
picturesque one, in his Arctic dress of wool and fur. Standing six foot
two or three, with proportionate breadth of shoulders and depth of
chest, his smooth-shaven face nipped by the cold to a gleaming pink,
his long lashes and eyebrows white with ice, and the ear and neck flaps
of his great wolfskin cap loosely raised, he seemed, of a verity, the
Frost King, just stepped in out of the night.

Clasped outside his Mackinaw jacket, a beaded belt held two large
Colt's revolvers and a hunting knife, while he carried, in addition to
the inevitable dog whip, a smokeless rifle of the largest bore and
latest pattern. As he came forward, for all his step was firm and
elastic, they could see that fatigue bore heavily upon him.

An awkward silence had fallen, but his hearty 'What cheer, my lads?'
put them quickly at ease, and the next instant Malemute Kid and he had
gripped hands. Though they had never met, each had heard of the other,
and the recognition was mutual. A sweeping introduction and a mug of
punch were forced upon him before he could explain his errand.

How long since that basket sled, with three men and eight dogs,
passed?' he asked.

'An even two days ahead. Are you after them?' 'Yes; my team. Run them
off under my very nose, the cusses. I've gained two days on them
already--pick them up on the next run.' 'Reckon they'll show spunk?'
asked Belden, in order to keep up the conversation, for Malemute Kid
already had the coffeepot on and was busily frying bacon and moose meat.

The stranger significantly tapped his revolvers.

'When'd yeh leave Dawson?' 'Twelve o'clock.' 'Last night?'--as a matter
of course.

'Today.' A murmur of surprise passed round the circle. And well it
might; for it was just midnight, and seventy-five miles of rough river
trail was not to be sneered at for a twelve hours' run.

The talk soon became impersonal, however, harking back to the trails of
childhood. As the young stranger ate of the rude fare Malemute Kid
attentively studied his face. Nor was he long in deciding that it was
fair, honest, and open, and that he liked it. Still youthful, the lines
had been firmly traced by toil and hardship.

Though genial in conversation, and mild when at rest, the blue eyes
gave promise of the hard steel-glitter which comes when called into
action, especially against odds. The heavy jaw and square-cut chin
demonstrated rugged pertinacity and indomitability. Nor, though the
attributes of the lion were there, was there wanting the certain
softness, the hint of womanliness, which bespoke the emotional nature.

'So thet's how me an' the ol' woman got spliced,' said Belden,
concluding the exciting tale of his courtship. '"Here we be, Dad," sez
she. "An' may yeh be damned," sez he to her, an' then to me, "Jim,
yeh--yeh git outen them good duds o' yourn; I want a right peart slice
o' thet forty acre plowed 'fore dinner." An' then he sort o' sniffled
an' kissed her. An' I was thet happy--but he seen me an' roars out,
"Yeh, Jim!" An' yeh bet I dusted fer the barn.' 'Any kids waiting for
you back in the States?' asked the stranger.

'Nope; Sal died 'fore any come. Thet's why I'm here.' Belden
abstractedly began to light his pipe, which had failed to go out, and
then brightened up with, 'How 'bout yerself, stranger--married man?'
For reply, he opened his watch, slipped it from the thong which served
for a chain, and passed it over. Belden picked up the slush lamp,
surveyed the inside of the case critically, and, swearing admiringly to
himself, handed it over to Louis Savoy. With numerous 'By gars!' he
finally surrendered it to Prince, and they noticed that his hands
trembled and his eyes took on a peculiar softness. And so it passed
from horny hand to horny hand--the pasted photograph of a woman, the
clinging kind that such men fancy, with a babe at the breast. Those who
had not yet seen the wonder were keen with curiosity; those who had
became silent and retrospective. They could face the pinch of famine,
the grip of scurvy, or the quick death by field or flood; but the
pictured semblance of a stranger woman and child made women and
children of them all.

'Never have seen the youngster yet--he's a boy, she says, and two years
old,' said the stranger as he received the treasure back. A lingering
moment he gazed upon it, then snapped the case and turned away, but not
quick enough to hide the restrained rush of tears.  Malemute Kid led
him to a bunk and bade him turn in.

'Call me at four sharp. Don't fail me,' were his last words, and a
moment later he was breathing in the heaviness of exhausted sleep.

'By Jove! He's a plucky chap,' commented Prince. 'Three hours' sleep
after seventy-five miles with the dogs, and then the trail again. Who
is he, Kid?' 'Jack Westondale. Been in going on three years, with
nothing but the name of working like a horse, and any amount of bad
luck to his credit. I never knew him, but Sitka Charley told me about
him.' 'It seems hard that a man with a sweet young wife like his should
be putting in his years in this Godforsaken hole, where every year
counts two on the outside.' 'The trouble with him is clean grit and
stubbornness. He's cleaned up twice with a stake, but lost it both
times.' Here the conversation was broken off by an uproar from Bettles,
for the effect had begun to wear away. And soon the bleak years of
monotonous grub and deadening toil were being forgotten in rough
merriment. Malemute Kid alone seemed unable to lose himself, and cast
many an anxious look at his watch. Once he put on his mittens and
beaver-skin cap, and, leaving the cabin, fell to rummaging about in the
cache.

Nor could he wait the hour designated; for he was fifteen minutes ahead
of time in rousing his guest. The young giant had stiffened badly, and
brisk rubbing was necessary to bring him to his feet. He tottered
painfully out of the cabin, to find his dogs harnessed and everything
ready for the start. The company wished him good luck and a short
chase, while Father Roubeau, hurriedly blessing him, led the stampede
for the cabin; and small wonder, for it is not good to face
seventy-four degrees below zero with naked ears and hands.

Malemute Kid saw him to the main trail, and there, gripping his hand
heartily, gave him advice.

'You'll find a hundred pounds of salmon eggs on the sled,' he said.
'The dogs will go as far on that as with one hundred and fifty of fish,
and you can't get dog food at Pelly, as you probably expected.' The
stranger started, and his eyes flashed, but he did not interrupt. 'You
can't get an ounce of food for dog or man till you reach Five Fingers,
and that's a stiff two hundred miles. Watch out for open water on the
Thirty Mile River, and be sure you take the big cutoff above Le Barge.'
'How did you know it? Surely the news can't be ahead of me already?' 'I
don't know it; and what's more, I don't want to know it. But you never
owned that team you're chasing. Sitka Charley sold it to them last
spring. But he sized you up to me as square once, and I believe him.
I've seen your face; I like it. And I've seen--why, damn you, hit the
high places for salt water and that wife of yours, and--' Here the Kid
unmittened and jerked out his sack.

'No; I don't need it,' and the tears froze on his cheeks as he
convulsively gripped Malemute Kid's hand.

'Then don't spare the dogs; cut them out of the traces as fast as they
drop; buy them, and think they're cheap at ten dollars a pound. You can
get them at Five Fingers, Little Salmon, and Hootalinqua. And watch out
for wet feet,' was his parting advice. 'Keep a-traveling up to
twenty-five, but if it gets below that, build a fire and change your
socks.'

Fifteen minutes had barely elapsed when the jingle of bells announced
new arrivals. The door opened, and a mounted policeman of the Northwest
Territory entered, followed by two half-breed dog drivers. Like
Westondale, they were heavily armed and showed signs of fatigue. The
half-breeds had been born to the trail and bore it easily; but the
young policeman was badly exhausted. Still, the dogged obstinacy of his
race held him to the pace he had set, and would hold him till he
dropped in his tracks.

'When did Westondale pull out?' he asked. 'He stopped here, didn't he?'
This was supererogatory, for the tracks told their own tale too well.

Malemute Kid had caught Belden's eye, and he, scenting the wind,
replied evasively, 'A right peart while back.' 'Come, my man; speak
up,' the policeman admonished.

'Yeh seem to want him right smart. Hez he ben gittin' cantankerous down
Dawson way?'

'Held up Harry McFarland's for forty thousand; exchanged it at the P.C.
store for a check on Seattle; and who's to stop the cashing of it if we
don't overtake him? When did he pull out?'

Every eye suppressed its excitement, for Malemute Kid had given the
cue, and the young officer encountered wooden faces on every hand.

Striding over to Prince, he put the question to him. Though it hurt
him, gazing into the frank, earnest face of his fellow countryman, he
replied inconsequentially on the state of the trail.

Then he espied Father Roubeau, who could not lie. 'A quarter of an hour
ago,' the priest answered; 'but he had four hours' rest for himself and
dogs.' 'Fifteen minutes' start, and he's fresh! My God!' The poor
fellow staggered back, half fainting from exhaustion and
disappointment, murmuring something about the run from Dawson in ten
hours and the dogs being played out.

Malemute Kid forced a mug of punch upon him; then he turned for the
door, ordering the dog drivers to follow. But the warmth and promise of
rest were too tempting, and they objected strenuously. The Kid was
conversant with their French patois, and followed it anxiously.

They swore that the dogs were gone up; that Siwash and Babette would
have to be shot before the first mile was covered; that the rest were
almost as bad; and that it would be better for all hands to rest up.

'Lend me five dogs?' he asked, turning to Malemute Kid.

But the Kid shook his head.

'I'll sign a check on Captain Constantine for five thousand--here's my
papers--I'm authorized to draw at my own discretion.'

Again the silent refusal.

'Then I'll requisition them in the name of the Queen.' Smiling
incredulously, the Kid glanced at his well-stocked arsenal, and the
Englishman, realizing his impotency, turned for the door. But the dog
drivers still objecting, he whirled upon them fiercely, calling them
women and curs. The swart face of the older half-breed flushed angrily
as he drew himself up and promised in good, round terms that he would
travel his leader off his legs, and would then be delighted to plant
him in the snow.

The young officer--and it required his whole will--walked steadily to
the door, exhibiting a freshness he did not possess. But they all knew
and appreciated his proud effort; nor could he veil the twinges of
agony that shot across his face. Covered with frost, the dogs were
curled up in the snow, and it was almost impossible to get them to
their feet. The poor brutes whined under the stinging lash, for the dog
drivers were angry and cruel; nor till Babette, the leader, was cut
from the traces, could they break out the sled and get under way.

'A dirty scoundrel and a liar!' 'By gar! Him no good!' 'A thief!'
'Worse than an Indian!'

It was evident that they were angry--first at the way they had been
deceived; and second at the outraged ethics of the Northland, where
honesty, above all, was man's prime jewel.

'An' we gave the cuss a hand, after knowin' what he'd did.' All eyes
turned accusingly upon Malemute Kid, who rose from the corner where he
had been making Babette comfortable, and silently emptied the bowl for
a final round of punch.

'It's a cold night, boys--a bitter cold night,' was the irrelevant
commencement of his defense. 'You've all traveled trail, and know what
that stands for. Don't jump a dog when he's down. You've only heard one
side. A whiter man than Jack Westondale never ate from the same pot nor
stretched blanket with you or me.

'Last fall he gave his whole clean-up, forty thousand, to Joe Castrell,
to buy in on Dominion. Today he'd be a millionaire. But, while he
stayed behind at Circle City, taking care of his partner with the
scurvy, what does Castell do? Goes into McFarland's, jumps the limit,
and drops the whole sack. Found him dead in the snow the next day. And
poor Jack laying his plans to go out this winter to his wife and the
boy he's never seen. You'll notice he took exactly what his partner
lost--forty thousand. Well, he's gone out; and what are you going to do
about it?' The Kid glanced round the circle of his judges, noted the
softening of their faces, then raised his mug aloft. 'So a health to
the man on trail this night; may his grub hold out; may his dogs keep
their legs; may his matches never miss fire.

'God prosper him; good luck go with him; and--' 'Confusion to the
Mounted Police!' cried Bettles, to the crash of the empty cups.



The Priestly Prerogative

This is the story of a man who did not appreciate his wife; also, of a
woman who did him too great an honor when she gave herself to him.
Incidentally, it concerns a Jesuit priest who had never been known to
lie. He was an appurtenance, and a very necessary one, to the Yukon
country; but the presence of the other two was merely accidental. They
were specimens of the many strange waifs which ride the breast of a
gold rush or come tailing along behind.

Edwin Bentham and Grace Bentham were waifs; they were also tailing
along behind, for the Klondike rush of '97 had long since swept down
the great river and subsided into the famine-stricken city of Dawson.
When the Yukon shut up shop and went to sleep under a three-foot
ice-sheet, this peripatetic couple found themselves at the Five Finger
Rapids, with the City of Gold still a journey of many sleeps to the
north.

Many cattle had been butchered at this place in the fall of the year,
and the offal made a goodly heap. The three fellow-voyagers of Edwin
Bentham and wife gazed upon this deposit, did a little mental
arithmetic, caught a certain glimpse of a bonanza, and decided to
remain. And all winter they sold sacks of bones and frozen hides to the
famished dog-teams. It was a modest price they asked, a dollar a pound,
just as it came. Six months later, when the sun came back and the Yukon
awoke, they buckled on their heavy moneybelts and journeyed back to the
Southland, where they yet live and lie mightily about the Klondike they
never saw.

But Edwin Bentham--he was an indolent fellow, and had he not been
possessed of a wife, would have gladly joined issued in the dog-meat
speculation. As it was, she played upon his vanity, told him how great
and strong he was, how a man such as he certainly was could overcome
all obstacles and of a surety obtain the Golden Fleece. So he squared
his jaw, sold his share in the bones and hides for a sled and one dog,
and turned his snowshoes to the north. Needless to state, Grace
Bentham's snowshoes never allowed his tracks to grow cold. Nay, ere
their tribulations had seen three days, it was the man who followed in
the rear, and the woman who broke trail in advance. Of course, if
anybody hove in sight, the position was instantly reversed. Thus did
his manhood remain virgin to the travelers who passed like ghosts on
the silent trail. There are such men in this world.

How such a man and such a woman came to take each other for better and
for worse is unimportant to this narrative. These things are familiar
to us all, and those people who do them, or even question them too
closely, are apt to lose a beautiful faith which is known as Eternal
Fitness.

Edwin Bentham was a boy, thrust by mischance into a man's body,--a boy
who could complacently pluck a butterfly, wing from wing, or cower in
abject terror before a lean, nervy fellow, not half his size. He was a
selfish cry-baby, hidden behind a man's mustache and stature, and
glossed over with a skin-deep veneer of culture and conventionality.
Yes; he was a clubman and a society man, the sort that grace social
functions and utter inanities with a charm and unction which is
indescribable; the sort that talk big, and cry over a toothache; the
sort that put more hell into a woman's life by marrying her than can
the most graceless libertine that ever browsed in forbidden pastures.
We meet these men every day, but we rarely know them for what they are.
Second to marrying them, the best way to get this knowledge is to eat
out of the same pot and crawl under the same blanket with them
for--well, say a week; no greater margin is necessary.

To see Grace Bentham, was to see a slender, girlish creature; to know
her, was to know a soul which dwarfed your own, yet retained all the
elements of the eternal feminine. This was the woman who urged and
encouraged her husband in his Northland quest, who broke trail for him
when no one was looking, and cried in secret over her weakling woman's
body.

So journeyed this strangely assorted couple down to old Fort Selkirk,
then through fivescore miles of dismal wilderness to Stuart River. And
when the short day left them, and the man lay down in the snow and
blubbered, it was the woman who lashed him to the sled, bit her lips
with the pain of her aching limbs, and helped the dog haul him to
Malemute Kid's cabin. Malemute Kid was not at home, but Meyers, the
German trader, cooked great moose-steaks and shook up a bed of fresh
pine boughs. Lake, Langham, and Parker, were excited, and not unduly so
when the cause was taken into account.

'Oh, Sandy! Say, can you tell a porterhouse from a round? Come out and
lend us a hand, anyway!' This appeal emanated from the cache, where
Langham was vainly struggling with divers quarters of frozen moose.

'Don't you budge from those dishes!' commanded Parker.

'I say, Sandy; there's a good fellow--just run down to the Missouri
Camp and borrow some cinnamon,' begged Lake.

'Oh! oh! hurry up! Why don't--' But the crash of meat and boxes, in the
cache, abruptly quenched this peremptory summons.

'Come now, Sandy; it won't take a minute to go down to the Missouri--'

'You leave him alone,' interrupted Parker. 'How am I to mix the
biscuits if the table isn't cleared off?'

Sandy paused in indecision, till suddenly the fact that he was
Langham's 'man' dawned upon him. Then he apologetically threw down the
greasy dishcloth, and went to his master's rescue.

These promising scions of wealthy progenitors had come to the Northland
in search of laurels, with much money to burn, and a 'man' apiece.
Luckily for their souls, the other two men were up the White River in
search of a mythical quartz-ledge; so Sandy had to grin under the
responsibility of three healthy masters, each of whom was possessed of
peculiar cookery ideas. Twice that morning had a disruption of the
whole camp been imminent, only averted by immense concessions from one
or the other of these knights of the chafing-dish. But at last their
mutual creation, a really dainty dinner, was completed.

Then they sat down to a three-cornered game of 'cut-throat,'--a
proceeding which did away with all casus belli for future hostilities,
and permitted the victor to depart on a most important mission.

This fortune fell to Parker, who parted his hair in the middle, put on
his mittens and bearskin cap, and stepped over to Malemute Kid's cabin.
And when he returned, it was in the company of Grace Bentham and
Malemute Kid,--the former very sorry her husband could not share with
her their hospitality, for he had gone up to look at the Henderson
Creek mines, and the latter still a trifle stiff from breaking trail
down the Stuart River.

Meyers had been asked, but had declined, being deeply engrossed in an
experiment of raising bread from hops.

Well, they could do without the husband; but a woman--why they had not
seen one all winter, and the presence of this one promised a new era in
their lives.

They were college men and gentlemen, these three young fellows,
yearning for the flesh-pots they had been so long denied. Probably
Grace Bentham suffered from a similar hunger; at least, it meant much
to her, the first bright hour in many weeks of darkness.

But that wonderful first course, which claimed the versatile Lake for
its parent, had no sooner been served than there came a loud knock at
the door.

'Oh! Ah! Won't you come in, Mr. Bentham?' said Parker, who had stepped
to see who the newcomer might be.

'Is my wife here?' gruffly responded that worthy.

'Why, yes. We left word with Mr. Meyers.' Parker was exerting his most
dulcet tones, inwardly wondering what the deuce it all meant. 'Won't
you come in? Expecting you at any moment, we reserved a place. And just
in time for the first course, too.' 'Come in, Edwin, dear,' chirped
Grace Bentham from her seat at the table.

Parker naturally stood aside.

'I want my wife,' reiterated Bentham hoarsely, the intonation savoring
disagreeably of ownership.

Parker gasped, was within an ace of driving his fist into the face of
his boorish visitor, but held himself awkwardly in check. Everybody
rose. Lake lost his head and caught himself on the verge of saying,
'Must you go?' Then began the farrago of leave-taking. 'So nice of
you--' 'I am awfully sorry' 'By Jove! how things did brighten--'
'Really now, you--'

'Thank you ever so much--' 'Nice trip to Dawson--' etc., etc.

In this wise the lamb was helped into her jacket and led to the
slaughter. Then the door slammed, and they gazed woefully upon the
deserted table.

'Damn!' Langham had suffered disadvantages in his early training, and
his oaths were weak and monotonous. 'Damn!' he repeated, vaguely
conscious of the incompleteness and vainly struggling for a more virile
term. It is a clever woman who can fill out the many weak places in an
inefficient man, by her own indomitability, re-enforce his vacillating
nature, infuse her ambitious soul into his, and spur him on to great
achievements. And it is indeed a very clever and tactful woman who can
do all this, and do it so subtly that the man receives all the credit
and believes in his inmost heart that everything is due to him and him
alone.

This is what Grace Bentham proceeded to do. Arriving in Dawson with a
few pounds of flour and several letters of introduction, she at once
applied herself to the task of pushing her big baby to the fore. It was
she who melted the stony heart and wrung credit from the rude barbarian
who presided over the destiny of the P. C. Company; yet it was Edwin
Bentham to whom the concession was ostensibly granted. It was she who
dragged her baby up and down creeks, over benches and divides, and on a
dozen wild stampedes; yet everybody remarked what an energetic fellow
that Bentham was. It was she who studied maps, and catechised miners,
and hammered geography and locations into his hollow head, till
everybody marveled at his broad grasp of the country and knowledge of
its conditions. Of course, they said the wife was a brick, and only a
few wise ones appreciated and pitied the brave little woman.

She did the work; he got the credit and reward. In the Northwest
Territory a married woman cannot stake or record a creek, bench, or
quartz claim; so Edwin Bentham went down to the Gold Commissioner and
filed on Bench Claim 23, second tier, of French Hill. And when April
came they were washing out a thousand dollars a day, with many, many
such days in prospect.

At the base of French Hill lay Eldorado Creek, and on a creek claim
stood the cabin of Clyde Wharton. At present he was not washing out a
diurnal thousand dollars; but his dumps grew, shift by shift, and there
would come a time when those dumps would pass through his sluice-boxes,
depositing in the riffles, in the course of half a dozen days, several
hundred thousand dollars. He often sat in that cabin, smoked his pipe,
and dreamed beautiful little dreams,--dreams in which neither the dumps
nor the half-ton of dust in the P. C. Company's big safe, played a part.

And Grace Bentham, as she washed tin dishes in her hillside cabin,
often glanced down into Eldorado Creek, and dreamed,--not of dumps nor
dust, however. They met frequently, as the trail to the one claim
crossed the other, and there is much to talk about in the Northland
spring; but never once, by the light of an eye nor the slip of a
tongue, did they speak their hearts.

This is as it was at first. But one day Edwin Bentham was brutal. All
boys are thus; besides, being a French Hill king now, he began to think
a great deal of himself and to forget all he owed to his wife. On this
day, Wharton heard of it, and waylaid Grace Bentham, and talked wildly.
This made her very happy, though she would not listen, and made him
promise to not say such things again. Her hour had not come.

But the sun swept back on its northern journey, the black of midnight
changed to the steely color of dawn, the snow slipped away, the water
dashed again over the glacial drift, and the wash-up began. Day and
night the yellow clay and scraped bedrock hurried through the swift
sluices, yielding up its ransom to the strong men from the Southland.

And in that time of tumult came Grace Bentham's hour.

To all of us such hours at some time come,--that is, to us who are not
too phlegmatic.

Some people are good, not from inherent love of virtue, but from sheer
laziness. But those of us who know weak moments may understand.

Edwin Bentham was weighing dust over the bar of the saloon at the
Forks--altogether too much of his dust went over that pine board--when
his wife came down the hill and slipped into Clyde Wharton's cabin.
Wharton was not expecting her, but that did not alter the case. And
much subsequent misery and idle waiting might have been avoided, had
not Father Roubeau seen this and turned aside from the main creek
trail. 'My child,--' 'Hold on, Father Roubeau! Though I'm not of your
faith, I respect you; but you can't come in between this woman and me!'
'You know what you are doing?' 'Know! Were you God Almighty, ready to
fling me into eternal fire, I'd bank my will against yours in this
matter.' Wharton had placed Grace on a stool and stood belligerently
before her.

'You sit down on that chair and keep quiet,' he continued, addressing
the Jesuit. 'I'll take my innings now. You can have yours after.'

Father Roubeau bowed courteously and obeyed. He was an easy-going man
and had learned to bide his time. Wharton pulled a stool alongside the
woman's, smothering her hand in his.

'Then you do care for me, and will take me away?' Her face seemed to
reflect the peace of this man, against whom she might draw close for
shelter.

'Dear, don't you remember what I said before? Of course I-' 'But how
can you?--the wash-up?' 'Do you think that worries? Anyway, I'll give
the job to Father Roubeau, here.

'I can trust him to safely bank the dust with the company.' 'To think
of it!--I'll never see him again.' 'A blessing!' 'And to go--O, Clyde,
I can't! I can't!' 'There, there; of course you can, just let me plan
it.--You see, as soon as we get a few traps together, we'll start,
and-' 'Suppose he comes back?' 'I'll break every-' 'No, no! No
fighting, Clyde! Promise me that.' 'All right! I'll just tell the men
to throw him off the claim. They've seen how he's treated you, and
haven't much love for him.'

'You mustn't do that. You mustn't hurt him.' 'What then? Let him come
right in here and take you away before my eyes?' 'No-o,' she half
whispered, stroking his hand softly.

'Then let me run it, and don't worry. I'll see he doesn't get hurt.
Precious lot he cared whether you got hurt or not! We won't go back to
Dawson. I'll send word down for a couple of the boys to outfit and pole
a boat up the Yukon. We'll cross the divide and raft down the Indian
River to meet them. Then--' 'And then?' Her head was on his shoulder.

Their voices sank to softer cadences, each word a caress. The Jesuit
fidgeted nervously.

'And then?' she repeated.

'Why we'll pole up, and up, and up, and portage the White Horse Rapids
and the Box Canon.' 'Yes?' 'And the Sixty-Mile River; then the lakes,
Chilcoot, Dyea, and Salt Water.' 'But, dear, I can't pole a boat.' 'You
little goose! I'll get Sitka Charley; he knows all the good water and
best camps, and he is the best traveler I ever met, if he is an Indian.
All you'll have to do, is to sit in the middle of the boat, and sing
songs, and play Cleopatra, and fight--no, we're in luck; too early for
mosquitoes.'

'And then, O my Antony?' 'And then a steamer, San Francisco, and the
world! Never to come back to this cursed hole again. Think of it! The
world, and ours to choose from! I'll sell out. Why, we're rich! The
Waldworth Syndicate will give me half a million for what's left in the
ground, and I've got twice as much in the dumps and with the P. C.
Company. We'll go to the Fair in Paris in 1900. We'll go to Jerusalem,
if you say so.

'We'll buy an Italian palace, and you can play Cleopatra to your
heart's content. No, you shall be Lucretia, Acte, or anybody your
little heart sees fit to become. But you mustn't, you really mustn't-'
'The wife of Caesar shall be above reproach.' 'Of course, but--' 'But I
won't be your wife, will I, dear?' 'I didn't mean that.' 'But you'll
love me just as much, and never even think--oh! I know you'll be like
other men; you'll grow tired, and--and-'

'How can you? I--' 'Promise me.' 'Yes, yes; I do promise.' 'You say it
so easily, dear; but how do you know?--or I know? I have so little to
give, yet it is so much, and all I have. O, Clyde! promise me you
won't?'

'There, there! You mustn't begin to doubt already. Till death do us
part, you know.'

'Think! I once said that to--to him, and now?' 'And now, little
sweetheart, you're not to bother about such things any more.

Of course, I never, never will, and--' And for the first time, lips
trembled against lips.

Father Roubeau had been watching the main trail through the window, but
could stand the strain no longer.

He cleared his throat and turned around.

'Your turn now, Father!' Wharton's face was flushed with the fire of
his first embrace.

There was an exultant ring to his voice as he abdicated in the other's
favor. He had no doubt as to the result. Neither had Grace, for a smile
played about her mouth as she faced the priest.

'My child,' he began, 'my heart bleeds for you. It is a pretty dream,
but it cannot be.'

'And why, Father? I have said yes.' 'You knew not what you did. You did
not think of the oath you took, before your God, to that man who is
your husband. It remains for me to make you realize the sanctity of
such a pledge.' 'And if I do realize, and yet refuse?'

'Then God'

'Which God? My husband has a God which I care not to worship. There
must be many such.' 'Child! unsay those words! Ah! you do not mean
them. I understand. I, too, have had such moments.' For an instant he
was back in his native France, and a wistful, sad-eyed face came as a
mist between him and the woman before him.

'Then, Father, has my God forsaken me? I am not wicked above women. My
misery with him has been great. Why should it be greater? Why shall I
not grasp at happiness? I cannot, will not, go back to him!' 'Rather is
your God forsaken. Return. Throw your burden upon Him, and the darkness
shall be lifted. O my child,--' 'No; it is useless; I have made my bed
and so shall I lie. I will go on. And if God punishes me, I shall bear
it somehow. You do not understand. You are not a woman.' 'My mother was
a woman.'

'But--' 'And Christ was born of a woman.' She did not answer. A silence
fell. Wharton pulled his mustache impatiently and kept an eye on the
trail. Grace leaned her elbow on the table, her face set with resolve.
The smile had died away. Father Roubeau shifted his ground.

'You have children?'

'At one time I wished--but now--no. And I am thankful.' 'And a mother?'
'Yes.' 'She loves you?' 'Yes.' Her replies were whispers.

'And a brother?--no matter, he is a man. But a sister?' Her head
drooped a quavering 'Yes.' 'Younger? Very much?' 'Seven years.' 'And
you have thought well about this matter? About them? About your mother?
And your sister? She stands on the threshold of her woman's life, and
this wildness of yours may mean much to her. Could you go before her,
look upon her fresh young face, hold her hand in yours, or touch your
cheek to hers?'

To his words, her brain formed vivid images, till she cried out,
'Don't! don't!' and shrank away as do the wolf-dogs from the lash.

'But you must face all this; and better it is to do it now.' In his
eyes, which she could not see, there was a great compassion, but his
face, tense and quivering, showed no relenting.

She raised her head from the table, forced back the tears, struggled
for control.

'I shall go away. They will never see me, and come to forget me. I
shall be to them as dead. And--and I will go with Clyde--today.' It
seemed final. Wharton stepped forward, but the priest waved him back.

'You have wished for children?' A silent 'Yes.' 'And prayed for them?'
'Often.' 'And have you thought, if you should have children?' Father
Roubeau's eyes rested for a moment on the man by the window.

A quick light shot across her face. Then the full import dawned upon
her. She raised her hand appealingly, but he went on.

'Can you picture an innocent babe in your arms? A boy? The world is not
so hard upon a girl. Why, your very breast would turn to gall! And you
could be proud and happy of your boy, as you looked on other
children?--' 'O, have pity! Hush!' 'A scapegoat--'

'Don't! don't! I will go back!' She was at his feet.

'A child to grow up with no thought of evil, and one day the world to
fling a tender name in his face. A child to look back and curse you
from whose loins he sprang!'

'O my God! my God!' She groveled on the floor. The priest sighed and
raised her to her feet.

Wharton pressed forward, but she motioned him away.

'Don't come near me, Clyde! I am going back!' The tears were coursing
pitifully down her face, but she made no effort to wipe them away.

'After all this? You cannot! I will not let you!' 'Don't touch me!' She
shivered and drew back.

'I will! You are mine! Do you hear? You are mine!' Then he whirled upon
the priest. 'O what a fool I was to ever let you wag your silly tongue!
Thank your God you are not a common man, for I'd--but the priestly
prerogative must be exercised, eh? Well, you have exercised it. Now get
out of my house, or I'll forget who and what you are!' Father Roubeau
bowed, took her hand, and started for the door. But Wharton cut them
off.

'Grace! You said you loved me?' 'I did.' 'And you do now?' 'I do.' 'Say
it again.'

'I do love you, Clyde; I do.' 'There, you priest!' he cried. 'You have
heard it, and with those words on her lips you would send her back to
live a lie and a hell with that man?'

But Father Roubeau whisked the woman into the inner room and closed the
door. 'No words!' he whispered to Wharton, as he struck a casual
posture on a stool. 'Remember, for her sake,' he added.

The room echoed to a rough knock at the door; the latch raised and
Edwin Bentham stepped in.

'Seen anything of my wife?' he asked as soon as salutations had been
exchanged.

Two heads nodded negatively.

'I saw her tracks down from the cabin,' he continued tentatively, 'and
they broke off, just opposite here, on the main trail.' His listeners
looked bored.

'And I--I thought--'

'She was here!' thundered Wharton.

The priest silenced him with a look. 'Did you see her tracks leading up
to this cabin, my son?' Wily Father Roubeau--he had taken good care to
obliterate them as he came up the same path an hour before.

'I didn't stop to look, I--' His eyes rested suspiciously on the door
to the other room, then interrogated the priest. The latter shook his
head; but the doubt seemed to linger.

Father Roubeau breathed a swift, silent prayer, and rose to his feet.
'If you doubt me, why--' He made as though to open the door.

A priest could not lie. Edwin Bentham had heard this often, and
believed it.

'Of course not, Father,' he interposed hurriedly. 'I was only wondering
where my wife had gone, and thought maybe--I guess she's up at Mrs.
Stanton's on French Gulch. Nice weather, isn't it? Heard the news?
Flour's gone down to forty dollars a hundred, and they say the
che-cha-quas are flocking down the river in droves.

'But I must be going; so good-by.' The door slammed, and from the
window they watched him take his guest up French Gulch. A few weeks
later, just after the June high-water, two men shot a canoe into
mid-stream and made fast to a derelict pine. This tightened the painter
and jerked the frail craft along as would a tow-boat. Father Roubeau
had been directed to leave the Upper Country and return to his swarthy
children at Minook. The white men had come among them, and they were
devoting too little time to fishing, and too much to a certain deity
whose transient habitat was in countless black bottles.

Malemute Kid also had business in the Lower Country, so they journeyed
together.

But one, in all the Northland, knew the man Paul Roubeau, and that man
was Malemute Kid. Before him alone did the priest cast off the
sacerdotal garb and stand naked. And why not? These two men knew each
other. Had they not shared the last morsel of fish, the last pinch of
tobacco, the last and inmost thought, on the barren stretches of Bering
Sea, in the heartbreaking mazes of the Great Delta, on the terrible
winter journey from Point Barrow to the Porcupine? Father Roubeau
puffed heavily at his trail-worn pipe, and gazed on the reddisked sun,
poised somberly on the edge of the northern horizon.

Malemute Kid wound up his watch. It was midnight.

'Cheer up, old man!' The Kid was evidently gathering up a broken thread.

'God surely will forgive such a lie. Let me give you the word of a man
who strikes a true note: If She have spoken a word, remember thy lips
are sealed, And the brand of the Dog is upon him by whom is the secret
revealed.

If there be trouble to Herward, and a lie of the blackest can clear,
Lie, while thy lips can move or a man is alive to hear.'

Father Roubeau removed his pipe and reflected. 'The man speaks true,
but my soul is not vexed with that. The lie and the penance stand with
God; but--but--'

'What then? Your hands are clean.' 'Not so. Kid, I have thought much,
and yet the thing remains. I knew, and made her go back.' The clear
note of a robin rang out from the wooden bank, a partridge drummed the
call in the distance, a moose lunged noisily in the eddy; but the twain
smoked on in silence.



The Wisdom of the Trail

Sitka Charley had achieved the impossible. Other Indians might have
known as much of the wisdom of the trail as he did; but he alone knew
the white man's wisdom, the honor of the trail, and the law. But these
things had not come to him in a day. The aboriginal mind is slow to
generalize, and many facts, repeated often, are required to compass an
understanding. Sitka Charley, from boyhood, had been thrown continually
with white men, and as a man he had elected to cast his fortunes with
them, expatriating himself, once and for all, from his own people. Even
then, respecting, almost venerating their power, and pondering over it,
he had yet to divine its secret essence--the honor and the law. And it
was only by the cumulative evidence of years that he had finally come
to understand. Being an alien, when he did know, he knew it better than
the white man himself; being an Indian, he had achieved the impossible.

And of these things had been bred a certain contempt for his own
people--a contempt which he had made it a custom to conceal, but which
now burst forth in a polyglot whirlwind of curses upon the heads of
Kah-Chucte and Gowhee. They cringed before him like a brace of snarling
wolf dogs, too cowardly to spring, too wolfish to cover their fangs.
They were not handsome creatures. Neither was Sitka Charley. All three
were frightful-looking. There was no flesh to their faces; their
cheekbones were massed with hideous scabs which had cracked and frozen
alternately under the intense frost; while their eyes burned luridly
with the light which is born of desperation and hunger. Men so
situated, beyond the pale of the honor and the law, are not to be
trusted. Sitka Charley knew this; and this was why he had forced them
to abandon their rifles with the rest of the camp outfit ten days
before. His rifle and Captain Eppingwell's were the only ones that
remained.

'Come, get a fire started,' he commanded, drawing out the precious
matchbox with its attendant strips of dry birchbark.

The two Indians fell sullenly to the task of gathering dead branches
and underwood. They were weak and paused often, catching themselves, in
the act of stooping, with giddy motions, or staggering to the center of
operations with their knees shaking like castanets.

After each trip they rested for a moment, as though sick and deadly
weary. At times their eyes took on the patient stoicism of dumb
suffering; and again the ego seemed almost burst forth with its wild
cry, 'I, I, I want to exist!'--the dominant note of the whole living
universe.

A light breath of air blew from the south, nipping the exposed portions
of their bodies and driving the frost, in needles of fire, through fur
and flesh to the bones. So, when the fire had grown lusty and thawed a
damp circle in the snow about it, Sitka Charley forced his reluctant
comrades to lend a hand in pitching a fly. It was a primitive affair,
merely a blanket stretched parallel with the fire and to windward of
it, at an angle of perhaps forty-five degrees. This shut out the chill
wind and threw the heat backward and down upon those who were to huddle
in its shelter. Then a layer of green spruce boughs were spread, that
their bodies might not come in contact with the snow. When this task
was completed, Kah-Chucte and Gowhee proceeded to take care of their
feet. Their icebound moccasins were sadly worn by much travel, and the
sharp ice of the river jams had cut them to rags.

Their Siwash socks were similarly conditioned, and when these had been
thawed and removed, the dead-white tips of the toes, in the various
stages of mortification, told their simple tale of the trail.

Leaving the two to the drying of their footgear, Sitka Charley turned
back over the course he had come. He, too, had a mighty longing to sit
by the fire and tend his complaining flesh, but the honor and the law
forbade. He toiled painfully over the frozen field, each step a
protest, every muscle in revolt. Several times, where the open water
between the jams had recently crusted, he was forced to miserably
accelerate his movements as the fragile footing swayed and threatened
beneath him. In such places death was quick and easy; but it was not
his desire to endure no more.

His deepening anxiety vanished as two Indians dragged into view round a
bend in the river. They staggered and panted like men under heavy
burdens; yet the packs on their backs were a matter of but a few
pounds. He questioned them eagerly, and their replies seemed to relieve
him. He hurried on. Next came two white men, supporting between them a
woman. They also behaved as though drunken, and their limbs shook with
weakness. But the woman leaned lightly upon them, choosing to carry
herself forward with her own strength. At the sight of her a flash of
joy cast its fleeting light across Sitka Charley's face. He cherished a
very great regard for Mrs. Eppingwell. He had seen many white women,
but this was the first to travel the trail with him. When Captain
Eppingwell proposed the hazardous undertaking and made him an offer for
his services, he had shaken his head gravely; for it was an unknown
journey through the dismal vastnesses of the Northland, and he knew it
to be of the kind that try to the uttermost the souls of men.

But when he learned that the captain's wife was to accompany them, he
had refused flatly to have anything further to do with it. Had it been
a woman of his own race he would have harbored no objections; but these
women of the Southland--no, no, they were too soft, too tender, for
such enterprises.

Sitka Charley did not know this kind of woman. Five minutes before, he
did not even dream of taking charge of the expedition; but when she
came to him with her wonderful smile and her straight clean English,
and talked to the point, without pleading or persuading, he had
incontinently yielded. Had there been a softness and appeal to mercy in
the eyes, a tremble to the voice, a taking advantage of sex, he would
have stiffened to steel; instead her clear-searching eyes and
clear-ringing voice, her utter frankness and tacit assumption of
equality, had robbed him of his reason. He felt, then, that this was a
new breed of woman; and ere they had been trail mates for many days he
knew why the sons of such women mastered the land and the sea, and why
the sons of his own womankind could not prevail against them. Tender
and soft! Day after day he watched her, muscle-weary, exhausted,
indomitable, and the words beat in upon him in a perennial refrain.
Tender and soft! He knew her feet had been born to easy paths and sunny
lands, strangers to the moccasined pain of the North, unkissed by the
chill lips of the frost, and he watched and marveled at them twinkling
ever through the weary day.

She had always a smile and a word of cheer, from which not even the
meanest packer was excluded. As the way grew darker she seemed to
stiffen and gather greater strength, and when Kah-Chucte and Gowhee,
who had bragged that they knew every landmark of the way as a child did
the skin bails of the tepee, acknowledged that they knew not where they
were, it was she who raised a forgiving voice amid the curses of the
men. She had sung to them that night till they felt the weariness fall
from them and were ready to face the future with fresh hope. And when
the food failed and each scant stint was measured jealously, she it was
who rebelled against the machinations of her husband and Sitka Charley,
and demanded and received a share neither greater nor less than that of
the others.

Sitka Charley was proud to know this woman. A new richness, a greater
breadth, had come into his life with her presence. Hitherto he had been
his own mentor, had turned to right or left at no man's beck; he had
moulded himself according to his own dictates, nourished his manhood
regardless of all save his own opinion. For the first time he had felt
a call from without for the best that was in him, just a glance of
appreciation from the clear-searching eyes, a word of thanks from the
clear-ringing voice, just a slight wreathing of the lips in the
wonderful smile, and he walked with the gods for hours to come. It was
a new stimulant to his manhood; for the first time he thrilled with a
conscious pride in his wisdom of the trail; and between the twain they
ever lifted the sinking hearts of their comrades. The faces of the two
men and the woman brightened as they saw him, for after all he was the
staff they leaned upon. But Sitka Charley, rigid as was his wont,
concealing pain and pleasure impartially beneath an iron exterior,
asked them the welfare of the rest, told the distance to the fire, and
continued on the back-trip.

Next he met a single Indian, unburdened, limping, lips compressed, and
eyes set with the pain of a foot in which the quick fought a losing
battle with the dead. All possible care had been taken of him, but in
the last extremity the weak and unfortunate must perish, and Sitka
Charley deemed his days to be few. The man could not keep up for long,
so he gave him rough cheering words. After that came two more Indians,
to whom he had allotted the task of helping along Joe, the third white
man of the party. They had deserted him. Sitka Charley saw at a glance
the lurking spring in their bodies, and knew they had at last cast off
his mastery. So he was not taken unawares when he ordered them back in
quest of their abandoned charge, and saw the gleam of the hunting
knives that they drew from the sheaths. A pitiful spectacle, three weak
men lifting their puny strength in the face of the mighty vastness; but
the two recoiled under the fierce rifle blows of the one and returned
like beaten dogs to the leash. Two hours later, with Joe reeling
between them and Sitka Charley bringing up the rear, they came to the
fire, where the remainder of the expedition crouched in the shelter of
the fly.

'A few words, my comrades, before we sleep,' Sitka Charley said after
they had devoured their slim rations of unleavened bread. He was
speaking to the Indians in their own tongue, having already given the
import to the whites. 'A few words, my comrades, for your own good,
that ye may yet perchance live. I shall give you the law; on his own
head by the death of him that breaks it. We have passed the Hills of
Silence, and we now travel the head reaches of the Stuart. It may be
one sleep, it may be several, it may be many sleeps, but in time we
shall come among the men of the Yukon, who have much grub. It were well
that we look to the law. Today Kah-Chucte and Gowhee, whom I commanded
to break trail, forgot they were men, and like frightened children ran
away.

'True, they forgot; so let us forget. But hereafter, let them remember.
If it should happen they do not...' He touched his rifle carelessly,
grimly. 'Tomorrow they shall carry the flour and see that the white man
Joe lies not down by the trail. The cups of flour are counted; should
so much as an ounce be wanting at nightfall... Do ye understand? Today
there were others that forgot. Moose Head and Three Salmon left the
white man Joe to lie in the snow. Let them forget no more. With the
light of day shall they go forth and break trail. Ye have heard the
law. Look well, lest ye break it.' Sitka Charley found it beyond him to
keep the line close up. From Moose Head and Three Salmon, who broke
trail in advance, to Kah-Chucte, Gowhee, and Joe, it straggled out over
a mile. Each staggered, fell or rested as he saw fit.

The line of march was a progression through a chain of irregular halts.
Each drew upon the last remnant of his strength and stumbled onward
till it was expended, but in some miraculous way there was always
another last remnant. Each time a man fell it was with the firm belief
that he would rise no more; yet he did rise, and again and again. The
flesh yielded, the will conquered; but each triumph was a tragedy. The
Indian with the frozen foot, no longer erect, crawled forward on hand
and knee. He rarely rested, for he knew the penalty exacted by the
frost.

Even Mrs. Eppingwell's lips were at last set in a stony smile, and her
eyes, seeing, saw not. Often she stopped, pressing a mittened hand to
her heart, gasping and dizzy.

Joe, the white man, had passed beyond the stage of suffering. He no
longer begged to be let alone, prayed to die; but was soothed and
content under the anodyne of delirium. Kah-Chucte and Gowhee dragged
him on roughly, venting upon him many a savage glance or blow. To them
it was the acme of injustice.

Their hearts were bitter with hate, heavy with fear. Why should they
cumber their strength with his weakness? To do so meant death; not to
do so--and they remembered the law of Sitka Charley, and the rifle.

Joe fell with greater frequency as the daylight waned, and so hard was
he to raise that they dropped farther and farther behind. Sometimes all
three pitched into the snow, so weak had the Indians become. Yet on
their backs was life, and strength, and warmth.

Within the flour sacks were all the potentialities of existence. They
could not but think of this, and it was not strange, that which came to
pass. They had fallen by the side of a great timber jam where a
thousand cords of firewood waited the match. Near by was an air hole
through the ice. Kah-Chucte looked on the wood and the water, as did
Gowhee; then they looked at each other.

Never a word was spoken. Gowhee struck a fire; Kah-Chucte filled a tin
cup with water and heated it; Joe babbled of things in another land, in
a tongue they did not understand.

They mixed flour with the warm water till it was a thin paste, and of
this they drank many cups. They did not offer any to Joe; but he did
not mind. He did not mind anything, not even his moccasins, which
scorched and smoked among the coals.

A crystal mist of snow fell about them, softly, caressingly, wrapping
them in clinging robes of white. And their feet would have yet trod
many trails had not destiny brushed the clouds aside and cleared the
air. Nay, ten minutes' delay would have been salvation.

Sitka Charley, looking back, saw the pillared smoke of their fire, and
guessed. And he looked ahead at those who were faithful, and at Mrs.
Eppingwell. 'So, my good comrades, ye have again forgotten that you
were men? Good! Very good. There will be fewer bellies to feed.' Sitka
Charley retied the flour as he spoke, strapping the pack to the one on
his own back. He kicked Joe till the pain broke through the poor
devil's bliss and brought him doddering to his feet. Then he shoved him
out upon the trail and started him on his way. The two Indians
attempted to slip off.

'Hold, Gowhee! And thou, too, Kah-Chucte! Hath the flour given such
strength to thy legs that they may outrun the swift-winged lead? Think
not to cheat the law. Be men for the last time, and be content that ye
die full-stomached.

Come, step up, back to the timber, shoulder to shoulder. Come!' The two
men obeyed, quietly, without fear; for it is the future which pressed
upon the man, not the present.

'Thou, Gowhee, hast a wife and children and a deerskin lodge in the
Chipewyan. What is thy will in the matter?' 'Give thou her of the goods
which are mine by the word of the captain--the blankets, the beads, the
tobacco, the box which makes strange sounds after the manner of the
white men. Say that I did die on the trail, but say not how.' 'And
thou, Kah-Chucte, who hast nor wife nor child?' 'Mine is a sister, the
wife of the factor at Koshim. He beats her, and she is not happy. Give
thou her the goods which are mine by the contract, and tell her it were
well she go back to her own people. Shouldst thou meet the man, and be
so minded, it were a good deed that he should die. He beats her, and
she is afraid.' 'Are ye content to die by the law?' 'We are.' 'Then
good-bye, my good comrades. May ye sit by the well-filled pot, in warm
lodges, ere the day is done.' As he spoke he raised his rifle, and many
echoes broke the silence. Hardly had they died away when other rifles
spoke in the distance. Sitka Charley started.

There had been more than one shot, yet there was but one other rifle in
the party.

He gave a fleeting glance at the men who lay so quietly, smiled
viciously at the wisdom of the trail, and hurried on to meet the men of
the Yukon.



The Wife of a King

Once when the northland was very young, the social and civic virtues
were remarkably alike for their paucity and their simplicity. When the
burden of domestic duties grew grievous, and the fireside mood expanded
to a constant protest against its bleak loneliness, the adventurers
from the Southland, in lieu of better, paid the stipulated prices and
took unto themselves native wives. It was a foretaste of Paradise to
the women, for it must be confessed that the white rovers gave far
better care and treatment of them than did their Indian copartners. Of
course, the white men themselves were satisfied with such deals, as
were also the Indian men for that matter. Having sold their daughters
and sisters for cotton blankets and obsolete rifles and traded their
warm furs for flimsy calico and bad whisky, the sons of the soil
promptly and cheerfully succumbed to quick consumption and other swift
diseases correlated with the blessings of a superior civilization.

It was in these days of Arcadian simplicity that Cal Galbraith
journeyed through the land and fell sick on the Lower River. It was a
refreshing advent in the lives of the good Sisters of the Holy Cross,
who gave him shelter and medicine; though they little dreamed of the
hot elixir infused into his veins by the touch of their soft hands and
their gentle ministrations. Cal Galbraith, became troubled with strange
thoughts which clamored for attention till he laid eyes on the Mission
girl, Madeline. Yet he gave no sign, biding his time patiently. He
strengthened with the coming spring, and when the sun rode the heavens
in a golden circle, and the joy and throb of life was in all the land,
he gathered his still weak body together and departed.

Now, Madeline, the Mission girl, was an orphan. Her white father had
failed to give a bald-faced grizzly the trail one day, and had died
quickly. Then her Indian mother, having no man to fill the winter
cache, had tried the hazardous experiment of waiting till the
salmon-run on fifty pounds of flour and half as many of bacon. After
that, the baby, Chook-ra, went to live with the good Sisters, and to be
thenceforth known by another name.

But Madeline still had kinsfolk, the nearest being a dissolute uncle
who outraged his vitals with inordinate quantities of the white man's
whisky. He strove daily to walk with the gods, and incidentally, his
feet sought shorter trails to the grave. When sober he suffered
exquisite torture. He had no conscience. To this ancient vagabond Cal
Galbraith duly presented himself, and they consumed many words and much
tobacco in the conversation that followed. Promises were also made; and
in the end the old heathen took a few pounds of dried salmon and his
birch-bark canoe, and paddled away to the Mission of the Holy Cross.

It is not given the world to know what promises he made and what lies
he told--the Sisters never gossip; but when he returned, upon his
swarthy chest there was a brass crucifix, and in his canoe his niece
Madeline. That night there was a grand wedding and a potlach; so that
for two days to follow there was no fishing done by the village. But in
the morning Madeline shook the dust of the Lower River from her
moccasins, and with her husband, in a poling-boat, went to live on the
Upper River in a place known as the Lower Country. And in the years
which followed she was a good wife, sharing her husband's hardships and
cooking his food. And she kept him in straight trails, till he learned
to save his dust and to work mightily. In the end, he struck it rich
and built a cabin in Circle City; and his happiness was such that men
who came to visit him in his home-circle became restless at the sight
of it and envied him greatly.

But the Northland began to mature and social amenities to make their
appearance.

Hitherto, the Southland had sent forth its sons; but it now belched
forth a new exodus--this time of its daughters. Sisters and wives they
were not; but they did not fail to put new ideas in the heads of the
men, and to elevate the tone of things in ways peculiarly their own. No
more did the squaws gather at the dances, go roaring down the center in
the good, old Virginia reels, or make merry with jolly 'Dan Tucker.'
They fell back on their natural stoicism and uncomplainingly watched
the rule of their white sisters from their cabins.

Then another exodus came over the mountains from the prolific Southland.

This time it was of women that became mighty in the land. Their word
was law; their law was steel. They frowned upon the Indian wives, while
the other women became mild and walked humbly. There were cowards who
became ashamed of their ancient covenants with the daughters of the
soil, who looked with a new distaste upon their dark-skinned children;
but there were also others--men--who remained true and proud of their
aboriginal vows. When it became the fashion to divorce the native
wives. Cal Galbraith retained his manhood, and in so doing felt the
heavy hand of the women who had come last, knew least, but who ruled
the land.

One day, the Upper Country, which lies far above Circle City, was
pronounced rich. Dog-teams carried the news to Salt Water; golden
argosies freighted the lure across the North Pacific; wires and cables
sang with the tidings; and the world heard for the first time of the
Klondike River and the Yukon Country. Cal Galbraith had lived the years
quietly. He had been a good husband to Madeline, and she had blessed
him. But somehow discontent fell upon him; he felt vague yearnings for
his own kind, for the life he had been shut out from--a general sort of
desire, which men sometimes feel, to break out and taste the prime of
living. Besides, there drifted down the river wild rumors of the
wonderful El Dorado, glowing descriptions of the city of logs and
tents, and ludicrous accounts of the che-cha-quas who had rushed in and
were stampeding the whole country.

Circle City was dead. The world had moved on up river and become a new
and most marvelous world.

Cal Galbraith grew restless on the edge of things, and wished to see
with his own eyes.

So, after the wash-up, he weighed in a couple of hundred pounds of dust
on the Company's big scales, and took a draft for the same on Dawson.
Then he put Tom Dixon in charge of his mines, kissed Madeline good-by,
promised to be back before the first mush-ice ran, and took passage on
an up-river steamer.

Madeline waited, waited through all the three months of daylight. She
fed the dogs, gave much of her time to Young Cal, watched the short
summer fade away and the sun begin its long journey to the south. And
she prayed much in the manner of the Sisters of the Holy Cross. The
fall came, and with it there was mush-ice on the Yukon, and Circle City
kings returning to the winter's work at their mines, but no Cal
Galbraith. Tom Dixon received a letter, however, for his men sledded up
her winter's supply of dry pine. The Company received a letter for its
dogteams filled her cache with their best provisions, and she was told
that her credit was limitless.

Through all the ages man has been held the chief instigator of the woes
of woman; but in this case the men held their tongues and swore harshly
at one of their number who was away, while the women failed utterly to
emulate them. So, without needless delay, Madeline heard strange tales
of Cal Galbraith's doings; also, of a certain Greek dancer who played
with men as children did with bubbles. Now Madeline was an Indian
woman, and further, she had no woman friend to whom to go for wise
counsel. She prayed and planned by turns, and that night, being quick
of resolve and action, she harnessed the dogs, and with Young Cal
securely lashed to the sled, stole away.

Though the Yukon still ran free, the eddy-ice was growing, and each day
saw the river dwindling to a slushy thread. Save him who has done the
like, no man may know what she endured in traveling a hundred miles on
the rim-ice; nor may they understand the toil and hardship of breaking
the two hundred miles of packed ice which remained after the river
froze for good. But Madeline was an Indian woman, so she did these
things, and one night there came a knock at Malemute Kid's door.
Thereat he fed a team of starving dogs, put a healthy youngster to bed,
and turned his attention to an exhausted woman. He removed her icebound
moccasins while he listened to her tale, and stuck the point of his
knife into her feet that he might see how far they were frozen.

Despite his tremendous virility, Malemute Kid was possessed of a
softer, womanly element, which could win the confidence of a snarling
wolf-dog or draw confessions from the most wintry heart. Nor did he
seek them. Hearts opened to him as spontaneously as flowers to the sun.
Even the priest, Father Roubeau, had been known to confess to him,
while the men and women of the Northland were ever knocking at his
door--a door from which the latch-string hung always out. To Madeline,
he could do no wrong, make no mistake. She had known him from the time
she first cast her lot among the people of her father's race; and to
her half-barbaric mind it seemed that in him was centered the wisdom of
the ages, that between his vision and the future there could be no
intervening veil.

There were false ideals in the land. The social strictures of Dawson
were not synonymous with those of the previous era, and the swift
maturity of the Northland involved much wrong. Malemute Kid was aware
of this, and he had Cal Galbraith's measure accurately.

He knew a hasty word was the father of much evil; besides, he was
minded to teach a great lesson and bring shame upon the man. So Stanley
Prince, the young mining expert, was called into the conference the
following night as was also Lucky Jack Harrington and his violin. That
same night, Bettles, who owed a great debt to Malemute Kid, harnessed
up Cal Galbraith's dogs, lashed Cal Galbraith, Junior, to the sled, and
slipped away in the dark for Stuart River.


II

'So; one--two--three, one--two--three. Now reverse! No, no! Start up
again, Jack. See--this way.' Prince executed the movement as one should
who has led the cotillion.

'Now; one--two--three, one--two--three. Reverse! Ah! that's better. Try
it again. I say, you know, you mustn't look at your feet.
One--two--three, one--two--three. Shorter steps! You are not hanging to
the gee-pole just now. Try it over.

'There! that's the way. One--two--three, one--two--three.' Round and
round went Prince and Madeline in an interminable waltz. The table and
stools had been shoved over against the wall to increase the room.
Malemute Kid sat on the bunk, chin to knees, greatly interested. Jack
Harrington sat beside him, scraping away on his violin and following
the dancers.

It was a unique situation, the undertaking of these three men with the
woman.

The most pathetic part, perhaps, was the businesslike way in which they
went about it.

No athlete was ever trained more rigidly for a coming contest, nor
wolf-dog for the harness, than was she. But they had good material, for
Madeline, unlike most women of her race, in her childhood had escaped
the carrying of heavy burdens and the toil of the trail. Besides, she
was a clean-limbed, willowy creature, possessed of much grace which had
not hitherto been realized. It was this grace which the men strove to
bring out and knock into shape.

'Trouble with her she learned to dance all wrong,' Prince remarked to
the bunk after having deposited his breathless pupil on the table.
'She's quick at picking up; yet I could do better had she never danced
a step. But say, Kid, I can't understand this.' Prince imitated a
peculiar movement of the shoulders and head--a weakness Madeline
suffered from in walking.

'Lucky for her she was raised in the Mission,' Malemute Kid answered.
'Packing, you know,--the head-strap. Other Indian women have it bad,
but she didn't do any packing till after she married, and then only at
first. Saw hard lines with that husband of hers. They went through the
Forty-Mile famine together.' 'But can we break it?' 'Don't know.

'Perhaps long walks with her trainers will make the riffle. Anyway,
they'll take it out some, won't they, Madeline?' The girl nodded
assent. If Malemute Kid, who knew all things, said so, why it was so.
That was all there was about it.

She had come over to them, anxious to begin again. Harrington surveyed
her in quest of her points much in the same manner men usually do
horses. It certainly was not disappointing, for he asked with sudden
interest, 'What did that beggarly uncle of yours get anyway?' 'One
rifle, one blanket, twenty bottles of hooch. Rifle broke.' She said
this last scornfully, as though disgusted at how low her maiden-value
had been rated.

She spoke fair English, with many peculiarities of her husband's
speech, but there was still perceptible the Indian accent, the
traditional groping after strange gutturals. Even this her instructors
had taken in hand, and with no small success, too.

At the next intermission, Prince discovered a new predicament.

'I say, Kid,' he said, 'we're wrong, all wrong. She can't learn in
moccasins.

'Put her feet into slippers, and then onto that waxed floor--phew!'
Madeline raised a foot and regarded her shapeless house-moccasins
dubiously. In previous winters, both at Circle City and Forty-Mile, she
had danced many a night away with similar footgear, and there had been
nothing the matter.

But now--well, if there was anything wrong it was for Malemute Kid to
know, not her.

But Malemute Kid did know, and he had a good eye for measures; so he
put on his cap and mittens and went down the hill to pay Mrs.
Eppingwell a call. Her husband, Clove Eppingwell, was prominent in the
community as one of the great Government officials.

The Kid had noted her slender little foot one night, at the Governor's
Ball. And as he also knew her to be as sensible as she was pretty, it
was no task to ask of her a certain small favor.

On his return, Madeline withdrew for a moment to the inner room. When
she reappeared Prince was startled.

'By Jove!' he gasped. 'Who'd a' thought it! The little witch! Why my
sister--' 'Is an English girl,' interrupted Malemute Kid, 'with an
English foot. This girl comes of a small-footed race. Moccasins just
broadened her feet healthily, while she did not misshape them by
running with the dogs in her childhood.' But this explanation failed
utterly to allay Prince's admiration. Harrington's commercial instinct
was touched, and as he looked upon the exquisitely turned foot and
ankle, there ran through his mind the sordid list--'One rifle, one
blanket, twenty bottles of hooch.' Madeline was the wife of a king, a
king whose yellow treasure could buy outright a score of fashion's
puppets; yet in all her life her feet had known no gear save red-tanned
moosehide. At first she had looked in awe at the tiny white-satin
slippers; but she had quickly understood the admiration which shone,
manlike, in the eyes of the men. Her face flushed with pride. For the
moment she was drunken with her woman's loveliness; then she murmured,
with increased scorn, 'And one rifle, broke!' So the training went on.
Every day Malemute Kid led the girl out on long walks devoted to the
correction of her carriage and the shortening of her stride.

There was little likelihood of her identity being discovered, for Cal
Galbraith and the rest of the Old-Timers were like lost children among
the many strangers who had rushed into the land. Besides, the frost of
the North has a bitter tongue, and the tender women of the South, to
shield their cheeks from its biting caresses, were prone to the use of
canvas masks. With faces obscured and bodies lost in squirrel-skin
parkas, a mother and daughter, meeting on trail, would pass as
strangers.

The coaching progressed rapidly. At first it had been slow, but later a
sudden acceleration had manifested itself. This began from the moment
Madeline tried on the white-satin slippers, and in so doing found
herself. The pride of her renegade father, apart from any natural
self-esteem she might possess, at that instant received its birth.
Hitherto, she had deemed herself a woman of an alien breed, of inferior
stock, purchased by her lord's favor. Her husband had seemed to her a
god, who had lifted her, through no essential virtues on her part, to
his own godlike level. But she had never forgotten, even when Young Cal
was born, that she was not of his people. As he had been a god, so had
his womenkind been goddesses. She might have contrasted herself with
them, but she had never compared.

It might have been that familiarity bred contempt; however, be that as
it may, she had ultimately come to understand these roving white men,
and to weigh them.

True, her mind was dark to deliberate analysis, but she yet possessed
her woman's clarity of vision in such matters. On the night of the
slippers she had measured the bold, open admiration of her three
man-friends; and for the first time comparison had suggested itself. It
was only a foot and an ankle, but--but comparison could not, in the
nature of things, cease at that point. She judged herself by their
standards till the divinity of her white sisters was shattered. After
all, they were only women, and why should she not exalt herself to
their midst? In doing these things she learned where she lacked and
with the knowledge of her weakness came her strength. And so mightily
did she strive that her three trainers often marveled late into the
night over the eternal mystery of woman.

In this way Thanksgiving Night drew near. At irregular intervals
Bettles sent word down from Stuart River regarding the welfare of Young
Cal. The time of their return was approaching. More than once a casual
caller, hearing dance-music and the rhythmic pulse of feet, entered,
only to find Harrington scraping away and the other two beating time or
arguing noisily over a mooted step. Madeline was never in evidence,
having precipitately fled to the inner room.

On one of these nights Cal Galbraith dropped in. Encouraging news had
just come down from Stuart River, and Madeline had surpassed
herself--not in walk alone, and carriage and grace, but in womanly
roguishness. They had indulged in sharp repartee and she had defended
herself brilliantly; and then, yielding to the intoxication of the
moment, and of her own power, she had bullied, and mastered, and
wheedled, and patronized them with most astonishing success. And
instinctively, involuntarily, they had bowed, not to her beauty, her
wisdom, her wit, but to that indefinable something in woman to which
man yields yet cannot name.

The room was dizzy with sheer delight as she and Prince whirled through
the last dance of the evening. Harrington was throwing in inconceivable
flourishes, while Malemute Kid, utterly abandoned, had seized the broom
and was executing mad gyrations on his own account.

At this instant the door shook with a heavy rap-rap, and their quick
glances noted the lifting of the latch. But they had survived similar
situations before. Harrington never broke a note. Madeline shot through
the waiting door to the inner room. The broom went hurtling under the
bunk, and by the time Cal Galbraith and Louis Savoy got their heads in,
Malemute Kid and Prince were in each other's arms, wildly schottisching
down the room.

As a rule, Indian women do not make a practice of fainting on
provocation, but Madeline came as near to it as she ever had in her
life. For an hour she crouched on the floor, listening to the heavy
voices of the men rumbling up and down in mimic thunder. Like familiar
chords of childhood melodies, every intonation, every trick of her
husband's voice swept in upon her, fluttering her heart and weakening
her knees till she lay half-fainting against the door. It was well she
could neither see nor hear when he took his departure.

'When do you expect to go back to Circle City?' Malemute Kid asked
simply.

'Haven't thought much about it,' he replied. 'Don't think till after
the ice breaks.' 'And Madeline?'

He flushed at the question, and there was a quick droop to his eyes.
Malemute Kid could have despised him for that, had he known men less.
As it was, his gorge rose against the wives and daughters who had come
into the land, and not satisfied with usurping the place of the native
women, had put unclean thoughts in the heads of the men and made them
ashamed.

'I guess she's all right,' the Circle City King answered hastily, and
in an apologetic manner. 'Tom Dixon's got charge of my interests, you
know, and he sees to it that she has everything she wants.' Malemute
Kid laid hand upon his arm and hushed him suddenly. They had stepped
without. Overhead, the aurora, a gorgeous wanton, flaunted miracles of
color; beneath lay the sleeping town. Far below, a solitary dog gave
tongue.

The King again began to speak, but the Kid pressed his hand for
silence. The sound multiplied. Dog after dog took up the strain till
the full-throated chorus swayed the night.

To him who hears for the first time this weird song, is told the first
and greatest secret of the Northland; to him who has heard it often, it
is the solemn knell of lost endeavor. It is the plaint of tortured
souls, for in it is invested the heritage of the North, the suffering
of countless generations--the warning and the requiem to the world's
estrays.

Cal Galbraith shivered slightly as it died away in half-caught sobs.
The Kid read his thoughts openly, and wandered back with him through
all the weary days of famine and disease; and with him was also the
patient Madeline, sharing his pains and perils, never doubting, never
complaining. His mind's retina vibrated to a score of pictures, stern,
clear-cut, and the hand of the past drew back with heavy fingers on his
heart. It was the psychological moment. Malemute Kid was half-tempted
to play his reserve card and win the game; but the lesson was too mild
as yet, and he let it pass. The next instant they had gripped hands,
and the King's beaded moccasins were drawing protests from the outraged
snow as he crunched down the hill.

Madeline in collapse was another woman to the mischievous creature of
an hour before, whose laughter had been so infectious and whose
heightened color and flashing eyes had made her teachers for the while
forget. Weak and nerveless, she sat in the chair just as she had been
dropped there by Prince and Harrington.

Malemute Kid frowned. This would never do. When the time of meeting her
husband came to hand, she must carry things off with high-handed
imperiousness. It was very necessary she should do it after the manner
of white women, else the victory would be no victory at all. So he
talked to her, sternly, without mincing of words, and initiated her
into the weaknesses of his own sex, till she came to understand what
simpletons men were after all, and why the word of their women was law.

A few days before Thanksgiving Night, Malemute Kid made another call on
Mrs. Eppingwell. She promptly overhauled her feminine fripperies, paid
a protracted visit to the dry-goods department of the P. C. Company,
and returned with the Kid to make Madeline's acquaintance. After that
came a period such as the cabin had never seen before, and what with
cutting, and fitting, and basting, and stitching, and numerous other
wonderful and unknowable things, the male conspirators were more often
banished the premises than not. At such times the Opera House opened
its double storm-doors to them.

So often did they put their heads together, and so deeply did they
drink to curious toasts, that the loungers scented unknown creeks of
incalculable richness, and it is known that several checha-quas and at
least one Old-Timer kept their stampeding packs stored behind the bar,
ready to hit the trail at a moment's notice.

Mrs. Eppingwell was a woman of capacity; so, when she turned Madeline
over to her trainers on Thanksgiving Night she was so transformed that
they were almost afraid of her. Prince wrapped a Hudson Bay blanket
about her with a mock reverence more real than feigned, while Malemute
Kid, whose arm she had taken, found it a severe trial to resume his
wonted mentorship. Harrington, with the list of purchases still running
through his head, dragged along in the rear, nor opened his mouth once
all the way down into the town. When they came to the back door of the
Opera House they took the blanket from Madeline's shoulders and spread
it on the snow. Slipping out of Prince's moccasins, she stepped upon it
in new satin slippers. The masquerade was at its height. She hesitated,
but they jerked open the door and shoved her in. Then they ran around
to come in by the front entrance.


III

'Where is Freda?' the Old-Timers questioned, while the che-cha-quas
were equally energetic in asking who Freda was. The ballroom buzzed
with her name.

It was on everybody's lips. Grizzled 'sour-dough boys,' day-laborers at
the mines but proud of their degree, either patronized the
spruce-looking tenderfeet and lied eloquently--the 'sour-dough boys'
being specially created to toy with truth--or gave them savage looks of
indignation because of their ignorance. Perhaps forty kings of the
Upper and Lower Countries were on the floor, each deeming himself hot
on the trail and sturdily backing his judgment with the yellow dust of
the realm. An assistant was sent to the man at the scales, upon whom
had fallen the burden of weighing up the sacks, while several of the
gamblers, with the rules of chance at their finger-ends, made up
alluring books on the field and favorites.

Which was Freda? Time and again the 'Greek Dancer' was thought to have
been discovered, but each discovery brought panic to the betting ring
and a frantic registering of new wagers by those who wished to hedge.
Malemute Kid took an interest in the hunt, his advent being hailed
uproariously by the revelers, who knew him to a man. The Kid had a good
eye for the trick of a step, and ear for the lilt of a voice, and his
private choice was a marvelous creature who scintillated as the 'Aurora
Borealis.' But the Greek dancer was too subtle for even his
penetration. The majority of the gold-hunters seemed to have centered
their verdict on the 'Russian Princess,' who was the most graceful in
the room, and hence could be no other than Freda Moloof.

During a quadrille a roar of satisfaction went up. She was discovered.
At previous balls, in the figure, 'all hands round,' Freda had
displayed an inimitable step and variation peculiarly her own. As the
figure was called, the 'Russian Princess' gave the unique rhythm to
limb and body. A chorus of I-told-you-so's shook the squared
roof-beams, when lo! it was noticed that 'Aurora Borealis' and another
masque, the 'Spirit of the Pole,' were performing the same trick
equally well. And when two twin 'Sun-Dogs' and a 'Frost Queen' followed
suit, a second assistant was dispatched to the aid of the man at the
scales.

Bettles came off trail in the midst of the excitement, descending upon
them in a hurricane of frost. His rimed brows turned to cataracts as he
whirled about; his mustache, still frozen, seemed gemmed with diamonds
and turned the light in varicolored rays; while the flying feet slipped
on the chunks of ice which rattled from his moccasins and German socks.
A Northland dance is quite an informal affair, the men of the creeks
and trails having lost whatever fastidiousness they might have at one
time possessed; and only in the high official circles are conventions
at all observed. Here, caste carried no significance. Millionaires and
paupers, dog-drivers and mounted policemen joined hands with 'ladies in
the center,' and swept around the circle performing most remarkable
capers. Primitive in their pleasure, boisterous and rough, they
displayed no rudeness, but rather a crude chivalry more genuine than
the most polished courtesy.

In his quest for the 'Greek Dancer,' Cal Galbraith managed to get into
the same set with the 'Russian Princess,' toward whom popular suspicion
had turned.

But by the time he had guided her through one dance, he was willing not
only to stake his millions that she was not Freda, but that he had had
his arm about her waist before. When or where he could not tell, but
the puzzling sense of familiarity so wrought upon him that he turned
his attention to the discovery of her identity. Malemute Kid might have
aided him instead of occasionally taking the Princess for a few turns
and talking earnestly to her in low tones. But it was Jack Harrington
who paid the 'Russian Princess' the most assiduous court. Once he drew
Cal Galbraith aside and hazarded wild guesses as to who she was, and
explained to him that he was going in to win. That rankled the Circle
City King, for man is not by nature monogamic, and he forgot both
Madeline and Freda in the new quest.

It was soon noised about that the 'Russian Princess' was not Freda
Moloof. Interest deepened. Here was a fresh enigma. They knew Freda
though they could not find her, but here was somebody they had found
and did not know. Even the women could not place her, and they knew
every good dancer in the camp. Many took her for one of the official
clique, indulging in a silly escapade. Not a few asserted she would
disappear before the unmasking. Others were equally positive that she
was the woman-reporter of the Kansas City Star, come to write them up
at ninety dollars per column. And the men at the scales worked busily.

At one o'clock every couple took to the floor. The unmasking began amid
laughter and delight, like that of carefree children. There was no end
of Oh's and Ah's as mask after mask was lifted. The scintillating
'Aurora Borealis' became the brawny negress whose income from washing
the community's clothes ran at about five hundred a month. The twin
'Sun-Dogs' discovered mustaches on their upper lips, and were
recognized as brother Fraction-Kings of El Dorado. In one of the most
prominent sets, and the slowest in uncovering, was Cal Galbraith with
the 'Spirit of the Pole.' Opposite him was Jack Harrington and the
'Russian Princess.' The rest had discovered themselves, yet the 'Greek
Dancer' was still missing. All eyes were upon the group. Cal Galbraith,
in response to their cries, lifted his partner's mask. Freda's
wonderful face and brilliant eyes flashed out upon them. A roar went
up, to be squelched suddenly in the new and absorbing mystery of the
'Russian Princess.' Her face was still hidden, and Jack Harrington was
struggling with her. The dancers tittered on the tiptoes of expectancy.
He crushed her dainty costume roughly, and then--and then the revelers
exploded. The joke was on them. They had danced all night with a
tabooed native woman.

But those that knew, and they were many, ceased abruptly, and a hush
fell upon the room.

Cal Galbraith crossed over with great strides, angrily, and spoke to
Madeline in polyglot Chinook. But she retained her composure,
apparently oblivious to the fact that she was the cynosure of all eyes,
and answered him in English. She showed neither fright nor anger, and
Malemute Kid chuckled at her well-bred equanimity. The King felt
baffled, defeated; his common Siwash wife had passed beyond him.

'Come!' he said finally. 'Come on home.' 'I beg pardon,' she replied;
'I have agreed to go to supper with Mr. Harrington. Besides, there's no
end of dances promised.'

Harrington extended his arm to lead her away. He evinced not the
slightest disinclination toward showing his back, but Malemute Kid had
by this time edged in closer. The Circle City King was stunned. Twice
his hand dropped to his belt, and twice the Kid gathered himself to
spring; but the retreating couple passed through the supper-room door
where canned oysters were spread at five dollars the plate.

The crowd sighed audibly, broke up into couples, and followed them.
Freda pouted and went in with Cal Galbraith; but she had a good heart
and a sure tongue, and she spoiled his oysters for him. What she said
is of no importance, but his face went red and white at intervals, and
he swore repeatedly and savagely at himself.

The supper-room was filled with a pandemonium of voices, which ceased
suddenly as Cal Galbraith stepped over to his wife's table. Since the
unmasking considerable weights of dust had been placed as to the
outcome. Everybody watched with breathless interest.

Harrington's blue eyes were steady, but under the overhanging
tablecloth a Smith & Wesson balanced on his knee. Madeline looked up,
casually, with little interest.

'May--may I have the next round dance with you?' the King stuttered.

The wife of the King glanced at her card and inclined her head.



An Odyssey of the North

The sleds were singing their eternal lament to the creaking of the
harness and the tinkling bells of the leaders; but the men and dogs
were tired and made no sound. The trail was heavy with new-fallen snow,
and they had come far, and the runners, burdened with flint-like
quarters of frozen moose, clung tenaciously to the unpacked surface and
held back with a stubbornness almost human.

Darkness was coming on, but there was no camp to pitch that night. The
snow fell gently through the pulseless air, not in flakes, but in tiny
frost crystals of delicate design. It was very warm--barely ten below
zero--and the men did not mind. Meyers and Bettles had raised their ear
flaps, while Malemute Kid had even taken off his mittens.

The dogs had been fagged out early in the after noon, but they now
began to show new vigor. Among the more astute there was a certain
restlessness--an impatience at the restraint of the traces, an
indecisive quickness of movement, a sniffing of snouts and pricking of
ears. These became incensed at their more phlegmatic brothers, urging
them on with numerous sly nips on their hinder quarters. Those, thus
chidden, also contracted and helped spread the contagion. At last the
leader of the foremost sled uttered a sharp whine of satisfaction,
crouching lower in the snow and throwing himself against the collar.
The rest followed suit.

There was an ingathering of back hands, a tightening of traces; the
sleds leaped forward, and the men clung to the gee poles, violently
accelerating the uplift of their feet that they might escape going
under the runners. The weariness of the day fell from them, and they
whooped encouragement to the dogs. The animals responded with joyous
yelps. They were swinging through the gathering darkness at a rattling
gallop.

'Gee! Gee!' the men cried, each in turn, as their sleds abruptly left
the main trail, heeling over on single runners like luggers on the wind.

Then came a hundred yards' dash to the lighted parchment window, which
told its own story of the home cabin, the roaring Yukon stove, and the
steaming pots of tea. But the home cabin had been invaded. Threescore
huskies chorused defiance, and as many furry forms precipitated
themselves upon the dogs which drew the first sled. The door was flung
open, and a man, clad in the scarlet tunic of the Northwest Police,
waded knee-deep among the furious brutes, calmly and impartially
dispensing soothing justice with the butt end of a dog whip. After that
the men shook hands; and in this wise was Malemute Kid welcomed to his
own cabin by a stranger.

Stanley Prince, who should have welcomed him, and who was responsible
for the Yukon stove and hot tea aforementioned, was busy with his
guests. There were a dozen or so of them, as nondescript a crowd as
ever served the Queen in the enforcement of her laws or the delivery of
her mails. They were of many breeds, but their common life had formed
of them a certain type--a lean and wiry type, with trail-hardened
muscles, and sun-browned faces, and untroubled souls which gazed
frankly forth, clear-eyed and steady.

They drove the dogs of the Queen, wrought fear in the hearts of her
enemies, ate of her meager fare, and were happy. They had seen life,
and done deeds, and lived romances; but they did not know it.

And they were very much at home. Two of them were sprawled upon
Malemute Kid's bunk, singing chansons which their French forebears sang
in the days when first they entered the Northwest land and mated with
its Indian women. Bettles' bunk had suffered a similar invasion, and
three or four lusty voyageurs worked their toes among its blankets as
they listened to the tale of one who had served on the boat brigade
with Wolseley when he fought his way to Khartoum.

And when he tired, a cowboy told of courts and kings and lords and
ladies he had seen when Buffalo Bill toured the capitals of Europe. In
a corner two half-breeds, ancient comrades in a lost campaign, mended
harnesses and talked of the days when the Northwest flamed with
insurrection and Louis Riel was king.

Rough jests and rougher jokes went up and down, and great hazards by
trail and river were spoken of in the light of commonplaces, only to be
recalled by virtue of some grain of humor or ludicrous happening.
Prince was led away by these uncrowned heroes who had seen history
made, who regarded the great and the romantic as but the ordinary and
the incidental in the routine of life. He passed his precious tobacco
among them with lavish disregard, and rusty chains of reminiscence were
loosened, and forgotten odysseys resurrected for his especial benefit.

When conversation dropped and the travelers filled the last pipes and
lashed their tight-rolled sleeping furs. Prince fell back upon his
comrade for further information.

'Well, you know what the cowboy is,' Malemute Kid answered, beginning
to unlace his moccasins; 'and it's not hard to guess the British blood
in his bed partner. As for the rest, they're all children of the
coureurs du bois, mingled with God knows how many other bloods. The two
turning in by the door are the regulation 'breeds' or Boisbrules. That
lad with the worsted breech scarf--notice his eyebrows and the turn of
his jaw--shows a Scotchman wept in his mother's smoky tepee. And that
handsome looking fellow putting the capote under his head is a French
half-breed--you heard him talking; he doesn't like the two Indians
turning in next to him. You see, when the 'breeds' rose under the Riel
the full-bloods kept the peace, and they've not lost much love for one
another since.' 'But I say, what's that glum-looking fellow by the
stove? I'll swear he can't talk English. He hasn't opened his mouth all
night.' 'You're wrong. He knows English well enough. Did you follow his
eyes when he listened? I did. But he's neither kith nor kin to the
others. When they talked their own patois you could see he didn't
understand. I've been wondering myself what he is. Let's find out.'
'Fire a couple of sticks into the stove!'

Malemute Kid commanded, raising his voice and looking squarely at the
man in question.

He obeyed at once.

'Had discipline knocked into him somewhere.' Prince commented in a low
tone.

Malemute Kid nodded, took off his socks, and picked his way among
recumbent men to the stove. There he hung his damp footgear among a
score or so of mates.

'When do you expect to get to Dawson?' he asked tentatively.

The man studied him a moment before replying. 'They say seventy-five
mile. So? Maybe two days.' The very slightest accent was perceptible,
while there was no awkward hesitancy or groping for words.

'Been in the country before?' 'No.' 'Northwest Territory?' 'Yes.' 'Born
there?' 'No.'

'Well, where the devil were you born? You're none of these.' Malemute
Kid swept his hand over the dog drivers, even including the two
policemen who had turned into Prince's bunk. 'Where did you come from?
I've seen faces like yours before, though I can't remember just where.'
'I know you,' he irrelevantly replied, at once turning the drift of
Malemute Kid's questions.

'Where? Ever see me?' 'No; your partner, him priest, Pastilik, long
time ago. Him ask me if I see you, Malemute Kid. Him give me grub. I no
stop long. You hear him speak 'bout me?' 'Oh! you're the fellow that
traded the otter skins for the dogs?' The man nodded, knocked out his
pipe, and signified his disinclination for conversation by rolling up
in his furs. Malemute Kid blew out the slush lamp and crawled under the
blankets with Prince.

'Well, what is he?' 'Don't know--turned me off, somehow, and then shut
up like a clam.

'But he's a fellow to whet your curiosity. I've heard of him. All the
coast wondered about him eight years ago. Sort of mysterious, you know.
He came down out of the North in the dead of winter, many a thousand
miles from here, skirting Bering Sea and traveling as though the devil
were after him. No one ever learned where he came from, but he must
have come far. He was badly travel-worn when he got food from the
Swedish missionary on Golovin Bay and asked the way south. We heard of
all this afterward. Then he abandoned the shore line, heading right
across Norton Sound. Terrible weather, snowstorms and high winds, but
he pulled through where a thousand other men would have died, missing
St. Michaels and making the land at Pastilik. He'd lost all but two
dogs, and was nearly gone with starvation.

'He was so anxious to go on that Father Roubeau fitted him out with
grub; but he couldn't let him have any dogs, for he was only waiting my
arrival, to go on a trip himself. Mr. Ulysses knew too much to start on
without animals, and fretted around for several days. He had on his
sled a bunch of beautifully cured otter skins, sea otters, you know,
worth their weight in gold. There was also at Pastilik an old Shylock
of a Russian trader, who had dogs to kill. Well, they didn't dicker
very long, but when the Strange One headed south again, it was in the
rear of a spanking dog team. Mr. Shylock, by the way, had the otter
skins. I saw them, and they were magnificent. We figured it up and
found the dogs brought him at least five hundred apiece. And it wasn't
as if the Strange One didn't know the value of sea otter; he was an
Indian of some sort, and what little he talked showed he'd been among
white men.

'After the ice passed out of the sea, word came up from Nunivak Island
that he'd gone in there for grub. Then he dropped from sight, and this
is the first heard of him in eight years. Now where did he come from?
and what was he doing there? and why did he come from there? He's
Indian, he's been nobody knows where, and he's had discipline, which is
unusual for an Indian. Another mystery of the North for you to solve,
Prince.' 'Thanks awfully, but I've got too many on hand as it is,' he
replied.

Malemute Kid was already breathing heavily; but the young mining
engineer gazed straight up through the thick darkness, waiting for the
strange orgasm which stirred his blood to die away. And when he did
sleep, his brain worked on, and for the nonce he, too, wandered through
the white unknown, struggled with the dogs on endless trails, and saw
men live, and toil, and die like men. The next morning, hours before
daylight, the dog drivers and policemen pulled out for Dawson. But the
powers that saw to Her Majesty's interests and ruled the destinies of
her lesser creatures gave the mailmen little rest, for a week later
they appeared at Stuart River, heavily burdened with letters for Salt
Water.

However, their dogs had been replaced by fresh ones; but, then, they
were dogs.

The men had expected some sort of a layover in which to rest up;
besides, this Klondike was a new section of the Northland, and they had
wished to see a little something of the Golden City where dust flowed
like water and dance halls rang with never-ending revelry. But they
dried their socks and smoked their evening pipes with much the same
gusto as on their former visit, though one or two bold spirits
speculated on desertion and the possibility of crossing the unexplored
Rockies to the east, and thence, by the Mackenzie Valley, of gaining
their old stamping grounds in the Chippewyan country.

Two or three even decided to return to their homes by that route when
their terms of service had expired, and they began to lay plans
forthwith, looking forward to the hazardous undertaking in much the
same way a city-bred man would to a day's holiday in the woods.

He of the Otter Skins seemed very restless, though he took little
interest in the discussion, and at last he drew Malemute Kid to one
side and talked for some time in low tones.

Prince cast curious eyes in their direction, and the mystery deepened
when they put on caps and mittens and went outside. When they returned,
Malemute Kid placed his gold scales on the table, weighed out the
matter of sixty ounces, and transferred them to the Strange One's sack.
Then the chief of the dog drivers joined the conclave, and certain
business was transacted with him.

The next day the gang went on upriver, but He of the Otter Skins took
several pounds of grub and turned his steps back toward Dawson.

'Didn't know what to make of it,' said Malemute Kid in response to
Prince's queries; 'but the poor beggar wanted to be quit of the service
for some reason or other--at least it seemed a most important one to
him, though he wouldn't let on what. You see, it's just like the army:
he signed for two years, and the only way to get free was to buy
himself out. He couldn't desert and then stay here, and he was just
wild to remain in the country.

'Made up his mind when he got to Dawson, he said; but no one knew him,
hadn't a cent, and I was the only one he'd spoken two words with. So he
talked it over with the lieutenant-governor, and made arrangements in
case he could get the money from me--loan, you know. Said he'd pay back
in the year, and, if I wanted, would put me onto something rich.
Never'd seen it, but he knew it was rich.

'And talk! why, when he got me outside he was ready to weep. Begged and
pleaded; got down in the snow to me till I hauled him out of it.
Palavered around like a crazy man.

'Swore he's worked to this very end for years and years, and couldn't
bear to be disappointed now. Asked him what end, but he wouldn't say.

'Said they might keep him on the other half of the trail and he
wouldn't get to Dawson in two years, and then it would be too late.
Never saw a man take on so in my life. And when I said I'd let him have
it, had to yank him out of the snow again. Told him to consider it in
the light of a grubstake. Think he'd have it? No sir! Swore he'd give
me all he found, make me rich beyond the dreams of avarice, and all
such stuff. Now a man who puts his life and time against a grubstake
ordinarily finds it hard enough to turn over half of what he finds.
Something behind all this, Prince; just you make a note of it. We'll
hear of him if he stays in the country--' 'And if he doesn't?' 'Then my
good nature gets a shock, and I'm sixty some odd ounces out.' The cold
weather had come on with the long nights, and the sun had begun to play
his ancient game of peekaboo along the southern snow line ere aught was
heard of Malemute Kid's grubstake. And then, one bleak morning in early
January, a heavily laden dog train pulled into his cabin below Stuart
River. He of the Otter Skins was there, and with him walked a man such
as the gods have almost forgotten how to fashion. Men never talked of
luck and pluck and five-hundred-dollar dirt without bringing in the
name of Axel Gunderson; nor could tales of nerve or strength or daring
pass up and down the campfire without the summoning of his presence.
And when the conversation flagged, it blazed anew at mention of the
woman who shared his fortunes.

As has been noted, in the making of Axel Gunderson the gods had
remembered their old-time cunning and cast him after the manner of men
who were born when the world was young. Full seven feet he towered in
his picturesque costume which marked a king of Eldorado. His chest,
neck, and limbs were those of a giant. To bear his three hundred pounds
of bone and muscle, his snowshoes were greater by a generous yard than
those of other men. Rough-hewn, with rugged brow and massive jaw and
unflinching eyes of palest blue, his face told the tale of one who knew
but the law of might. Of the yellow of ripe corn silk, his
frost-incrusted hair swept like day across the night and fell far down
his coat of bearskin.

A vague tradition of the sea seemed to cling about him as he swung down
the narrow trail in advance of the dogs; and he brought the butt of his
dog whip against Malemute Kid's door as a Norse sea rover, on southern
foray, might thunder for admittance at the castle gate.

Prince bared his womanly arms and kneaded sour-dough bread, casting, as
he did so, many a glance at the three guests--three guests the like of
which might never come under a man's roof in a lifetime. The Strange
One, whom Malemute Kid had surnamed Ulysses, still fascinated him; but
his interest chiefly gravitated between Axel Gunderson and Axel
Gunderson's wife. She felt the day's journey, for she had softened in
comfortable cabins during the many days since her husband mastered the
wealth of frozen pay streaks, and she was tired. She rested against his
great breast like a slender flower against a wall, replying lazily to
Malemute Kid's good-natured banter, and stirring Prince's blood
strangely with an occasional sweep of her deep, dark eyes. For Prince
was a man, and healthy, and had seen few women in many months. And she
was older than he, and an Indian besides. But she was different from
all native wives he had met: she had traveled--had been in his country
among others, he gathered from the conversation; and she knew most of
the things the women of his own race knew, and much more that it was
not in the nature of things for them to know. She could make a meal of
sun-dried fish or a bed in the snow; yet she teased them with
tantalizing details of many-course dinners, and caused strange internal
dissensions to arise at the mention of various quondam dishes which
they had well-nigh forgotten. She knew the ways of the moose, the bear,
and the little blue fox, and of the wild amphibians of the Northern
seas; she was skilled in the lore of the woods, and the streams, and
the tale writ by man and bird and beast upon the delicate snow crust
was to her an open book; yet Prince caught the appreciative twinkle in
her eye as she read the Rules of the Camp. These rules had been
fathered by the Unquenchable Bettles at a time when his blood ran high,
and were remarkable for the terse simplicity of their humor.

Prince always turned them to the wall before the arrival of ladies; but
who could suspect that this native wife--Well, it was too late now.

This, then, was the wife of Axel Gunderson, a woman whose name and fame
had traveled with her husband's, hand in hand, through all the
Northland. At table, Malemute Kid baited her with the assurance of an
old friend, and Prince shook off the shyness of first acquaintance and
joined in. But she held her own in the unequal contest, while her
husband, slower in wit, ventured naught but applause. And he was very
proud of her; his every look and action revealed the magnitude of the
place she occupied in his life. He of the Otter Skins ate in silence,
forgotten in the merry battle; and long ere the others were done he
pushed back from the table and went out among the dogs. Yet all too
soon his fellow travelers drew on their mittens and parkas and followed
him.

There had been no snow for many days, and the sleds slipped along the
hardpacked Yukon trail as easily as if it had been glare ice. Ulysses
led the first sled; with the second came Prince and Axel Gunderson's
wife; while Malemute Kid and the yellow-haired giant brought up the
third.

'It's only a hunch, Kid,' he said, 'but I think it's straight. He's
never been there, but he tells a good story, and shows a map I heard of
when I was in the Kootenay country years ago. I'd like to have you go
along; but he's a strange one, and swore point-blank to throw it up if
anyone was brought in. But when I come back you'll get first tip, and
I'll stake you next to me, and give you a half share in the town site
besides.' 'No! no!' he cried, as the other strove to interrupt. 'I'm
running this, and before I'm done it'll need two heads.

'If it's all right, why, it'll be a second Cripple Creek, man; do you
hear?--a second Cripple Creek! It's quartz, you know, not placer; and
if we work it right we'll corral the whole thing--millions upon
millions. I've heard of the place before, and so have you. We'll build
a town--thousands of workmen--good waterways--steamship lines--big
carrying trade--light-draught steamers for head reaches--survey a
railroad, perhaps--sawmills--electric-light plant--do our own
banking--commercial company--syndicate--Say! Just you hold your hush
till I get back!' The sleds came to a halt where the trail crossed the
mouth of Stuart River. An unbroken sea of frost, its wide expanse
stretched away into the unknown east.

The snowshoes were withdrawn from the lashings of the sleds. Axel
Gunderson shook hands and stepped to the fore, his great webbed shoes
sinking a fair half yard into the feathery surface and packing the snow
so the dogs should not wallow. His wife fell in behind the last sled,
betraying long practice in the art of handling the awkward footgear.
The stillness was broken with cheery farewells; the dogs whined; and He
of the Otter Skins talked with his whip to a recalcitrant wheeler.

An hour later the train had taken on the likeness of a black pencil
crawling in a long, straight line across a mighty sheet of foolscap.


II

One night, many weeks later, Malemute Kid and Prince fell to solving
chess problems from the torn page of an ancient magazine. The Kid had
just returned from his Bonanza properties and was resting up
preparatory to a long moose hunt.

Prince, too, had been on creek and trail nearly all winter, and had
grown hungry for a blissful week of cabin life.

'Interpose the black knight, and force the king. No, that won't do.
See, the next move-'

'Why advance the pawn two squares? Bound to take it in transit, and
with the bishop out of the way-' 'But hold on! That leaves a hole,
and-' 'No; it's protected. Go ahead! You'll see it works.' It was very
interesting. Somebody knocked at the door a second time before Malemute
Kid said, 'Come in.' The door swung open. Something staggered in.

Prince caught one square look and sprang to his feet. The horror in his
eyes caused Malemute Kid to whirl about; and he, too, was startled,
though he had seen bad things before. The thing tottered blindly toward
them. Prince edged away till he reached the nail from which hung his
Smith & Wesson.

'My God! what is it?' he whispered to Malemute Kid.

'Don't know. Looks like a case of freezing and no grub,' replied the
Kid, sliding away in the opposite direction. 'Watch out! It may be
mad,' he warned, coming back from closing the door.

The thing advanced to the table. The bright flame of the slush lamp
caught its eye. It was amused, and gave voice to eldritch cackles which
betokened mirth.

Then, suddenly, he--for it was a man--swayed back, with a hitch to his
skin trousers, and began to sing a chantey, such as men lift when they
swing around the capstan circle and the sea snorts in their ears:
Yan-kee ship come down de ri-ib-er, Pull! my bully boys! Pull! D'yeh
want--to know de captain ru-uns her? Pull! my bully boys! Pull!
Jon-a-than Jones ob South Caho-li-in-a, Pull! my bully. He broke off
abruptly, tottered with a wolfish snarl to the meat shelf, and before
they could intercept was tearing with his teeth at a chunk of raw
bacon. The struggle was fierce between him and Malemute Kid; but his
mad strength left him as suddenly as it had come, and he weakly
surrendered the spoil. Between them they got him upon a stool, where he
sprawled with half his body across the table.

A small dose of whiskey strengthened him, so that he could dip a spoon
into the sugar caddy which Malemute Kid placed before him. After his
appetite had been somewhat cloyed, Prince, shuddering as he did so,
passed him a mug of weak beef tea.

The creature's eyes were alight with a somber frenzy, which blazed and
waned with every mouthful. There was very little skin to the face. The
face, for that matter, sunken and emaciated, bore little likeness to
human countenance.

Frost after frost had bitten deeply, each depositing its stratum of
scab upon the half-healed scar that went before. This dry, hard surface
was of a bloody-black color, serrated by grievous cracks wherein the
raw red flesh peeped forth. His skin garments were dirty and in
tatters, and the fur of one side was singed and burned away, showing
where he had lain upon his fire.

Malemute Kid pointed to where the sun-tanned hide had been cut away,
strip by strip--the grim signature of famine.

'Who--are--you?' slowly and distinctly enunciated the Kid.

The man paid no heed.

'Where do you come from?' 'Yan-kee ship come down de ri-ib-er,' was the
quavering response.

'Don't doubt the beggar came down the river,' the Kid said, shaking him
in an endeavor to start a more lucid flow of talk.

But the man shrieked at the contact, clapping a hand to his side in
evident pain. He rose slowly to his feet, half leaning on the table.

'She laughed at me--so--with the hate in her eye; and
she--would--not--come.' His voice died away, and he was sinking back
when Malemute Kid gripped him by the wrist and shouted, 'Who? Who would
not come?' 'She, Unga. She laughed, and struck at me, so, and so. And
then-' 'Yes?'

'And then--' 'And then what?' 'And then he lay very still in the snow a
long time. He is-still in--the--snow.' The two men looked at each other
helplessly.

'Who is in the snow?' 'She, Unga. She looked at me with the hate in her
eye, and then--'

'Yes, yes.' 'And then she took the knife, so; and once, twice--she was
weak. I traveled very slow. And there is much gold in that place, very
much gold.' 'Where is Unga?' For all Malemute Kid knew, she might be
dying a mile away. He shook the man savagely, repeating again and
again, 'Where is Unga? Who is Unga?' 'She--is--in--the--snow.' 'Go on!'
The Kid was pressing his wrist cruelly.

'So--I--would--be--in--the snow--but--I--had--a--debt--to--pay.
It--was--heavy--I--had--a-debt--to--pay--a--debt--to--pay I--had-' The
faltering monosyllables ceased as he fumbled in his pouch and drew
forth a buckskin sack. 'A--debt--to--pay--five--pounds--of--gold-grub--
stake--Mal--e--mute--Kid--I--y--' The exhausted head dropped upon the
table; nor could Malemute Kid rouse it again.

'It's Ulysses,' he said quietly, tossing the bag of dust on the table.
'Guess it's all day with Axel Gunderson and the woman. Come on, let's
get him between the blankets. He's Indian; he'll pull through and tell
a tale besides.' As they cut his garments from him, near his right
breast could be seen two unhealed, hard-lipped knife thrusts.


III

'I will talk of the things which were in my own way; but you will
understand. I will begin at the beginning, and tell of myself and the
woman, and, after that, of the man.' He of the Otter Skins drew over to
the stove as do men who have been deprived of fire and are afraid the
Promethean gift may vanish at any moment. Malemute Kid picked up the
slush lamp and placed it so its light might fall upon the face of the
narrator. Prince slid his body over the edge of the bunk and joined
them.

'I am Naass, a chief, and the son of a chief, born between a sunset and
a rising, on the dark seas, in my father's oomiak. All of a night the
men toiled at the paddles, and the women cast out the waves which threw
in upon us, and we fought with the storm. The salt spray froze upon my
mother's breast till her breath passed with the passing of the tide.
But I--I raised my voice with the wind and the storm, and lived.

'We dwelt in Akatan--' 'Where?' asked Malemute Kid.

'Akatan, which is in the Aleutians; Akatan, beyond Chignik, beyond
Kardalak, beyond Unimak. As I say, we dwelt in Akatan, which lies in
the midst of the sea on the edge of the world. We farmed the salt seas
for the fish, the seal, and the otter; and our homes shouldered about
one another on the rocky strip between the rim of the forest and the
yellow beach where our kayaks lay. We were not many, and the world was
very small. There were strange lands to the east--islands like Akatan;
so we thought all the world was islands and did not mind.

'I was different from my people. In the sands of the beach were the
crooked timbers and wave-warped planks of a boat such as my people
never built; and I remember on the point of the island which overlooked
the ocean three ways there stood a pine tree which never grew there,
smooth and straight and tall. It is said the two men came to that spot,
turn about, through many days, and watched with the passing of the
light. These two men came from out of the sea in the boat which lay in
pieces on the beach. And they were white like you, and weak as the
little children when the seal have gone away and the hunters come home
empty. I know of these things from the old men and the old women, who
got them from their fathers and mothers before them. These strange
white men did not take kindly to our ways at first, but they grew
strong, what of the fish and the oil, and fierce. And they built them
each his own house, and took the pick of our women, and in time
children came. Thus he was born who was to become the father of my
father's father.

'As I said, I was different from my people, for I carried the strong,
strange blood of this white man who came out of the sea. It is said we
had other laws in the days before these men; but they were fierce and
quarrelsome, and fought with our men till there were no more left who
dared to fight. Then they made themselves chiefs, and took away our old
laws, and gave us new ones, insomuch that the man was the son of his
father, and not his mother, as our way had been. They also ruled that
the son, first-born, should have all things which were his father's
before him, and that the brothers and sisters should shift for
themselves. And they gave us other laws. They showed us new ways in the
catching of fish and the killing of bear which were thick in the woods;
and they taught us to lay by bigger stores for the time of famine. And
these things were good.

'But when they had become chiefs, and there were no more men to face
their anger, they fought, these strange white men, each with the other.
And the one whose blood I carry drove his seal spear the length of an
arm through the other's body. Their children took up the fight, and
their children's children; and there was great hatred between them, and
black doings, even to my time, so that in each family but one lived to
pass down the blood of them that went before. Of my blood I was alone;
of the other man's there was but a girl. Unga, who lived with her
mother. Her father and my father did not come back from the fishing one
night; but afterward they washed up to the beach on the big tides, and
they held very close to each other.

'The people wondered, because of the hatred between the houses, and the
old men shook their heads and said the fight would go on when children
were born to her and children to me. They told me this as a boy, till I
came to believe, and to look upon Unga as a foe, who was to be the
mother of children which were to fight with mine. I thought of these
things day by day, and when I grew to a stripling I came to ask why
this should be so.

'And they answered, "We do not know, but that in such way your fathers
did." And I marveled that those which were to come should fight the
battles of those that were gone, and in it I could see no right. But
the people said it must be, and I was only a stripling.

'And they said I must hurry, that my blood might be the older and grow
strong before hers. This was easy, for I was head man, and the people
looked up to me because of the deeds and the laws of my fathers, and
the wealth which was mine. Any maiden would come to me, but I found
none to my liking. And the old men and the mothers of maidens told me
to hurry, for even then were the hunters bidding high to the mother of
Unga; and should her children grow strong before mine, mine would
surely die.

'Nor did I find a maiden till one night coming back from the fishing.
The sunlight was lying, so, low and full in the eyes, the wind free,
and the kayacks racing with the white seas. Of a sudden the kayak of
Unga came driving past me, and she looked upon me, so, with her black
hair flying like a cloud of night and the spray wet on her cheek. As I
say, the sunlight was full in the eyes, and I was a stripling; but
somehow it was all clear, and I knew it to be the call of kind to kind.

'As she whipped ahead she looked back within the space of two
strokes--looked as only the woman Unga could look--and again I knew it
as the call of kind. The people shouted as we ripped past the lazy
oomiaks and left them far behind. But she was quick at the paddle, and
my heart was like the belly of a sail, and I did not gain. The wind
freshened, the sea whitened, and, leaping like the seals on the
windward breech, we roared down the golden pathway of the sun.' Naass
was crouched half out of his stool, in the attitude of one driving a
paddle, as he ran the race anew. Somewhere across the stove he beheld
the tossing kayak and the flying hair of Unga. The voice of the wind
was in his ears, and its salt beat fresh upon his nostrils.

'But she made the shore, and ran up the sand, laughing, to the house of
her mother. And a great thought came to me that night--a thought worthy
of him that was chief over all the people of Akatan. So, when the moon
was up, I went down to the house of her mother, and looked upon the
goods of Yash-Noosh, which were piled by the door--the goods of
Yash-Noosh, a strong hunter who had it in mind to be the father of the
children of Unga. Other young men had piled their goods there and taken
them away again; and each young man had made a pile greater than the
one before.

'And I laughed to the moon and the stars, and went to my own house
where my wealth was stored. And many trips I made, till my pile was
greater by the fingers of one hand than the pile of Yash-Noosh. There
were fish, dried in the sun and smoked; and forty hides of the hair
seal, and half as many of the fur, and each hide was tied at the mouth
and big bellied with oil; and ten skins of bear which I killed in the
woods when they came out in the spring. And there were beads and
blankets and scarlet cloths, such as I got in trade from the people who
lived to the east, and who got them in trade from the people who lived
still beyond in the east.

'And I looked upon the pile of Yash-Noosh and laughed, for I was head
man in Akatan, and my wealth was greater than the wealth of all my
young men, and my fathers had done deeds, and given laws, and put their
names for all time in the mouths of the people.

'So, when the morning came, I went down to the beach, casting out of
the corner of my eye at the house of the mother of Unga. My offer yet
stood untouched.

'And the women smiled, and said sly things one to the other. I
wondered, for never had such a price been offered; and that night I
added more to the pile, and put beside it a kayak of well-tanned skins
which never yet had swam in the sea. But in the day it was yet there,
open to the laughter of all men. The mother of Unga was crafty, and I
grew angry at the shame in which I stood before my people. So that
night I added till it became a great pile, and I hauled up my oomiak,
which was of the value of twenty kayaks. And in the morning there was
no pile.

'Then made I preparation for the wedding, and the people that lived
even to the east came for the food of the feast and the potlatch token.
Unga was older than I by the age of four suns in the way we reckoned
the years. I was only a stripling; but then I was a chief, and the son
of a chief, and it did not matter.

'But a ship shoved her sails above the floor of the ocean, and grew
larger with the breath of the wind. From her scuppers she ran clear
water, and the men were in haste and worked hard at the pumps. On the
bow stood a mighty man, watching the depth of the water and giving
commands with a voice of thunder. His eyes were of the pale blue of the
deep waters, and his head was maned like that of a sea lion. And his
hair was yellow, like the straw of a southern harvest or the manila
rope yarns which sailormen plait.

'Of late years we had seen ships from afar, but this was the first to
come to the beach of Akatan. The feast was broken, and the women and
children fled to the houses, while we men strung our bows and waited
with spears in hand. But when the ship's forefoot smelled the beach the
strange men took no notice of us, being busy with their own work. With
the falling of the tide they careened the schooner and patched a great
hole in her bottom. So the women crept back, and the feast went on.

'When the tide rose, the sea wanderers kedged the schooner to deep
water and then came among us. They bore presents and were friendly; so
I made room for them, and out of the largeness of my heart gave them
tokens such as I gave all the guests, for it was my wedding day, and I
was head man in Akatan. And he with the mane of the sea lion was there,
so tall and strong that one looked to see the earth shake with the fall
of his feet. He looked much and straight at Unga, with his arms folded,
so, and stayed till the sun went away and the stars came out. Then he
went down to his ship. After that I took Unga by the hand and led her
to my own house. And there was singing and great laughter, and the
women said sly things, after the manner of women at such times. But we
did not care. Then the people left us alone and went home.

'The last noise had not died away when the chief of the sea wanderers
came in by the door. And he had with him black bottles, from which we
drank and made merry. You see, I was only a stripling, and had lived
all my days on the edge of the world. So my blood became as fire, and
my heart as light as the froth that flies from the surf to the cliff.
Unga sat silent among the skins in the corner, her eyes wide, for she
seemed to fear. And he with the mane of the sea lion looked upon her
straight and long. Then his men came in with bundles of goods, and he
piled before me wealth such as was not in all Akatan. There were guns,
both large and small, and powder and shot and shell, and bright axes
and knives of steel, and cunning tools, and strange things the like of
which I had never seen. When he showed me by sign that it was all mine,
I thought him a great man to be so free; but he showed me also that
Unga was to go away with him in his ship.

'Do you understand?--that Unga was to go away with him in his ship. The
blood of my fathers flamed hot on the sudden, and I made to drive him
through with my spear. But the spirit of the bottles had stolen the
life from my arm, and he took me by the neck, so, and knocked my head
against the wall of the house. And I was made weak like a newborn
child, and my legs would no more stand under me.

'Unga screamed, and she laid hold of the things of the house with her
hands, till they fell all about us as he dragged her to the door. Then
he took her in his great arms, and when she tore at his yellow hair
laughed with a sound like that of the big bull seal in the rut.

'I crawled to the beach and called upon my people, but they were
afraid. Only Yash-Noosh was a man, and they struck him on the head with
an oar, till he lay with his face in the sand and did not move. And
they raised the sails to the sound of their songs, and the ship went
away on the wind.

'The people said it was good, for there would be no more war of the
bloods in Akatan; but I said never a word, waiting till the time of the
full moon, when I put fish and oil in my kayak and went away to the
east. I saw many islands and many people, and I, who had lived on the
edge, saw that the world was very large. I talked by signs; but they
had not seen a schooner nor a man with the mane of a sea lion, and they
pointed always to the east. And I slept in queer places, and ate odd
things, and met strange faces. Many laughed, for they thought me light
of head; but sometimes old men turned my face to the light and blessed
me, and the eyes of the young women grew soft as they asked me of the
strange ship, and Unga, and the men of the sea.

'And in this manner, through rough seas and great storms, I came to
Unalaska. There were two schooners there, but neither was the one I
sought. So I passed on to the east, with the world growing ever larger,
and in the island of Unamok there was no word of the ship, nor in
Kadiak, nor in Atognak. And so I came one day to a rocky land, where
men dug great holes in the mountain. And there was a schooner, but not
my schooner, and men loaded upon it the rocks which they dug. This I
thought childish, for all the world was made of rocks; but they gave me
food and set me to work. When the schooner was deep in the water, the
captain gave me money and told me to go; but I asked which way he went,
and he pointed south. I made signs that I would go with him, and he
laughed at first, but then, being short of men, took me to help work
the ship. So I came to talk after their manner, and to heave on ropes,
and to reef the stiff sails in sudden squalls, and to take my turn at
the wheel. But it was not strange, for the blood of my fathers was the
blood of the men of the sea.

'I had thought it an easy task to find him I sought, once I got among
his own people; and when we raised the land one day, and passed between
a gateway of the sea to a port, I looked for perhaps as many schooners
as there were fingers to my hands. But the ships lay against the
wharves for miles, packed like so many little fish; and when I went
among them to ask for a man with the mane of a sea lion, they laughed,
and answered me in the tongues of many peoples. And I found that they
hailed from the uttermost parts of the earth.

'And I went into the city to look upon the face of every man. But they
were like the cod when they run thick on the banks, and I could not
count them. And the noise smote upon me till I could not hear, and my
head was dizzy with much movement. So I went on and on, through the
lands which sang in the warm sunshine; where the harvests lay rich on
the plains; and where great cities were fat with men that lived like
women, with false words in their mouths and their hearts black with the
lust of gold. And all the while my people of Akatan hunted and fished,
and were happy in the thought that the world was small.

'But the look in the eyes of Unga coming home from the fishing was with
me always, and I knew I would find her when the time was met. She
walked down quiet lanes in the dusk of the evening, or led me chases
across the thick fields wet with the morning dew, and there was a
promise in her eyes such as only the woman Unga could give.

'So I wandered through a thousand cities. Some were gentle and gave me
food, and others laughed, and still others cursed; but I kept my tongue
between my teeth, and went strange ways and saw strange sights.
Sometimes I, who was a chief and the son of a chief, toiled for
men--men rough of speech and hard as iron, who wrung gold from the
sweat and sorrow of their fellow men. Yet no word did I get of my quest
till I came back to the sea like a homing seal to the rookeries.

'But this was at another port, in another country which lay to the
north. And there I heard dim tales of the yellow-haired sea wanderer,
and I learned that he was a hunter of seals, and that even then he was
abroad on the ocean.

'So I shipped on a seal schooner with the lazy Siwashes, and followed
his trackless trail to the north where the hunt was then warm. And we
were away weary months, and spoke many of the fleet, and heard much of
the wild doings of him I sought; but never once did we raise him above
the sea. We went north, even to the Pribilofs, and killed the seals in
herds on the beach, and brought their warm bodies aboard till our
scuppers ran grease and blood and no man could stand upon the deck.
Then were we chased by a ship of slow steam, which fired upon us with
great guns. But we put sail till the sea was over our decks and washed
them clean, and lost ourselves in a fog.

'It is said, at this time, while we fled with fear at our hearts, that
the yellow-haired sea wanderer put in to the Pribilofs, right to the
factory, and while the part of his men held the servants of the
company, the rest loaded ten thousand green skins from the salt houses.
I say it is said, but I believe; for in the voyages I made on the coast
with never a meeting the northern seas rang with his wildness and
daring, till the three nations which have lands there sought him with
their ships.

'And I heard of Unga, for the captains sang loud in her praise, and she
was always with him. She had learned the ways of his people, they said,
and was happy. But I knew better--knew that her heart harked back to
her own people by the yellow beach of Akatan.

'So, after a long time, I went back to the port which is by a gateway
of the sea, and there I learned that he had gone across the girth of
the great ocean to hunt for the seal to the east of the warm land which
runs south from the Russian seas.

'And I, who was become a sailorman, shipped with men of his own race,
and went after him in the hunt of the seal. And there were few ships
off that new land; but we hung on the flank of the seal pack and
harried it north through all the spring of the year. And when the cows
were heavy with pup and crossed the Russian line, our men grumbled and
were afraid. For there was much fog, and every day men were lost in the
boats. They would not work, so the captain turned the ship back toward
the way it came. But I knew the yellow-haired sea wanderer was
unafraid, and would hang by the pack, even to the Russian Isles, where
few men go. So I took a boat, in the black of night, when the lookout
dozed on the fo'c'slehead, and went alone to the warm, long land. And I
journeyed south to meet the men by Yeddo Bay, who are wild and
unafraid. And the Yoshiwara girls were small, and bright like steel,
and good to look upon; but I could not stop, for I knew that Unga
rolled on the tossing floor by the rookeries of the north.

'The men by Yeddo Bay had met from the ends of the earth, and had
neither gods nor homes, sailing under the flag of the Japanese. And
with them I went to the rich beaches of Copper Island, where our salt
piles became high with skins.

'And in that silent sea we saw no man till we were ready to come away.
Then one day the fog lifted on the edge of a heavy wind, and there
jammed down upon us a schooner, with close in her wake the cloudy
funnels of a Russian man-of-war. We fled away on the beam of the wind,
with the schooner jamming still closer and plunging ahead three feet to
our two. And upon her poop was the man with the mane of the sea lion,
pressing the rails under with the canvas and laughing in his strength
of life. And Unga was there--I knew her on the moment--but he sent her
below when the cannons began to talk across the sea.

As I say, with three feet to our two, till we saw the rudder lift green
at every jump--and I swinging on to the wheel and cursing, with my back
to the Russian shot. For we knew he had it in mind to run before us,
that he might get away while we were caught. And they knocked our masts
out of us till we dragged into the wind like a wounded gull; but he
went on over the edge of the sky line--he and Unga.

'What could we? The fresh hides spoke for themselves. So they took us
to a Russian port, and after that to a lone country, where they set us
to work in the mines to dig salt. And some died, and--and some did not
die.' Naass swept the blanket from his shoulders, disclosing the
gnarled and twisted flesh, marked with the unmistakable striations of
the knout. Prince hastily covered him, for it was not nice to look upon.

'We were there a weary time and sometimes men got away to the south,
but they always came back. So, when we who hailed from Yeddo Bay rose
in the night and took the guns from the guards, we went to the north.
And the land was very large, with plains, soggy with water, and great
forests. And the cold came, with much snow on the ground, and no man
knew the way. Weary months we journeyed through the endless forest--I
do not remember, now, for there was little food and often we lay down
to die. But at last we came to the cold sea, and but three were left to
look upon it. One had shipped from Yeddo as captain, and he knew in his
head the lay of the great lands, and of the place where men may cross
from one to the other on the ice. And he led us--I do not know, it was
so long--till there were but two. When we came to that place we found
five of the strange people which live in that country, and they had
dogs and skins, and we were very poor. We fought in the snow till they
died, and the captain died, and the dogs and skins were mine. Then I
crossed on the ice, which was broken, and once I drifted till a gale
from the west put me upon the shore. And after that, Golovin Bay,
Pastilik, and the priest. Then south, south, to the warm sunlands where
first I wandered.

'But the sea was no longer fruitful, and those who went upon it after
the seal went to little profit and great risk. The fleets scattered,
and the captains and the men had no word of those I sought. So I turned
away from the ocean which never rests, and went among the lands, where
the trees, the houses, and the mountains sit always in one place and do
not move. I journeyed far, and came to learn many things, even to the
way of reading and writing from books. It was well I should do this,
for it came upon me that Unga must know these things, and that someday,
when the time was met--we--you understand, when the time was met.

'So I drifted, like those little fish which raise a sail to the wind
but cannot steer. But my eyes and my ears were open always, and I went
among men who traveled much, for I knew they had but to see those I
sought to remember. At last there came a man, fresh from the mountains,
with pieces of rock in which the free gold stood to the size of peas,
and he had heard, he had met, he knew them. They were rich, he said,
and lived in the place where they drew the gold from the ground.

'It was in a wild country, and very far away; but in time I came to the
camp, hidden between the mountains, where men worked night and day, out
of the sight of the sun. Yet the time was not come. I listened to the
talk of the people. He had gone away--they had gone away--to England,
it was said, in the matter of bringing men with much money together to
form companies. I saw the house they had lived in; more like a palace,
such as one sees in the old countries. In the nighttime I crept in
through a window that I might see in what manner he treated her. I went
from room to room, and in such way thought kings and queens must live,
it was all so very good. And they all said he treated her like a queen,
and many marveled as to what breed of woman she was for there was other
blood in her veins, and she was different from the women of Akatan, and
no one knew her for what she was. Aye, she was a queen; but I was a
chief, and the son of a chief, and I had paid for her an untold price
of skin and boat and bead.

'But why so many words? I was a sailorman, and knew the way of the
ships on the seas. I followed to England, and then to other countries.
Sometimes I heard of them by word of mouth, sometimes I read of them in
the papers; yet never once could I come by them, for they had much
money, and traveled fast, while I was a poor man. Then came trouble
upon them, and their wealth slipped away one day like a curl of smoke.
The papers were full of it at the time; but after that nothing was
said, and I knew they had gone back where more gold could be got from
the ground.

'They had dropped out of the world, being now poor, and so I wandered
from camp to camp, even north to the Kootenay country, where I picked
up the cold scent. They had come and gone, some said this way, and some
that, and still others that they had gone to the country of the Yukon.
And I went this way, and I went that, ever journeying from place to
place, till it seemed I must grow weary of the world which was so
large. But in the Kootenay I traveled a bad trail, and a long trail,
with a breed of the Northwest, who saw fit to die when the famine
pinched. He had been to the Yukon by an unknown way over the mountains,
and when he knew his time was near gave me the map and the secret of a
place where he swore by his gods there was much gold.

'After that all the world began to flock into the north. I was a poor
man; I sold myself to be a driver of dogs. The rest you know. I met him
and her in Dawson.

'She did not know me, for I was only a stripling, and her life had been
large, so she had no time to remember the one who had paid for her an
untold price.

'So? You bought me from my term of service. I went back to bring things
about in my own way, for I had waited long, and now that I had my hand
upon him was in no hurry.

'As I say, I had it in mind to do my own way, for I read back in my
life, through all I had seen and suffered, and remembered the cold and
hunger of the endless forest by the Russian seas. As you know, I led
him into the east--him and Unga--into the east where many have gone and
few returned. I led them to the spot where the bones and the curses of
men lie with the gold which they may not have.

'The way was long and the trail unpacked. Our dogs were many and ate
much; nor could our sleds carry till the break of spring. We must come
back before the river ran free. So here and there we cached grub, that
our sleds might be lightened and there be no chance of famine on the
back trip. At the McQuestion there were three men, and near them we
built a cache, as also did we at the Mayo, where was a hunting camp of
a dozen Pellys which had crossed the divide from the south.

'After that, as we went on into the east, we saw no men; only the
sleeping river, the moveless forest, and the White Silence of the
North. As I say, the way was long and the trail unpacked. Sometimes, in
a day's toil, we made no more than eight miles, or ten, and at night we
slept like dead men. And never once did they dream that I was Naass,
head man of Akatan, the righter of wrongs.

'We now made smaller caches, and in the nighttime it was a small matter
to go back on the trail we had broken and change them in such way that
one might deem the wolverines the thieves. Again there be places where
there is a fall to the river, and the water is unruly, and the ice
makes above and is eaten away beneath.

'In such a spot the sled I drove broke through, and the dogs; and to
him and Unga it was ill luck, but no more. And there was much grub on
that sled, and the dogs the strongest.

'But he laughed, for he was strong of life, and gave the dogs that were
left little grub till we cut them from the harnesses one by one and fed
them to their mates. We would go home light, he said, traveling and
eating from cache to cache, with neither dogs nor sleds; which was
true, for our grub was very short, and the last dog died in the traces
the night we came to the gold and the bones and the curses of men.

'To reach that place--and the map spoke true--in the heart of the great
mountains, we cut ice steps against the wall of a divide. One looked
for a valley beyond, but there was no valley; the snow spread away,
level as the great harvest plains, and here and there about us mighty
mountains shoved their white heads among the stars. And midway on that
strange plain which should have been a valley the earth and the snow
fell away, straight down toward the heart of the world.

'Had we not been sailormen our heads would have swung round with the
sight, but we stood on the dizzy edge that we might see a way to get
down. And on one side, and one side only, the wall had fallen away till
it was like the slope of the decks in a topsail breeze. I do not know
why this thing should be so, but it was so. "It is the mouth of hell,"
he said; "let us go down." And we went down.

'And on the bottom there was a cabin, built by some man, of logs which
he had cast down from above. It was a very old cabin, for men had died
there alone at different times, and on pieces of birch bark which were
there we read their last words and their curses.

'One had died of scurvy; another's partner had robbed him of his last
grub and powder and stolen away; a third had been mauled by a baldface
grizzly; a fourth had hunted for game and starved--and so it went, and
they had been loath to leave the gold, and had died by the side of it
in one way or another. And the worthless gold they had gathered
yellowed the floor of the cabin like in a dream.

'But his soul was steady, and his head clear, this man I had led thus
far. "We have nothing to eat," he said, "and we will only look upon
this gold, and see whence it comes and how much there be. Then we will
go away quick, before it gets into our eyes and steals away our
judgment. And in this way we may return in the end, with more grub, and
possess it all." So we looked upon the great vein, which cut the wall
of the pit as a true vein should, and we measured it, and traced it
from above and below, and drove the stakes of the claims and blazed the
trees in token of our rights. Then, our knees shaking with lack of
food, and a sickness in our bellies, and our hearts chugging close to
our mouths, we climbed the mighty wall for the last time and turned our
faces to the back trip.

'The last stretch we dragged Unga between us, and we fell often, but in
the end we made the cache. And lo, there was no grub. It was well done,
for he thought it the wolverines, and damned them and his gods in one
breath. But Unga was brave, and smiled, and put her hand in his, till I
turned away that I might hold myself. "We will rest by the fire," she
said, "till morning, and we will gather strength from our moccasins."
So we cut the tops of our moccasins in strips, and boiled them half of
the night, that we might chew them and swallow them. And in the morning
we talked of our chance. The next cache was five days' journey; we
could not make it. We must find game.

'"We will go forth and hunt," he said.

'"Yes," said I, "we will go forth and hunt." 'And he ruled that Unga
stay by the fire and save her strength. And we went forth, he in quest
of the moose and I to the cache I had changed. But I ate little, so
they might not see in me much strength. And in the night he fell many
times as he drew into camp. And I, too, made to suffer great weakness,
stumbling over my snowshoes as though each step might be my last. And
we gathered strength from our moccasins.

'He was a great man. His soul lifted his body to the last; nor did he
cry aloud, save for the sake of Unga. On the second day I followed him,
that I might not miss the end. And he lay down to rest often. That
night he was near gone; but in the morning he swore weakly and went
forth again. He was like a drunken man, and I looked many times for him
to give up, but his was the strength of the strong, and his soul the
soul of a giant, for he lifted his body through all the weary day. And
he shot two ptarmigan, but would not eat them. He needed no fire; they
meant life; but his thought was for Unga, and he turned toward camp.

'He no longer walked, but crawled on hand and knee through the snow. I
came to him, and read death in his eyes. Even then it was not too late
to eat of the ptarmigan. He cast away his rifle and carried the birds
in his mouth like a dog. I walked by his side, upright. And he looked
at me during the moments he rested, and wondered that I was so strong.
I could see it, though he no longer spoke; and when his lips moved,
they moved without sound.

'As I say, he was a great man, and my heart spoke for softness; but I
read back in my life, and remembered the cold and hunger of the endless
forest by the Russian seas. Besides, Unga was mine, and I had paid for
her an untold price of skin and boat and bead.

'And in this manner we came through the white forest, with the silence
heavy upon us like a damp sea mist. And the ghosts of the past were in
the air and all about us; and I saw the yellow beach of Akatan, and the
kayaks racing home from the fishing, and the houses on the rim of the
forest. And the men who had made themselves chiefs were there, the
lawgivers whose blood I bore and whose blood I had wedded in Unga. Aye,
and Yash-Noosh walked with me, the wet sand in his hair, and his war
spear, broken as he fell upon it, still in his hand. And I knew the
time was meet, and saw in the eyes of Unga the promise.

'As I say, we came thus through the forest, till the smell of the camp
smoke was in our nostrils. And I bent above him, and tore the ptarmigan
from his teeth.

'He turned on his side and rested, the wonder mounting in his eyes, and
the hand which was under slipping slow toward the knife at his hip. But
I took it from him, smiling close in his face. Even then he did not
understand. So I made to drink from black bottles, and to build high
upon the snow a pile--of goods, and to live again the things which had
happened on the night of my marriage. I spoke no word, but he
understood. Yet was he unafraid. There was a sneer to his lips, and
cold anger, and he gathered new strength with the knowledge. It was not
far, but the snow was deep, and he dragged himself very slow.

'Once he lay so long I turned him over and gazed into his eyes. And
sometimes he looked forth, and sometimes death. And when I loosed him
he struggled on again. In this way we came to the fire. Unga was at his
side on the instant. His lips moved without sound; then he pointed at
me, that Unga might understand. And after that he lay in the snow, very
still, for a long while. Even now is he there in the snow.

'I said no word till I had cooked the ptarmigan. Then I spoke to her,
in her own tongue, which she had not heard in many years. She
straightened herself, so, and her eyes were wonder-wide, and she asked
who I was, and where I had learned that speech.

'"I am Naass," I said.

'"You?" she said. "You?" And she crept close that she might look upon
me.

'"Yes," I answered; "I am Naass, head man of Akatan, the last of the
blood, as you are the last of the blood." 'And she laughed. By all the
things I have seen and the deeds I have done may I never hear such a
laugh again. It put the chill to my soul, sitting there in the White
Silence, alone with death and this woman who laughed.

'"Come!" I said, for I thought she wandered. "Eat of the food and let
us be gone. It is a far fetch from here to Akatan." 'But she shoved her
face in his yellow mane, and laughed till it seemed the heavens must
fall about our ears. I had thought she would be overjoyed at the sight
of me, and eager to go back to the memory of old times, but this seemed
a strange form to take.

'"Come!" I cried, taking her strong by the hand. "The way is long and
dark. Let us hurry!" "Where?" she asked, sitting up, and ceasing from
her strange mirth.

'"To Akatan," I answered, intent on the light to grow on her face at
the thought. But it became like his, with a sneer to the lips, and cold
anger.

'"Yes," she said; "we will go, hand in hand, to Akatan, you and I. And
we will live in the dirty huts, and eat of the fish and oil, and bring
forth a spawn--a spawn to be proud of all the days of our life. We will
forget the world and be happy, very happy. It is good, most good. Come!
Let us hurry. Let us go back to Akatan." And she ran her hand through
his yellow hair, and smiled in a way which was not good. And there was
no promise in her eyes.

'I sat silent, and marveled at the strangeness of woman. I went back to
the night when he dragged her from me and she screamed and tore at his
hair--at his hair which now she played with and would not leave. Then I
remembered the price and the long years of waiting; and I gripped her
close, and dragged her away as he had done. And she held back, even as
on that night, and fought like a she-cat for its whelp. And when the
fire was between us and the man. I loosed her, and she sat and
listened. And I told her of all that lay between, of all that had
happened to me on strange seas, of all that I had done in strange
lands; of my weary quest, and the hungry years, and the promise which
had been mine from the first. Aye, I told all, even to what had passed
that day between the man and me, and in the days yet young. And as I
spoke I saw the promise grow in her eyes, full and large like the break
of dawn. And I read pity there, the tenderness of woman, the love, the
heart and the soul of Unga. And I was a stripling again, for the look
was the look of Unga as she ran up the beach, laughing, to the home of
her mother. The stern unrest was gone, and the hunger, and the weary
waiting.

'The time was met. I felt the call of her breast, and it seemed there I
must pillow my head and forget. She opened her arms to me, and I came
against her. Then, sudden, the hate flamed in her eye, her hand was at
my hip. And once, twice, she passed the knife.

'"Dog!" she sneered, as she flung me into the snow. "Swine!" And then
she laughed till the silence cracked, and went back to her dead.

'As I say, once she passed the knife, and twice; but she was weak with
hunger, and it was not meant that I should die. Yet was I minded to
stay in that place, and to close my eyes in the last long sleep with
those whose lives had crossed with mine and led my feet on unknown
trails. But there lay a debt upon me which would not let me rest.

'And the way was long, the cold bitter, and there was little grub. The
Pellys had found no moose, and had robbed my cache. And so had the
three white men, but they lay thin and dead in their cabins as I
passed. After that I do not remember, till I came here, and found food
and fire--much fire.' As he finished, he crouched closely, even
jealously, over the stove. For a long while the slush-lamp shadows
played tragedies upon the wall.

'But Unga!' cried Prince, the vision still strong upon him.

'Unga? She would not eat of the ptarmigan. She lay with her arms about
his neck, her face deep in his yellow hair. I drew the fire close, that
she might not feel the frost, but she crept to the other side. And I
built a fire there; yet it was little good, for she would not eat. And
in this manner they still lie up there in the snow.'

'And you?' asked Malemute Kid.

'I do not know; but Akatan is small, and I have little wish to go back
and live on the edge of the world. Yet is there small use in life. I
can go to Constantine, and he will put irons upon me, and one day they
will tie a piece of rope, so, and I will sleep good. Yet--no; I do not
know.' 'But, Kid,' protested Prince, 'this is murder!' 'Hush!'
commanded Malemute Kid. 'There be things greater than our wisdom,
beyond our justice. The right and the wrong of this we cannot say, and
it is not for us to judge.' Naass drew yet closer to the fire. There
was a great silence, and in each man's eyes many pictures came and went.



The End

========================================
