========================================

[Illustration: ROSE O' THE RIVER]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ROSE O' THE RIVER
BY
KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN

ILLUSTRATED BY
GEORGE WRIGHT

NEW YORK
GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

COPYRIGHT 1905 BY THE CENTURY COMPANY
COPYRIGHT 1905 BY KATE DOUGLAS RIGGS
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

_Published September 1905_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TABLE OF CONTENTS

The Pine And The Rose                                              1
Old Kennebec                                                      13
The Edgewood "Drive"                                              28
"Blasphemious Swearin'"                                           40
The Game Of Jackstraws                                            50
Hearts And Other Hearts                                           67
The Little House                                                  81
The Garden Of Eden                                                93
The Serpent                                                      102
The Turquoise Ring                                               114
Gold And Pinchbeck                                               135
A Country Chevalier                                              145
Housebreaking                                                    160
The Dream Room                                                   168

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Rose O' The River                                       Frontispiece
"She's Up!"                                                        6
"He's A Turrible Smart Driver"                                    20
He Had Certainly "Taken Chances"                                  32
In A Twinkling He Was In The Water                                64
"Rose, I'll Take You Safely"                                      76
Hiding Her Face As He Flung It Down The River-Bank               116
She Had Gone With Maude To Claude's Store                        128
"As Long As Stephen Waterman's Alive, Rose Wiley Can Have Him"   158
"Don't Speak, Stephen, Till You Hear What I Have To Say"         174

------------------------------------------------------------------------




THE PINE AND THE ROSE


It was not long after sunrise, and Stephen Waterman, fresh from his dip
in the river, had scrambled up the hillside from the hut in the
alder-bushes where he had made his morning toilet.

An early ablution of this sort was not the custom of the farmers along
the banks of the Saco, but the Waterman house was hardly a stone's throw
from the water, and there was a clear, deep swimming-hole in the Willow
Cove that would have tempted the busiest man, or the least cleanly, in
York County. Then, too, Stephen was a child of the river, born, reared,
schooled on its very brink, never happy unless he were on it, or in it,
or beside it, or at least within sight or sound of it.

The immensity of the sea had always silenced and overawed him, left him
cold in feeling. The river wooed him, caressed him, won his heart. It
was just big enough to love. It was full of charms and changes, of
varying moods and sudden surprises. Its voice stole in upon his ear with
a melody far sweeter and more subtle than the boom of the ocean. Yet it
was not without strength, and when it was swollen with the freshets of
the spring and brimming with the bounty of its sister streams, it could
dash and roar, boom and crash, with the best of them.

Stephen stood on the side porch, drinking in the glory of the sunrise,
with the Saco winding like a silver ribbon through the sweet loveliness
of the summer landscape.

And the river rolled on toward the sea, singing its morning song,
creating and nourishing beauty at every step of its onward path. Cradled
in the heart of a great mountain-range, it pursued its gleaming way,
here lying silent in glassy lakes, there rushing into tinkling little
falls, foaming great falls, and thundering cataracts. Scores of bridges
spanned its width, but no steamers flurried its crystal depths. Here and
there a rough little rowboat, tethered to a willow, rocked to and fro in
some quiet bend of the shore. Here the silver gleam of a rising perch,
chub, or trout caught the eye; there a pickerel lay rigid in the clear
water, a fish carved in stone: here eels coiled in the muddy bottom of
some pool; and there, under the deep shadows of the rocks, lay fat,
sleepy bass, old, and incredibly wise, quite untempted by, and wholly
superior to, the rural fisherman's worm.

The river lapped the shores of peaceful meadows; it flowed along banks
green with maple, beech, sycamore, and birch; it fell tempestuously over
dams and fought its way between rocky cliffs crowned with stately firs.
It rolled past forests of pine and hemlock and spruce, now gentle, now
terrible; for there is said to be an Indian curse upon the Saco,
whereby, with every great sun, the child of a paleface shall be drawn
into its cruel depths. Lashed into fury by the stony reefs that impeded
its progress, the river looked now sapphire, now gold, now white, now
leaden gray; but always it was hurrying, hurrying on its appointed way
to the sea.

After feasting his eyes and filling his heart with a morning draught of
beauty, Stephen went in from the porch and, pausing at the stairway,
called in stentorian tones: "Get up and eat your breakfast, Rufus! The
boys will be picking the side jams to-day, and I'm going down to work on
the logs. If you come along, bring your own pick-pole and peavey." Then,
going to the kitchen pantry, he collected, from the various shelves, a
pitcher of milk, a loaf of bread, half an apple-pie, and a bowl of
blueberries, and, with the easy methods of a household unswayed by
feminine rule, moved toward a seat under an apple-tree and took his
morning meal in great apparent content. Having finished, and washed his
dishes with much more thoroughness than is common to unsuperintended
man, and having given Rufus the second call to breakfast with the vigor
and acrimony that usually marks that unpleasant performance, he strode
to a high point on the river-bank and, shading his eyes with his hand,
gazed steadily down stream.

Patches of green fodder and blossoming potatoes melted into soft fields
that had been lately mown, and there were glimpses of tasseling corn
rising high to catch the sun. Far, far down on the opposite bank of the
river was the hint of a brown roof, and the tip of a chimney that sent a
slender wisp of smoke into the clear air. Beyond this, and farther back
from the water, the trees apparently hid a cluster of other chimneys,
for thin spirals of smoke ascended here and there. The little brown roof
could never have revealed itself to any but a lover's eye; and that
discerned something even smaller, something like a pinkish speck, that
moved hither and thither on a piece of greensward that sloped to the
waterside.

"She's up!" Stephen exclaimed under his breath, his eyes shining, his
lips smiling. His voice had a note of hushed exaltation about it, as if
"she," whoever she might be, had, in condescending to rise, conferred a
priceless boon upon a waiting universe. If she were indeed a "up" (so
his tone implied), then the day, somewhat falsely heralded by the
sunrise, had really begun, and the human race might pursue its appointed
tasks, inspired and uplifted by the consciousness of her existence. It
might properly be grateful for the fact of her birth; that she had grown
to woman's estate; and, above all, that, in common with the sun, the
lark, the morning-glory, and other beautiful things of the early day,
she was up and about her lovely, cheery, heart-warming business.

[Illustration: "SHE'S UP!"]

The handful of chimneys and the smoke spirals rising here and there
among the trees on the river-bank belonged to what was known as the
Brier Neighborhood. There were only a few houses in all, scattered along
a side road leading from the river up to Liberty Centre. There were no
great signs of thrift or prosperity, but the Wiley cottage, the only one
near the water, was neat and well cared for, and Nature had done her
best to conceal man's indolence, poverty, or neglect.

Bushes of sweetbrier grew in fragrant little forests as tall as the
fences. Clumps of wild roses sprang up at every turn, and over all the
stone walls, as well as on every heap of rocks by the wayside, prickly
blackberry vines ran and clambered and clung, yielding fruit and thorns
impartially to the neighborhood children.

The pinkish speck that Stephen Waterman had spied from his side of the
river was Rose Wiley of the Brier Neighborhood on the Edgewood side. As
there was another of her name on Brigadier Hill, the Edgewood minister
called one of them the climbing Rose and the other the brier Rose, or
sometimes Rose of the river. She was well named, the pinkish speck. She
had not only some of the sweetest attributes of the wild rose, but the
parallel might have been extended as far as the thorns, for she had
wounded her scores,--hearts, be it understood, not hands. The wounding
was, on the whole, very innocently done; and if fault could be imputed
anywhere, it might rightly have been laid at the door of the kind powers
who had made her what she was, since the smile that blesses a single
heart is always destined to break many more.

She had not a single silk gown, but she had what is far better, a figure
to show off a cotton one. Not a brooch nor a pair of earrings was
numbered among her possessions, but any ordinary gems would have looked
rather dull and trivial when compelled to undergo comparison with her
bright eyes. As to her hair, the local milliner declared it impossible
for Rose Wiley to get an unbecoming hat; that on one occasion, being in
a frolicsome mood, Rose had tried on all the headgear in the village
emporium,--children's gingham "Shakers," mourning bonnets for aged
dames, men's haying hats and visored caps,--and she proved superior to
every test, looking as pretty as a pink in the best ones and simply
ravishing in the worst. In fact, she had been so fashioned and finished
by Nature that, had she been set on a revolving pedestal in a
show-window, the bystanders would have exclaimed, as each new charm came
into view: "Look at her waist!" "See her shoulders!" "And her neck and
chin!" "And her hair!" While the children, gazing with raptured
admiration, would have shrieked, in unison, "I choose her for mine."

All this is as much as to say that Rose of the river was a beauty, yet
it quite fails to explain, nevertheless, the secret of her power. When
she looked her worst the spell was as potent as when she looked her
best. Hidden away somewhere was a vital spark which warmed every one who
came in contact with it. Her lovely little person was a trifle below
medium height, and it might as well be confessed that her soul, on the
morning when Stephen Waterman saw her hanging out the clothes on the
river bank, was not large enough to be at all out of proportion; but
when eyes and dimples, lips and cheeks, enslave the onlooker, the soul
is seldom subjected to a close or critical scrutiny. Besides, Rose Wiley
was a nice girl, neat as wax, energetic, merry, amiable, economical. She
was a dutiful granddaughter to two of the most irritating old people in
the county; she never patronized her pug-nosed, pasty-faced girl
friends; she made wonderful pies and doughnuts; and besides, small
souls, if they are of the right sort, sometimes have a way of growing,
to the discomfiture of cynics and the gratification of the angels.

So, on one bank of the river grew the brier rose, a fragile thing,
swaying on a slender stalk and looking at its pretty reflection in the
water; and on the other a sturdy pine tree, well rooted against wind and
storm. And the sturdy pine yearned for the wild rose; and the rose, so
far as it knew, yearned for nothing at all, certainly not for rugged
pine trees standing tall and grim in rocky soil. If, in its present
stage of development, it gravitated toward anything in particular, it
would have been a well-dressed white birch growing on an irreproachable
lawn.

And the river, now deep, now shallow, now smooth, now tumultuous, now
sparkling in sunshine, now gloomy under clouds, rolled on to the
engulfing sea. It could not stop to concern itself with the petty
comedies and tragedies that were being enacted along its shores, else it
would never have reached its destination. Only last night, under a full
moon, there had been pairs of lovers leaning over the rails of all the
bridges along its course; but that was a common sight, like that of the
ardent couples sitting on its shady banks these summer days, looking
only into each other's eyes, but exclaiming about the beauty of the
water. Lovers would come and go, sometimes reappearing with successive
installments of loves in a way wholly mysterious to the river. Meantime
it had its own work to do and must be about it, for the side jams were
to be broken and the boom "let out" at the Edgewood bridge.




OLD KENNEBEC


It was just seven o'clock that same morning when Rose Wiley smoothed the
last wrinkle from her dimity counterpane, picked up a shred of corn-husk
from the spotless floor under the bed, slapped a mosquito on the
window-sill, removed all signs of murder with a moist towel, and before
running down to breakfast cast a frowning look at her pincushion.
Almira, otherwise "Mite," Shapley had been in her room the afternoon
before and disturbed with her careless hand the pattern of Rose's pins.
They were kept religiously in the form of a Maltese cross; and if, while
she was extricating one from her clothing, there had been an alarm of
fire, Rose would have stuck the pin in its appointed place in the
design, at the risk of losing her life.

Entering the kitchen with her light step, she brought the morning
sunshine with her. The old people had already engaged in differences of
opinion, but they commonly suspended open warfare in her presence. There
were the usual last things to be done for breakfast, offices that
belonged to her as her grandmother's assistant. She took yesterday's
soda biscuits out of the steamer where they were warming and softening;
brought an apple pie and a plate of seed cakes from the pantry; settled
the coffee with a piece of dried fish skin and an egg shell; and
transferred some fried potatoes from the spider to a covered dish.

"Did you remember the meat, grandpa? We're all out," she said, as she
began buttoning a stiff collar around his reluctant neck.

"Remember? Land, yes! I wish't I ever could forgit anything! The butcher
says he's 'bout tired o' travelin' over the country lookin' for critters
to kill, but if he finds anything he'll be up along in the course of a
week. He ain't a real smart butcher, Cyse Higgins ain't.--Land, Rose,
don't button that dickey clean through my epperdummis! I have to sport
starched collars in this life on account o' you and your gran'mother
bein' so chock full o' style; but I hope to the Lord I shan't have to
wear 'em in another world!"

"You won't," his wife responded with the snap of a dish towel, "or if
you do, they'll wilt with the heat."

Rose smiled, but the soft hand with which she tied the neck-cloth about
the old man's withered neck pacified his spirit, and he smiled knowingly
back at her as she took her seat at the breakfast table spread near the
open kitchen door. She was a dazzling Rose, and, it is to be feared, a
wasted one, for there was no one present to observe her clean pink
calico and the still more subtle note struck in the green ribbon which
was tied round her throat,--the ribbon that formed a sort of calyx, out
of which sprang the flower of her face, as fresh and radiant as if it
had bloomed that morning.

"Give me my coffee turrible quick," said Mr. Wiley; "I must be down the
bridge 'fore they start dog-warpin' the side jam."

"I notice you're always due at the bridge on churnin' days," remarked
his spouse, testily.

"'Taint me as app'ints drivin' dates at Edgewood," replied the old man.
"The boys'll hev a turrible job this year. The logs air ricked up jest
like Rose's jackstraws; I never see'em so turrible ricked up in all my
exper'ence; an' Lije Dennett don' know no more 'bout pickin' a jam than
Cooper's cow. Turrible sot in his ways, too; can't take a mite of
advice. I was tellin' him how to go to work on that bung that's formed
between the gre't gray rock an' the shore,--the awfullest place to bung
that there is between this an' Biddeford,--and says he: 'Look here,
I've be'n boss on this river for twelve year, an' I'll be doggoned if
I'm goin' to be taught my business by any man!' 'This ain't no river,'
says I, 'as you'd know,' says I, 'if you'd ever lived on the Kennebec.'
'Pity you hedn't stayed on it,' says he. 'I wish to the land I hed,' says
I. An' then I come away, for my tongue's so turrible spry an' sarcustic
that I knew if I stopped any longer I should stir up strife. There's
some folks that'll set on addled aigs year in an' year out, as if there
wan't good fresh ones bein' laid every day; an' Lije Dennett's one of
'em, when it comes to river drivin'."

"There's lots o' folks as have made a good livin' by mindin' their own
business," observed the still sententious Mrs. Wiley, as she speared a
soda-biscuit with her fork.

"Mindin' your own business is a turrible selfish trade," responded her
husband loftily. "If your neighbor is more ignorant than what you
are,--partic'larly if he's as ignorant as Cooper's cow,--you'd ought,
as a Kennebec man an' a Christian, to set him on the right track, though
it's always a turrible risky thing to do."

Rose's grandfather was called, by the irreverent younger generation,
sometimes "Turrible Wiley" and sometimes "Old Kennebec," because of the
frequency with which these words appeared in his conversation. There
were not wanting those of late who dubbed him Uncle Ananias, for reasons
too obvious to mention. After a long, indolent, tolerably truthful, and
useless life, he had, at seventy-five, lost sight of the dividing line
between fact and fancy, and drew on his imagination to such an extent
that he almost staggered himself when he began to indulge in
reminiscence. He was a feature of the Edgewood "drive," being always
present during the five or six days that it was in progress, sometimes
sitting on the river-bank, sometimes leaning over the bridge, sometimes
reclining against the butt-end of a huge log, but always chewing
tobacco and expectorating to incredible distances as he criticized and
damned impartially all the expedients in use at the particular moment.

"I want to stay down by the river this afternoon," said Rose. "Ever so
many of the girls will be there, and all my sewing is done up. If
grandpa will leave the horse for me, I'll take the drivers' lunch to
them at noon, and bring the dishes back in time to wash them before
supper."

"I suppose you can go, if the rest do," said her grandmother, "though
it's an awful lazy way of spendin' an afternoon. When I was a girl there
was no such dawdlin' goin' on, I can tell you. Nobody thought o' lookin'
at the river in them days; there wasn't time."

"But it's such fun to watch the logs!" Rose exclaimed. "Next to dancing,
the greatest fun in the world."

"'Specially as all the young men in town will be there, watchin', too,"
was the grandmother's reply. "Eben Brooks an' Richard Bean got home
yesterday with their doctors' diplomas in their pockets. Mrs. Brooks
says Eben stood forty-nine in a class o' fifty-five, an' seemed
consid'able proud of him; an' I guess it is the first time he ever stood
anywheres but at the foot. I tell you when these fifty-five new doctors
git scattered over the country there'll be consid'able many folks
keepin' house under ground. Dick Bean's goin' to stop a spell with Rufe
an' Steve Waterman. That'll make one more to play in the river."

"Rufus ain't hardly got his workin' legs on yit," allowed Mr. Wiley, "but
Steve's all right. He's a turrible smart driver, an' turrible reckless,
too. He'll take all the chances there is, though to a man that's lived
on the Kennebec there ain't what can rightly be called any turrible
chances on the Saco."

"He'd better be 'tendin' to his farm," objected Mrs. Wiley.

[Illustration: "HE'S A TURRIBLE SMART DRIVER"]

"His hay is all in," Rose spoke up quickly, "and he only helps on the
river when the farm work isn't pressing. Besides, though it's all play
to him, he earns his two dollars and a half a day."

"He don't keer about the two and a half," said her grandfather. "He jest
can't keep away from the logs. There's some that can't. When I first
moved here from Gard'ner, where the climate never suited me"--

"The climate of any place where you hev regular work never did an' never
will suit you," remarked the old man's wife; but the interruption
received no comment: such mistaken views of his character were too
frequent to make any impression.

"As I was sayin', Rose," he continued, "when we first moved here from
Gard'ner, we lived neighbor to the Watermans. Steve an' Rufus was little
boys then, always playin' with a couple o' wild cousins o' theirn,
consid'able older. Steve would scare his mother pretty nigh to death
stealin' away to the mill to ride on the 'carriage,' 'side o' the log
that was bein' sawed, hitchin' clean out over the river an' then jerkin'
back 'most into the jaws o' the machinery."

"He never hed any common sense to spare, even when he was a young one,"
remarked Mrs. Wiley; "and I don't see as all the 'cademy education his
father throwed away on him has changed him much." And with this
observation she rose from the table and went to the sink.

"Steve ain't nobody's fool," dissented the old man; "but he's kind o'
daft about the river. When he was little he was allers buildin' dams in
the brook, an' sailin' chips, an' runnin' on the logs; allers choppin'
up stickins an' raftin' 'em together in the pond. I cal'late Mis'
Waterman died consid'able afore her time, jest from fright, lookin' out
the winders and seein' her boys slippin' between the logs an' gittin'
their daily dousin'. She couldn't understand it, an' there's a heap o'
things women-folks never do an' never can understand,--jest because they
air women-folks."

"One o' the things is men, I s'pose," interrupted Mrs. Wiley.

"Men in general, but more partic'larly husbands," assented Old Kennebec;
"howsomever, there's another thing they don't an' can't never take in,
an' that's sport. Steve does river drivin' as he would horseracin' or
tiger-shootin' or tight-rope dancin'; an' he always did from a boy.
When he was about twelve or fifteen, he used to help the river-drivers
spring and fall, reg'lar. He couldn't do nothin' but shin up an' down
the rocks after hammers an' hatchets an' ropes, but he was turrible
pleased with his job. 'Stepanfetchit,' they used to call him them
days,--Stephanfetchit Waterman."

"Good name for him yet," came in acid tones from the sink. "He's still
steppin' an' fetchin', only it's Rose that's doin' the drivin' now."

"I'm not driving anybody, that I know of," answered Rose, with
heightened color, but with no loss of her habitual self-command.

"Then, when he graduated from errants," went on the crafty old man, who
knew that when breakfast ceased, churning must begin, "Steve used to get
seventy-five cents a day helpin' clear up the river--if you can call
this here silv'ry streamlet a river. He'd pick off a log here an' there
an' send it afloat, an' dig out them that hed got ketched in the rocks,
and tidy up the banks jest like spring house-cleanin'. If he'd hed any
kind of a boss, an' hed be'n trained on the Kennebec, he'd 'a' made a
turrible smart driver, Steve would."

"He'll be drownded, that's what'll become o' him," prophesied Mrs.
Wiley; "'specially if Rose encourages him in such silly foolishness as
ridin' logs from his house down to ourn, dark nights."

"Seein' as how Steve built ye a nice pig pen last month, 'pears to me
you might have a good word for him now an' then, mother," remarked Old
Kennebec, reaching for his second piece of pie.

"I wa'n't a mite deceived by that pig pen, no more'n I was by Jed
Towle's hen coop, nor Ivory Dunn's well-curb, nor Pitt Packard's
shed-steps. If you hed ever kep' up your buildin's yourself, Rose's
beaux wouldn't hev to do their courtin' with carpenters' tools."

"It's the pigpen an' the hencoop you want to keep your eye on, mother,
not the motives of them as made 'em. It's turrible onsettlin' to inspeck
folks' motives too turrible close."

"Riding a log is no more to Steve than riding a horse, so he says,"
interposed Rose, to change the subject; "but I tell him that a horse
doesn't revolve under you, and go sideways at the same time that it is
going forwards."

"Log-ridin' ain't no trick at all to a man of sperit," said Mr. Wiley.
"There's a few places in the Kennebec where the water's too shaller to
let the logs float, so we used to build a flume, an' the logs would whiz
down like arrers shot from a bow. The boys used to collect by the side
o' that there flume to see me ride a log down, an' I've watched 'em drop
in a dead faint when I spun by the crowd; but land! you can't drownd
some folks, not without you tie nail-kags to their head an' feet an'
drop 'em in the falls; I 've rid logs down the b'ilin'est rapids o' the
Kennebec an' never lost my head. I remember well the year o' the gre't
freshet, I rid a log from"--

"There, there, father, that'll do," said Mrs. Wiley, decisively. "I'll
put the cream in the churn, an' you jest work off some o' your steam by
bringin' the butter for us afore you start for the bridge. It don't do
no good to brag afore your own women-folks; work goes consid'able
better'n stories at every place 'cept the loafers' bench at the
tavern."

And the baffled raconteur, who had never done a piece of work cheerfully
in his life, dragged himself reluctantly to the shed, where, before
long, one could hear him moving the dasher up and down sedately to his
favorite "churning tune" of--

    Broad is the road that leads to death,
      And thousands walk together there;
    But Wisdom shows a narrow path,
      With here and there a traveler.




THE EDGEWOOD "DRIVE"


Just where the bridge knits together the two little villages of Pleasant
River and Edgewood, the glassy mirror of the Saco broadens suddenly,
sweeping over the dam in a luminous torrent. Gushes of pure amber mark
the middle of the dam, with crystal and silver at the sides, and from
the seething vortex beneath the golden cascade the white spray dashes up
in fountains. In the crevices and hollows of the rocks the mad water
churns itself into snowy froth, while the foam-flecked torrent, deep,
strong, and troubled to its heart, sweeps majestically under the bridge,
then dashes between wooded shores piled high with steep masses of rock,
or torn and riven by great gorges.

There had been much rain during the summer, and the Saco was very high,
so on the third day of the Edgewood drive there was considerable
excitement at the bridge, and a goodly audience of villagers from both
sides of the river. There were some who never came, some who had no
fancy for the sight, some to whom it was an old story, some who were too
busy, but there were many to whom it was the event of events, a
never-ending source of interest.

Above the fall, covering the placid surface of the river, thousands of
logs lay quietly "in boom" until the "turning out" process, on the last
day of the drive, should release them and give them their chance of
display, their brief moment of notoriety, their opportunity of
interesting, amusing, exciting, and exasperating the onlookers by their
antics.

Heaps of logs had been cast up on the rocks below the dam, where they
lay in hopeless confusion, adding nothing, however, to the problem of
the moment, for they too bided their time. If they had possessed wisdom,
discretion, and caution, they might have slipped gracefully over the
falls and, steering clear of the hidden ledges (about which it would
seem they must have heard whispers from the old pine trees along the
river), have kept a straight course and reached their destination
without costing the Edgewood Lumber Company a small fortune. Or, if they
had inclined toward a jolly and adventurous career, they could have
joined one of the various jams or "bungs," stimulated by the thought
that any one of them might be a key-log, holding for a time the entire
mass in its despotic power. But they had been stranded early in the
game, and, after lying high and dry for weeks, would be picked off one
by one and sent down-stream.

In the tumultuous boil, the foaming hubbub and flurry at the foot of the
falls, one enormous peeled log wallowed up and down like a huge
rhinoceros, greatly pleasing the children by its clumsy cavortings. Some
conflict of opposing forces kept it ever in motion, yet never set it
free. Below the bridge were always the real battle-grounds, the scenes
of the first and the fiercest conflicts. A ragged ledge of rock,
standing well above the yeasty torrent, marked the middle of the river.
Stephen had been stranded there once, just at dusk, on a stormy
afternoon in spring. A jam had broken under the men, and Stephen, having
taken too great risks, had been caught on the moving mass, and, leaping
from log to log, his only chance for life had been to find a footing on
Gray Rock, which was nearer than the shore.

Rufus was ill at the time, and Mrs. Waterman so anxious and nervous that
processions of boys had to be sent up to the River Farm, giving the
frightened mother the latest bulletins of her son's welfare. Luckily,
the river was narrow just at the Gray Rock, and it was a quite possible
task, though no easy one, to lash two ladders together and make a narrow
bridge on which the drenched and shivering man could reach the shore.
There were loud cheers when Stephen ran lightly across the slender
pathway that led to safety--ran so fast that the ladders had scarce time
to bend beneath his weight. He had certainly "taken chances," but when
did he not do that? The logger's life is one of "moving accidents by
flood and field," and Stephen welcomed with wildqq exhilaration every
hazard that came in his path. To him there was never a dull hour from
the moment that the first notch was cut in the tree (for he sometimes
joined the boys in the lumber camp just for a frolic) till the later one
when the hewn log reached its final destination. He knew nothing of
"tooling" a four-in-hand through narrow lanes or crowded
thoroughfares,--nothing of guiding a horse over the hedges and through
the pitfalls of a stiff bit of hunting country; his steed was the
rearing, plunging, kicking log, and he rode it like a river god.

[Illustration: HE HAD CERTAINLY "TAKEN CHANCES"]

The crowd loves daring, and so it welcomed Stephen with braves, but it
knew, as he knew, that he was only doing his duty by the Company, only
showing the Saco that man was master, only keeping the old Waterman name
in good repute.

"Ye can't drownd some folks," Old Kennebec had said, as he stood in a
group on the shore; "not without you tie sand-bags to'em an' drop 'em in
the Great Eddy. I'm the same kind; I remember when I was stranded on
jest sech a rock in the Kennebec, only they left me there all night for
dead, an' I had to swim the rapids when it come daylight."

"We're well acquainted with that rock and them rapids," exclaimed one of
the river-drivers, to the delight of the company.

Rose had reason to remember Stephen's adventure, for he had clambered
up the bank, smiling and blushing under the hurrahs of the boys, and,
coming to the wagon where she sat waiting for her grandfather, had
seized a moment to whisper: "Did you care whether I came across safe,
Rose? Say you did!"

Stephen recalled that question, too, on this August morning; perhaps
because this was to be a red-letter day, and sometime, when he had a
free moment,--sometime before supper, when he and Rose were sitting
apart from the others, watching the logs,--he intended again to ask her
to marry him. This thought trembled in him, stirring the deeps of his
heart like a great wave, almost sweeping him off his feet when he held
it too close and let it have full sway. It would be the fourth time that
he had asked Rose this question of all questions, but there was no
perceptible difference in his excitement, for there was always the
possible chance that she might change her mind and say yes, if only for
variety. Wanting a thing continuously, unchangingly, unceasingly, year
after year, he thought,--longing to reach it as the river longed to
reach the sea,--such wanting might, in course of time, mean having.

Rose drove up to the bridge with the men's luncheon, and the under boss
came up to take the baskets and boxes from the back of the wagon.

"We've had a reg'lar tussle this mornin', Rose," he said. "The logs are
determined not to move. Ike Billings, that's the han'somest and
fluentest all-round swearer on the Saco, has tried his best on the side
jam. He's all out o' cuss-words and there hain't a log budged. Now, stid
o' dog-warpin' this afternoon, an' lettin' the oxen haul off all them
stubborn logs by main force, we're goin' to ask you to set up on the
bank and smile at the jam. 'Land! she can do it!' says Ike a minute ago.
'When Rose starts smilin',' he says, 'there ain't a jam nor a bung in me
that don't melt like wax and jest float right off same as the logs do
when they get into quiet, sunny water.'"

Rose blushed and laughed, and drove up the hill to Mite Shapley's, where
she put up the horse and waited till the men had eaten their luncheon.
The drivers slept and had breakfast and supper at the Billings house, a
mile down river, but for several years Mrs. Wiley had furnished the noon
meal, sending it down piping hot on the stroke of twelve. The boys
always said that up or down the whole length of the Saco there was no
such cooking as the Wileys', and much of this praise was earned by
Rose's serving. It was the old grandmother who burnished the tin plates
and dippers till they looked like silver; for crotchety and
sharp-tongued as she was--she never allowed Rose to spoil her hands with
soft soap and sand: but it was Rose who planned and packed, Rose who
hemmed squares of old white tablecloths and sheets to line the baskets
and keep things daintily separate, Rose, also, whose tarts and cakes
were the pride and admiration of church sociables and sewing societies.

Where could such smoking pots of beans be found? A murmur of ecstatic
approval ran through the crowd when the covers were removed. Pieces of
sweet home-fed pork glistened like varnished mahogany on the top of the
beans, and underneath were such deeps of fragrant juice as come only
from slow fires and long, quiet hours in brick ovens. Who else could
steam and bake such mealy leaves of brown bread, brown as plum-pudding,
yet with no suspicion of sogginess? Who such soda-biscuits, big,
feathery, tasting of cream, and hardly needing butter? And green-apple
pies! Could such candied lower crusts be found elsewhere, or more
delectable filling? Or such rich, nutty doughnuts?--doughnuts that had
spurned the hot fat which is the ruin of so many, and risen from its
waves like golden-brown Venuses.

"By the great seleckmen!" ejaculated Jed Towle, as he swallowed his
fourth, "I'd like to hev a wife, two daughters, and four sisters like
them Wileys, and jest set still on the river-bank an' hev 'em cook
victuals for me. I'd hev nothin' to wish for then but a mouth as big as
the Saco's."

"And I wish this custard pie was the size o' Bonnie Eagle Pond," said
Ike Billings. "I'd like to fall into the middle of it and eat my way
out!"

"Look at that bunch o' Chiny asters tied on t' the bail o' that
biscuit-pail!" said Ivory Dunn. "That's the girl's doin's, you bet
women-folks don't seem to make no bo'quets after they git married. Let's
divide 'em up an' wear 'em drivin' this afternoon; mebbe they'll ketch
the eye so't our rags won't show so bad. Land! it's lucky my hundred
days is about up! If I don't git home soon, I shall be arrested for
goin' without clo'es. I set up'bout all night puttin' these blue patches
in my pants an' tryin' to piece together a couple of old red-flannel
shirts to make one whole one. That's the worst o' drivin' in these
places where the pretty girls make a habit of comin' down to the bridge
to see the fun. You hev to keep rigged up jest so stylish; you can't git
no chance at the rum bottle, an' you even hev to go a leetle mite light
on swearin'."




"BLASPHEMIOUS SWEARIN'"


"Steve Waterman's an awful nice feller," exclaimed Ivory Dunn just then.
Stephen had been looking intently across the river, watching the
Shapleys' side door, from which Rose might issue at any moment; and at
this point in the discussion he had lounged away from the group, and,
moving toward the bridge, began to throw pebbles idly into the water.

"He's an awful smart driver for one that don't foiler drivin' the year
round," continued Ivory; "and he's the awfullest clean-spoken,
soft-spoken feller I ever see."

"There's be'n two black sheep in his family a'ready, an' Steve kind o'
feels as if he'd ought to be extry white," remarked Jed Towle. "You
fellers that belonged to the old drive remember Pretty Quick Waterman
well enough? Steve's mother brought him up."

Yes; most of them remembered the Waterman twins, Stephen's cousins, now
both dead,--Slow Waterman, so moderate in his steps and actions that you
had to fix a landmark somewhere near him to see if he moved; and Pretty
Quick, who shone by comparison with his twin.

"I'd kind o' forgot that Pretty Quick Waterman was cousin to Steve,"
said the under boss; "he never worked with me much, but he wa'n't cut
off the same piece o' goods as the other Watermans. Great hemlock! but
he kep' a cussin' dictionary, Pretty Quick did! Whenever he heard any
new words he must 'a' writ 'em down, an' then studied 'em all up in the
winter-time, to use in the spring drive."

"Swearin' 's a habit that hed ought to be practiced with turrible
caution," observed old Mr. Wiley, when the drivers had finished
luncheon and taken out their pipes. "There's three kinds o'
swearin',--plain swearin', profane swearin', an' blasphemious swearin'.
Logs air jest like mules: there's times when a man can't seem to rip up
a jam in good style 'thout a few words that's too strong for the infant
classes in Sunday-schools; but a man hedn't ought to tempt Providence.
When he's ridin' a log near the falls at high water, or cuttin' the
key-log in a jam, he ain't in no place for blasphemious swearin'; jest a
little easy, perlite 'damn' is 'bout all he can resk, if he don't want to
git drownded an' hev his ghost walkin' the river-banks till kingdom
come.

"You an' I, Long, was the only ones that seen Pretty Quick go, wa'n't
we?" continued Old Kennebec, glancing at Long Abe Dennett (cousin to
Short Abe), who lay on his back in the grass, the smoke-wreaths rising
from his pipe, and the steel spikes in his heavy, calked-sole boots
shining in the sun.

"There was folks on the bridge," Long answered, "but we was the only
ones near enough to see an' hear. It was so onexpected, an' so soon
over, that them as was watchin' upstream, where the men was to work on
the falls, wouldn't 'a' hed time to see him go down. But I did, an'
nobody ain't heard me swear sence, though it's ten years ago. I allers
said it was rum an' bravadder that killed Pretty Quick Waterman that
day. The boys hedn't give him a 'dare' that he hedn't took up. He seemed
like he was possessed, an' the logs was the same way; they was fairly
wild, leapin' around in the maddest kind o' water you ever see. The
river was b'ilin' high that spring; it was an awful stubborn jam, an'
Pretty Quick, he'd be'n workin' on it sence dinner."

"He clumb up the bank more'n once to have a pull at the bottle that was
hid in the bushes," interpolated Mr. Wiley.

"Like as not; that was his failin'. Well, most o' the boys were on the
other side o' the river, workin' above the bridge, an' the boss hed
called Pretty Quick to come off an' leave the jam till mornin', when
they'd get horses an' dog-warp it off, log by log. But when the boss got
out o' sight, Pretty Quick jest stood right still, swingin' his axe, an'
blasphemin' so 't would freeze your blood, vowin' he wouldn't move till
the logs did, if he stayed there till the crack o' doom. Jest then a
great, ponderous log that hed be'n churnin' up an' down in the falls for
a week, got free an' come blunderin' an' thunderin' down-river. Land! it
was chockfull o' water, an' looked 'bout as big as a church! It come
straight along, butt-end foremost, an' struck that jam, full force, so't
every log in it shivered. There was a crack,--the crack o' doom, sure
enough, for Pretty Quick,--an' one o' the logs le'p' right out an'
struck him jest where he stood, with his axe in the air, blasphemin'.
The jam kind o' melted an' crumbled up, an' in a second Pretty Quick
was whirlin' in the white water. He never riz,--at least where we could
see him,--an' we didn't find him for a week. That's the whole story, an'
I guess Steve takes it as a warnin'. Any way, he ain't no friend to rum
nor swearin', Steve ain't. He knows Pretty Quick's ways shortened his
mother's life, an' you notice what a sharp lookout he keeps on Rufus."

"He needs it," Ike Billings commented tersely.

"Some men seem to lose their wits when they're workin' on logs,"
observed Mr. Wiley, who had deeply resented Long Dennett's telling of a
story which he knew fully as well and could have told much better. "Now,
nat'rally, I've seen things on the Kennebec "--

"Three cheers for the Saco! Hats off, boys!" shouted Jed Towle, and his
directions were followed with a will.

"As I was sayin'," continued the old man, peacefully, "I've seen things
on the Kennebec that wouldn't happen on a small river, an' I've be'n in
turrible places an' taken turrible resks--resks that would 'a' turned a
Saco River man's hair white; but them is the times when my wits work the
quickest. I remember once I was smokin' my pipe when a jam broke under
me. 'T was a small jam, or what we call a small jam on the
Kennebec,--only about three hundred thousand pine logs. The first thing
I knowed, I was shootin' back an' forth in the b'ilin' foam, hangin' on
t' the end of a log like a spider. My hands was clasped round the log,
and I never lost control o' my pipe. They said I smoked right along,
jest as cool an' placid as a pond-lily."

"Why'd you quit drivin'?" inquired Ivory.

"My strength wa'n't ekal to it," Mr. Wiley responded sadly. "I was all
skin, bones, an' nerve. The Comp'ny wouldn't part with me altogether,
so they give me a place in the office down on the wharves."

"That wa'n't so bad," said Jed Towle; "why didn't you hang on to it,
so's to keep in sight o' the Kennebec?"

"I found I couldn't be confined under cover. My liver give all out, my
appetite failed me, an' I wa'n't wuth a day's wages. I'd learned
engineerin' when I was a boy, an' I thought I'd try runnin' on the road
a spell, but it didn't suit my constitution. My kidneys ain't turrible
strong, an' the doctors said I'd have Bright's disease if I didn't git
some kind o' work where there wa'n't no vibrations."

"Hard to find, Mr. Wiley; hard to find!" said Jed Towle.

"You're right," responded the old man feelingly. "I've tried all kinds
o' labor. Some of 'em don't suit my liver, some disagrees with my
stomach, and the rest of 'em has vibrations; so here I set, high an'
dry on the banks of life, you might say, like a stranded log."

As this well-known simile fell upon the ear, there was a general stir in
the group, for Turrible Wiley, when rhetorical, sometimes grew tearful,
and this was a mood not to be encouraged.

"All right, boss," called Ike Billings, winking to the boys; "we'll be
there in a jiffy!" for the luncheon hour had flown, and the work of the
afternoon was waiting for them. "You make a chalk-mark where you left
off, Mr. Wiley, an' we'll hear the rest to-morrer; only don't you forgit
nothin'! Remember't was the Kennebec you was talkin' about."

"I will, indeed," responded the old man. "As I was sayin' when
interrupted, I may be a stranded log, but I'm proud that the mark o' the
Gard'ner Lumber Comp'ny is on me, so't when I git to my journey's end
they'll know where I belong and send me back to the Kennebec. Before I'm
sawed up I'd like to forgit this triflin' brook in the sight of a
good-sized river, an' rest my eyes on some full-grown logs, 'stead o'
these little damn pipestems you boys are playin' with!"




THE GAME OF JACKSTRAWS


There was a roar of laughter at the old man's boast, but in a moment all
was activity. The men ran hither and thither like ants, gathering their
tools. There were some old-fashioned pick-poles, straight, heavy levers
without any "dog," and there were modern pick-poles and peaveys, for
every river has its favorite equipment in these things. There was no
dynamite in those days to make the stubborn jams yield, and the dog-warp
was in general use. Horses or oxen, sometimes a line of men, stood on
the river-bank. A long rope was attached by means of a steel spike to
one log after another, and it was dragged from the tangled mass.
Sometimes, after unloading the top logs, those at the bottom would rise
and make the task easier; sometimes the work would go on for hours with
no perceptible progress, and Mr. Wiley would have opportunity to tell
the bystanders of a "turrible jam" on the Kennebec that had cost the
Lumber Company ten thousand dollars to break.

There would be great arguments on shore, among the villagers as well as
among the experts, as to the particular log which might be a key to the
position. The boss would study the problem from various standpoints, and
the drivers themselves would pass from heated discussion into long
consultations.

"They're paid by the day," Old Kennebec would philosophize to the
doctor; "an' when they're consultin' they don't hev to be doggin', which
is a turrible sight harder work."

Rose had created a small sensation, on one occasion, by pointing out to
the under boss the key-log in a jam. She was past mistress of the
pretty game of jackstraws, much in vogue at that time. The delicate
little lengths of polished wood or bone were shaken together and emptied
on the table. Each jackstraw had one of its ends fashioned in the shape
of some sort of implement,--a rake, hoe, spade, fork, or mallet. All the
pieces were intertwined by the shaking process, and they lay as they
fell, in a hopeless tangle. The task consisted in taking a tiny
pick-pole, scarcely bigger than a match, and with the bit of curved wire
on the end lifting off the jackstraws one by one without stirring the
pile or making it tremble. When this occurred, you gave place to your
opponent, who relinquished his turn to you when ill fortune descended
upon him, the game, which was a kind of river-driving and jam-picking in
miniature, being decided by the number of pieces captured and their
value. No wonder that the under boss asked Rose's advice as to the
key-log. She had a fairy's hand, and her cunning at deciding the pieces
to be moved, and her skill at extricating and lifting them from the
heap, were looked upon in Edgewood as little less than supernatural. It
was a favorite pastime; and although a man's hand is ill adapted to it,
being over-large and heavy; the game has obvious advantages for a lover
in bringing his head very close to that of his beloved adversary. The
jackstraws have to be watched with a hawk's eagerness, since the
"trembling" can be discerned only by a keen eye; but there were moments
when Stephen was willing to risk the loss of a battle if he could watch
Rose's drooping eyelashes, the delicate down on her pink cheek, and the
feathery curls that broke away from her hair.

He was looking at her now from a distance, for she and Mite Shapley were
assisting Jed Towle to pile up the tin plates and tie the tin dippers
together. Next she peered into one of the bean-pots, and seemed pleased
that there was still something in its depths; then she gathered the
fragments neatly together in a basket, and, followed by her friend,
clambered down the banks to a shady spot where the Boomshers, otherwise
known as the Crambry family, were "lined up" expectantly.

It is not difficult to find a single fool in any community, however
small; but a family of fools is fortunately somewhat rarer. Every
county, however, can boast of one fool-family, and York County is
always in the fashion, with fools as with everything else. The unique,
much-quoted, and undesirable Boomshers could not be claimed as
indigenous to the Saco valley, for this branch was an offshoot of a
still larger tribe inhabiting a distant township. Its beginnings were
shrouded in mystery. There was a French-Canadian ancestor somewhere, and
a Gipsy or Indian grandmother. They had always intermarried from time
immemorial. When one of the selectmen of their native place had been
asked why the Boomshers always married cousins, and why the habit was
not discouraged, he replied that he really didn't know; he s'posed they
felt it would be kind of odd to go right out and marry a stranger.

Lest "Boomsher" seem an unusual surname, it must be explained that the
actual name was French and could not be coped with by Edgewood or
Pleasant River, being something quite as impossible to spell as to
pronounce. As the family had lived for the last few years somewhere near
the Killick Cranberry Meadows, they were called--and completely
described in the calling--the Crambry fool-family. A talented and much
traveled gentleman who once stayed over night at the Edgewood tavern,
proclaimed it his opinion that Boomsher had been gradually corrupted
from Beaumarchais. When he wrote the word on his visiting card and
showed it to Mr. Wiley, Old Kennebec had replied, that in the judgment
of a man who had lived in large places and seen a turrible lot o' life,
such a name could never have been given either to a Christian or a
heathen family,--that the way in which the letters was thrown together
into it, and the way in which they was sounded when read out loud, was
entirely ag'in reason. It was true, he said, that Beaumarchais, bein'
such a fool name, might 'a' be'n invented a-purpose for a fool family,
but he wouldn't hold even with callin' 'em Boomsher; Crambry was well
enough for'em an' a sight easier to speak.

Stephen knew a good deal about the Crambrys, for he passed their
so-called habitation in going to one of his wood-lots. It was only a
month before that he had found them all sitting outside their
broken-down fence, surrounded by decrepit chairs, sofas, tables,
bedsteads, bits of carpet, and stoves.

"What's the matter?" he called out from his wagon. "There ain't nothin'
the matter," said Alcestis Crambry. "Father's dead, an we're dividin' up
the furnerchure."

Alcestis was the pride of the Crambrys, and the list of his attainments
used often to be on his proud father's lips. It was he who was the
largest, "for his size," in the family; he who could tell his brothers
Paul and Arcadus "by their looks;" he who knew a sour apple from a sweet
one the minute he bit it; he who, at the early age of ten, was bright
enough to point to the cupboard and say, "Puddin', dad!"

Alcestis had enjoyed, in consequence of his unusual intellectual powers,
some educational privileges, and the Killick schoolmistress well
remembered his first day at the village seat of learning. Reports of
what took place in this classic temple from day to day may have been
wafted to the dull ears of the boy, who was not thought ready for school
until he had attained the ripe age of twelve. It may even have been
that specific rumors of the signs, symbols, and hieroglyphics used in
educational institutions had reached him in the obscurity of his
cranberry meadows. At all events, when confronted by the alphabet chart,
whose huge black capitals were intended to capture the wandering eyes of
the infant class, Alcestis exhibited unusual, almost unnatural,
excitement.

"That is 'A,' my boy," said the teacher genially, as she pointed to the
first character on the chart.

"Good God, is that 'A'!" exclaimed Alcestis, sitting down heavily on
the nearest bench. And neither teacher nor scholars could discover
whether he was agreeably surprised or disappointed in the
letter,--whether he had expected, if he ever encountered it, to find it
writhing in coils on the floor of a cage, or whether it simply bore no
resemblance to the ideal already established in his mind.

Mrs. Wiley had once tried to make something of Mercy, the oldest
daughter of the family, but at the end of six weeks she announced that a
girl who couldn't tell whether the clock was going "forrards or
backwards," and who rubbed a pocket handkerchief as long as she did a
sheet, would be no help in her household.

The Crambrys had daily walked the five or six miles from their home to
the Edgewood bridge during the progress of the drive, not only for the
social and intellectual advantages to be gained from the company
present, but for the more solid compensation of a good meal. They all
adored Rose, partly because she gave them food, and partly because she
was sparkling and pretty and wore pink dresses that caught their dull
eyes.

The afternoon proved a lively one. In the first place, one of the
younger men slipped into the water between two logs, part of a lot
chained together waiting to be let out of the boom. The weight of the
mass higher up and the force of the current wedged him in rather
tightly, and when he had been "pried" out he declared that he felt like
an apple after it had been squeezed in the cider-mill, so he drove home,
and Rufus Waterman took his place.

Two hours' hard work followed this incident, and at the end of that time
the "bung" that reached from the shore to Waterman's Ledge (the rock
where Pretty Quick met his fate) was broken up, and the logs that
composed it were started down river. There remained now only the great
side-jam at Gray Rock. This had been allowed to grow, gathering logs as
they drifted past, thus making higher water and a stronger current on
the other side of the rock, and allowing an easier passage for the logs
at that point.

All was excitement now, for, this particular piece of work accomplished,
the boom above the falls would be "turned out," and the river would
once more be clear and clean at the Edgewood bridge.

Small boys, perching on the rocks with their heels hanging, hands and
mouths full of red Astrakhan apples, cheered their favorites to the
echo, while the drivers shouted to one another and watched the signs and
signals of the boss, who could communicate with them only in that way,
so great was the roar of the water.

The jam refused to yield to ordinary measures. It was a difficult
problem, for the rocky river-bed held many a snare and pitfall. There
was a certain ledge under the water, so artfully placed that every log
striking under its projecting edges would wedge itself firmly there,
attracting others by its evil example.

"That galoot-boss ought to hev shoved his crew down to that jam this
mornin'," grumbled Old Kennebec to Alcestis Crambry, who was always his
most loyal and attentive listener. "But he wouldn't take no advice, not
if Pharaoh nor Boat nor Herod nor Nicodemus come right out o' the Bible
an' give it to him. The logs air contrary to-day. Sometimes they'll go
along as easy as an old shoe, an' other times they'll do nothin' but
bung, bung, bung! There's a log nestlin' down in the middle o' that jam
that I've be'n watchin' for a week. It's a cur'ous one, to begin with;
an' then it has a mark on it that you can reco'nize it by. Did ye ever
hear tell o' George the Third, King of England, Alcestis, or ain't he
known over to the crambry medders? Well, once upon a time men used to go
through the forests over here an' slash a mark on the trunks o' the
biggest trees. That was the royal sign, as you might say, an' meant that
the tree was to be taken over to England to make masts an' yard-arms for
the King's ships. What made me think of it now is that the King's mark
was an arrer, an' it's an arrer that's on that there log I'm showin' ye.
Well, sir, I seen it fust at Milliken's Mills a Monday. It was in
trouble then, an'it's be'n in trouble ever sence. That's allers the way;
there'll be one pesky, crooked, contrary, consarn'ed log that can't go
anywheres without gittin' into difficulties. You can yank it out an' set
it afloat, an' before you hardly git your doggin' iron off of it, it'll
be snarled up agin in some new place. From the time it's chopped down to
the day it gets to Saco, it costs the Comp'ny 'bout ten times its pesky
valler as lumber. Now they've sent over to Benson's for a team of
horses, an' I bate ye they can't git 'em. I wish I was the boss on this
river, Alcestis."

"I wish I was," echoed the boy.

"Well, your head-fillin' ain't the right kind for a boss, Alcestis, an'
you'd better stick to dry land. You set right down here while I go back
a piece an' git the pipe out o' my coat pocket. I guess nothin' ain't
goin' to happen for a few minutes."

The surmise about the horses, unlike most of Old Kennebec's, proved to
be true. Benson's pair had gone to Portland with a load of hay;
accordingly the tackle was brought, the rope was adjusted to a log, and
five of the drivers, standing on the river-bank, attempted to drag it
from its intrenched position. It refused to yield the fraction of an
inch. Rufus and Stephen joined the five men, and the augmented crew of
seven were putting all their strength on the rope when a cry went up
from the watchers on the bridge. The "dog" had loosened suddenly, and
the men were flung violently to the ground. For a second they were
stunned both by the surprise and by the shock of the blow, but in the
same moment the cry of the crowd swelled louder. Alcestis Crambry had
stolen, all unnoticed, to the rope and had attempted to use his feeble
powers for the common good. When then blow came he fell backward, and,
making no effort to control the situation, slid over the bank and into
the water.

[Illustration: IN A TWINKLING HE WAS IN THE WATER]

The other Crambrys, not realizing the danger, laughed, audibly, but
there was no jeering from the bridge.

Stephen had seen Alcestis slip, and in the fraction of a moment had
taken off his boots and was coasting down the slippery rocks behind him
in a twinkling he was in the water, almost as soon as the boy himself.

"Doggoned idjut!" exclaimed Old Kennebec, tearfully. "Wuth the hull fool
family! If I hedn't 'a' be'n so old, I'd 'a' jumped in myself, for you
can't drownd a Wiley, not without you tie nail-kegs to their head an'
feet an' drop 'em in the falls."

Alcestis, who had neither brains, courage, nor experience, had, better
still, the luck that follows the witless. He was carried swiftly down
the current; but, only fifty feet away, a long, slender, log, wedged
between two low rocks on the shore, jutted out over the water, almost
touching its surface. The boy's clothes were admirably adapted to the
situation, being full of enormous rents. In some way the end of the log
caught in the rags of Alcestis's coat and held him just seconds enough
to enable Stephen to swim to him, to seize him by the nape of the neck,
to lift him on the log, and thence to the shore. It was a particularly
bad place for a landing, and there was nothing to do but to lower ropes
and drag the drenched men to the high ground above.

Alcestis came to his senses in ten or fifteen minutes, and seemed as
bright as usual: with a kind of added swagger at being the central
figure in a dramatic situation.

"I wonder you hedn't stove your brains out, when you landed so turrible
suddent on that rock at the foot of the bank," said Mr. Wiley to him.

"I should, but I took good care to light on my head," responded
Alcestis; a cryptic remark which so puzzled Old Kennebec that he mused
over it for some hours.




HEARTS AND OTHER HEARTS


Stephen had brought a change of clothes, as he had a habit of being
ducked once at least during the day; and since there was a halt in the
proceedings and no need of his services for an hour or two, he found
Rose and walked with her to a secluded spot where they could watch the
logs and not be seen by the people.

"You frightened everybody almost to death, jumping into the river,"
chided Rose.

Stephen laughed. "They thought I was a fool to save a fool, I suppose."

"Perhaps not as bad as that, but it did seem reckless."

"I know; and the boy, no doubt, would be better off dead; but so should
I be, if I could have let him die."

Rose regarded this strange point of view for a moment, and then silently
acquiesced in it. She was constantly doing this, and she often felt that
her mental horizon broadened in the act; but she could not be sure that
Stephen grew any dearer to her because of his moral altitudes.

"Besides," Stephen argued, "I happened to be nearest to the river, and
it was my job."

"How do you always happen to be nearest to the people in trouble, and
why is it always your 'job'!"

"If there are any rewards for good conduct being distributed, I'm right
in line with my hand stretched out," Stephen replied, with meaning in
his voice.

Rose blushed under her flowery hat as he led the way to a bench under a
sycamore tree that overhung the water.

She had almost convinced herself that she was as much in love with
Stephen Waterman as it was in her nature to be with anybody. He was
handsome in his big way, kind, generous, temperate, well educated, and
well-to-do. No fault could be found with his family, for his mother had
been a teacher, and his father, though a farmer, a college graduate.
Stephen himself had had one year at Bowdoin, but had been recalled, as
the head of the house, when his father died. That was a severe blow; but
his mother's death, three years after, was a grief never to be quite
forgotten. Rose, too, was the child of a gently bred mother, and all her
instincts were refined. Yes; Stephen in himself satisfied her in all the
larger wants of her nature, but she had an unsatisfied hunger for the
world,--the world of Portland, where her cousins lived; or, better
still, the world of Boston, of which she heard through Mrs. Wealthy
Brooks, whose nephew Claude often came to visit her in Edgewood. Life on
a farm a mile and a half distant from post-office and stores; life in
the house with Rufus, who was rumored to be somewhat wild and
unsteady,--this prospect seemed a trifle dull and uneventful to the
trivial part of her, though to the better part it was enough. The better
part of her loved Stephen Waterman, dimly feeling the richness of his
nature, the tenderness of his affection, the strength of his character.
Rose was not destitute either of imagination or sentiment. She did not
relish this constant weighing of Stephen in the balance: he was too good
to be weighed and considered. She longed to be carried out of herself on
a wave of rapturous assent, but something seemed to hold her back,--some
seed of discontent with the man's environment and circumstances, some
germ of longing for a gayer, brighter, more varied life. No amount of
self-searching or argument could change the situation. She always loved
Stephen more or less: more when he was away from her, because she never
approved his collars nor the set of his shirt bosom; and as he
naturally wore these despised articles of apparel whenever he proposed
to her, she was always lukewarm about marrying him and settling down on
the River Farm. Still, to-day she discovered in herself, with positive
gratitude, a warmer feeling for him than she had experienced before. He
wore a new and becoming gray flannel shirt, with the soft turnover
collar that belonged to it, and a blue tie, the color of his kind eyes.
She knew that he had shaved his beard at her request not long ago, and
that when she did not like the effect as much as she had hoped, he had
meekly grown a mustache for her sake; it did seem as if a man could
hardly do more to please an exacting lady-love.

And she had admired him unreservedly when he pulled off his boots and
jumped into the river to save Alcestis Crambry's life, without giving a
single thought to his own.

And was there ever, after all, such a noble, devoted, unselfish fellow,
or a better brother? And would she not despise herself for rejecting him
simply because he was countrified, and because she longed to see the
world of the fashion-plates in the magazines?

"The logs are so like people!" she exclaimed, as they sat down. "I could
name nearly every one of them for somebody in the village. Look at Mite
Shapley, that dancing little one, slipping over the falls and skimming
along the top of the water, keeping out of all the deep places, and
never once touching the rocks."

Stephen fell into her mood. "There's Squire Anderson coming down
crosswise and bumping everything in reach. You know he's always buying
lumber and logs without knowing what he is going to do with them. They
just lie and rot by the roadside. The boys always say that a toad-stool
is the old Squire's 'mark' on a log."

"And that stout, clumsy one is Short Dennett.--What are you doing,
Stephen!"

"Only building a fence round this clump of harebells," Stephen replied.
"They've just got well rooted, and if the boys come skidding down the
bank with their spiked shoes, the poor things will never hold up their
heads again. Now they're safe.--Oh, look, Rose! There come the minister
and his wife!"

A portly couple of peeled logs, exactly matched in size, came
ponderously over the falls together, rose within a second of each other,
joined again, and swept under the bridge side by side.

"And--oh! oh! Dr. and Mrs. Cram just after them! Isn't that funny?"
laughed Rose, as a very long, slender pair of pines swam down, as close
to each other as if they had been glued in that position. Rose thought,
as she watched them, who but Stephen would have cared what became of the
clump of delicate harebells. How gentle such a man would be to a woman!
How tender his touch would be if she were ill or in trouble!

Several single logs followed,--crooked ones, stolid ones, adventurous
ones, feeble swimmers, deep divers. Some of them tried to start a small
jam on their own account; others stranded themselves for good and all,
as Rose and Stephen sat there side by side, with little Dan Cupid for an
invisible third on the bench.

"There never was anything so like people," Rose repeated, leaning
forward excitedly. "And, upon my word, the minister and doctor couples
are still together. I wonder if they'll get as far as the falls at
Union? That would be an odd place to part, wouldn't it--Union?" Stephen
saw his opportunity, and seized it.

"There's a reason, Rose, why two logs go down stream better than one,
and get into less trouble. They make a wider path, create more force
and a better current. It's the same way with men and women. Oh, Rose,
there isn't a man in the world that's loved you as long, or knows how to
love you any better than I do. You're just like a white birch sapling,
and I'm a great, clumsy fir tree; but if you'll only trust yourself to
me, Rose, I'll take you safely down river."

Stephen's big hand closed on Rose's little one she returned its pressure
softly and gave him the kiss that with her, as with him, meant a promise
for all the years to come. The truth and passion in the man had broken
the girl's bonds for the moment. Her vision was clearer, and, realizing
the treasures of love and fidelity that were being offered her, she
accepted them, half unconscious that she was not returning them in kind.
How is the belle of two villages to learn that she should "thank Heaven,
fasting, for a good man's love"?

And Stephen? He went home in the dusk, not knowing whether his feet were
touching the solid earth or whether he was treading upon rainbows.

Rose's pink calico seemed to brush him as he walked in the path that was
wide enough only for one. His solitude was peopled again when he fed the
cattle, for Rose's face smiled at him from the haymow; and when he
strained the milk, Rose held the pans.

His nightly tasks over, he went out and took his favorite seat under the
apple tree. All was still, save for the crickets' ceaseless chirp, the
soft thud of an August sweeting dropping in the grass, and the
swish-swash of the water against his boat, tethered in the Willow Cove.

He remembered when he first saw Rose, for that must have been when he
began to love her, though he was only fourteen and quite unconscious
that the first seed had been dropped in the rich soil of his boyish
heart.

[Illustration: "ROSE, I'LL TAKE YOU SAFELY"]

He was seated on the kerosene barrel in the Edgewood post-office, which
was also the general country store, where newspapers, letters, molasses,
nails, salt codfish, hairpins, sugar, liver pills, canned goods, beans,
and ginghams dwelt in genial proximity. When she entered, just a little
pink-and-white slip of a thing with a tin pail in her hand and a
sunbonnet falling off her wavy hair, Stephen suddenly stopped swinging
his feet. She gravely announced her wants, reading them from a bit of
paper,--1 quart molasses, 1 package ginger, 1 lb. cheese, 2 pairs shoe
laces, 1 card shirt buttons.

While the storekeeper drew off the molasses she exchanged shy looks with
Stephen, who, clean, well-dressed, and carefully mothered as he was,
felt all at once uncouth and awkward, rather as if he were some clumsy
lout pitchforked into the presence of a fairy queen. He offered her the
little bunch of bachelor's buttons he held in his hand, augury of the
future, had he known it,--and she accepted them with a smile. She
dropped her memorandum; he picked it up, and she smiled again, doing
still more fatal damage than in the first instance. No words were
spoken, but Rose, even at ten, had less need of them than most of her
sex, for her dimples, aided by dancing eyes, length of lashes, and curve
of lips, quite took the place of conversation. The dimples tempted,
assented, denied, corroborated, deplored, protested, sympathized, while
the intoxicated beholder cudgeled his brain for words or deeds which
should provoke and evoke more and more dimples.

The storekeeper hung the molasses pail over Rose's right arm and tucked
the packages under her left, and as he opened the mosquito netting door
to let her pass out she looked back at Stephen, perched on the kerosene
barrel. Just a little girl, a little glance, a little dimple, and
Stephen was never quite the same again. The years went on, and the boy
became man, yet no other image had ever troubled the deep, placid waters
of his heart. Now, after many denials, the hopes and longings of his
nature had been answered, and Rose had promised to marry him. He would
sacrifice his passion for logging and driving in the future, and become
a staid farmer and man of affairs, only giving himself a river holiday
now and then. How still and peaceful it was under the trees, and how
glad his mother would be to think that the old farm would wake from its
sleep, and a woman's light foot be heard in the sunny kitchen!

Heaven was full of silent stars, and there was a moonglade on the water
that stretched almost from him to Rose. His heart embarked on that
golden pathway and sailed on it to the farther shore. The river was free
of logs, and under the light of the moon it shone like a silver mirror.
The soft wind among the fir branches breathed Rose's name; the river,
rippling against the shore, sang, "Rose;" and as Stephen sat there
dreaming of the future, his dreams, too, could have been voiced in one
word, and that word "Rose."




THE LITTLE HOUSE


The autumn days flew past like shuttles in a loom. The river reflected
the yellow foliage of the white birch and the scarlet of the maples. The
wayside was bright with goldenrod, with the red tassels of the sumac,
with the purple frost-flower and feathery clematis.

If Rose was not as happy as Stephen, she was quietly content, and felt
that she had more to be grateful for than most girls, for Stephen
surprised her with first one evidence and then another of thoughtful
generosity. In his heart of hearts he felt that Rose was not wholly his,
that she reserved, withheld something; and it was the subjugation of
this rebellious province that he sought. He and Rose had agreed to wait
a year for their marriage, in which time Rose's cousin would finish
school and be ready to live with the old people; meanwhile Stephen had
learned that his maiden aunt would be glad to come and keep house for
Rufus. The work at the River Farm was too hard for a girl, so he had
persuaded himself of late, and the house was so far from the village
that Rose was sure to be lonely. He owned a couple of acres between his
place and the Edgewood bridge, and here, one afternoon only a month
after their engagement, he took Rose to see the foundations of a little
house he was building for her. It was to be only a story-and-a-half
cottage of six small rooms, the two upper chambers to be finished off
later on. Stephen had placed it well back from the road, leaving space
in front for what was to be a most wonderful arrangement of flower-beds,
yet keeping a strip at the back, on the river-brink, for a small
vegetable garden. There had been a house there years before--so many
years that the blackened ruins were entirely overgrown; but a few elms
and an old apple-orchard remained to shade the new dwelling and give
welcome to the coming inmates.

Stephen had fifteen hundred dollars in bank, he could turn his hand to
almost anything, and his love was so deep that Rose's plumb-line had
never sounded bottom; accordingly he was able, with the help of two
steady workers, to have the roof on before the first of November. The
weather was clear and fine, and by Thanksgiving clapboards, shingles,
two coats of brown paint, and even the blinds had all been added. This
exhibition of reckless energy on Stephen's part did not wholly commend
itself to the neighborhood.

"Steve's too turrible spry," said Rose's grandfather; "he'll trip
himself up some o' these times."

"You never will," remarked his better half, sagely.

"The resks in life come along fast enough, without runnin' to meet 'em,"
continued the old man. "There's good dough in Rose, but it ain't more'n
half riz. Let somebody come along an' drop in a little more yeast, or
set the dish a little mite nearer the stove, an' you'll see what'll
happen."

"Steve's kept house for himself some time, an' I guess he knows more
about bread-makin' than you do."

"There don't nobody know more'n I do about nothin', when my pipe's
drawin' real good an' nobody's thornin' me to go to work," replied Mr.
Wiley; "but nobody's willin' to take the advice of a man that's seen the
world an' lived in large places, an' the risin' generation is in a
turrible hurry. I don' know how 't is: young folks air allers settin'
the clock forrard an' the old ones puttin' it back."

"Did you ketch anything for dinner when you was out this mornin'?" asked
his wife. "No, I fished an' fished, till I was about ready to drop, an'
I did git a few shiners, but land, they wa'n't as big as the worms I was
ketchin' 'em with, so I pitched 'em back in the water an' quit."

During the progress of these remarks Mr. Wiley opened the door under the
sink, and from beneath a huge iron pot drew a round tray loaded with a
glass pitcher and half a dozen tumblers, which he placed carefully on
the kitchen table.

"This is the last day's option I've got on this lemonade-set," he said,
"an' if I'm goin'to Biddeford to-morrer I've got to make up my mind here
an' now."

With this observation he took off his shoes, climbed in his stocking
feet to the vantage ground of a kitchen chair, and lifted a stone china
pitcher from a corner of the highest cupboard shelf where it had been
hidden.

"This lemonade's gittin' kind o' dusty," he complained, "I cal'lated to
hev a kind of a spree on it when I got through choosin' Rose's weddin'
present, but I guess the pig'll he v to help me out."

The old man filled one of the glasses from the pitcher, pulled up the
kitchen shades to the top, put both hands in his pockets, and walked
solemnly round the table, gazing at his offering from every possible
point of view.

There had been three lemonade sets in the window of a Biddeford crockery
store when Mr. Wiley chanced to pass by, and he had brought home the
blue and green one on approval.

To the casual eye it would have appeared as quite uniquely hideous until
the red and yellow or the purple and orange ones had been seen; after
that, no human being could have made a decision, where each was so
unparalleled in its ugliness, and Old Kennebec's confusion of mind would
have been perfectly understood by the connoisseur.

"How do you like it with the lemonade in, mother?" he inquired eagerly.
"The thing that plagues me most is that the red an' yaller one I hed
home last week lights up better'n this, an' I believe I'll settle on
that; for as I was thinkin' last night in bed, lemonade is mostly an
evenin' drink an' Rose won't be usin' the set much by daylight. Root
beer looks the han'somest in this purple set, but Rose loves lemonade
better'n beer, so I guess I'll pack up this one an' change it to-morrer.
Mebbe when I get it out o' sight an' give the lemonade to the pig I'll
be easier in my mind."

In the opinion of the community at large Stephen's forehandedness in the
matter of preparations for his marriage was imprudence, and his desire
for neatness and beauty flagrant extravagance. The house itself was a
foolish idea, it was thought, but there were extenuating circumstances,
for the maiden aunt really needed a home, and Rufus was likely to marry
before long and take his wife to the River Farm. It was to be hoped in
his case that he would avoid the snares of beauty and choose a good
stout girl who would bring the dairy back to what it was in Mrs.
Waterman's time.

All winter long Stephen labored on the inside of the cottage, mostly by
himself. He learned all trades in succession, Love being his only
master. He had many odd days to spare from his farm work, and if he had
not found days he would have taken nights. Scarcely a nail was driven
without Rose's advice; and when the plastering was hard and dry, the
wall-papers were the result of weeks of consultation.

Among the quiet joys of life there is probably no other so deep, so
sweet, so full of trembling hope and delight, as the building and making
of a home,--a home where two lives are to be merged in one and flow on
together, a home full of mysterious and delicious possibilities, hidden
in a future which is always rose-colored.

Rose's sweet little nature broadened under Stephen's influence; but she
had her moments of discontent and unrest, always followed quickly by
remorse.

At the Thanksgiving sociable some one had observed her turquoise
engagement ring,--some one who said that such a hand was worthy of a
diamond, that turquoises were a pretty color, but that there was only
one stone for an engagement ring, and that was a diamond. At the
Christmas dance the same some one had said her waltzing would make her
"all the rage" in Boston. She wondered if it were true, and wondered
whether, if she had not promised to marry Stephen, some splendid being
from a city would have descended from his heights, bearing diamonds in
his hand. Not that she would have accepted them; she only wondered.
These disloyal thoughts came seldom, and she put them resolutely away,
devoting herself with all the greater assiduity to her muslin curtains
and ruffled pillow-shams. Stephen, too, had his momentary pangs. There
were times when he could calm his doubts only by working on the little
house. The mere sight of the beloved floors and walls and ceilings
comforted his heart, and brought him good cheer.

The winter was a cold one, so bitterly cold that even the rapid water at
the Gray Rock was a mass of curdled yellow ice, something that had only
occurred once or twice before within the memory of the oldest
inhabitant.

It was also a very gay season for Pleasant River and Edgewood. Never had
there been so many card-parties, sleigh rides and tavern dances, and
never such wonderful skating. The river was one gleaming, glittering
thoroughfare of ice from Milliken's Mills to the dam at the Edgewood
bridge. At sundown bonfires were built here and there on the mirror like
surface, and all the young people from the neighboring villages gathered
on the ice; while detachments of merry, rosy-cheeked boys and girls,
those who preferred coasting, met at the top of Brigadier Hill, from
which one could get a longer and more perilous slide than from any other
point in the township.

Claude Merrill, in his occasional visits from Boston, was very much in
evidence at the Saturday evening ice parties. He was not an artist at
the sport himself, but he was especially proficient in the art of
strapping on a lady's skates, and murmuring--as he adjusted the last
buckle,--"The prettiest foot and ankle on the river!" It cannot be
denied that this compliment gave secret pleasure to the fair village
maidens who received it, but it was a pleasure accompanied by electric
shocks of excitement. A girl's foot might perhaps be mentioned, if a
fellow were daring enough, but the line was rigidly drawn at the ankle,
which was not a part of the human frame ever alluded to in the polite
society of Edgewood at that time.

Rose, in her red linsey-woolsey dress and her squirrel furs and cap, was
the life of every gathering, and when Stephen took her hand and they
glided up stream, alone together in the crowd, he used to wish that they
might skate on and on up the crystal ice-path of the river, to the moon
itself, whither it seemed to lead them.




THE GARDEN OF EDEN


But the Saco all this time was meditating of its surprises. The snapping
cold weather and the depth to which the water was frozen were aiding it
in its preparation for the greatest event of the season. On a certain
gray Saturday in March, after a week of mild temperature, it began to
rain as if, after months of snowing, it really enjoyed a new form of
entertainment. Sunday dawned with the very flood-gates of heaven
opening, so it seemed. All day long the river was rising under its miles
of unbroken ice, rising at the threatening rate of four inches an hour.

Edgewood went to bed as usual that night, for the bridge at that point
was set too high to be carried away by freshets, but at other villages
whose bridges were in less secure position there was little sleep and
much anxiety.

At midnight a cry was heard from the men watching at Milliken's Mills.
The great ice jam had parted from Rolfe's Island and was swinging out
into the open, pushing everything before it. All the able-bodied men in
the village turned out of bed, and with lanterns in hand began to clear
the stores and mills, for it seemed that everything near the river banks
must go before that avalanche of ice.

Stephen and Rufus were there helping to save the property of their
friends and neighbors; Rose and Mite Shapley had stayed the night with a
friend, and all three girls were shivering with fear and excitement as
they stood near the bridge, watching the never-to-be-forgotten sight. It
is needless to say that the Crambry family was on hand, for whatever
instincts they may have lacked, the instinct for being on the spot when
anything was happening, was present in them to the most remarkable
extent. The town was supporting them in modest winter quarters somewhat
nearer than Killick to the centre of civilization, and the first alarm
brought them promptly to the scene, Mrs. Crambry remarking at intervals:
"If I'd known there'd be so many out I'd ought to have worn my bunnit;
but I ain't got no bunnit, an' if I had they say I ain't got no head to
wear it on!"

By the time the jam neared the falls it had grown with its
accumulations, until it was made up of tier after tier of huge ice
cakes, piled side by side and one upon another, with heaps of trees and
branches and drifting lumber holding them in place. Some of the blocks
stood erect and towered like icebergs, and these, glittering in the
lights of the twinkling lanterns, pushed solemnly forward, cracking,
crushing, and cutting everything in their way. When the great mass
neared the planing mill on the east shore the girls covered their eyes,
expecting to hear the crash of the falling building; but, impelled by
the force of some mysterious current, it shook itself ponderously, and
then, with one magnificent movement, slid up the river bank, tier
following tier in grand confusion. This left a water way for the main
drift; the ice broke in every direction, and down, down, down, from
Bonnie Eagle and Moderation swept the harvest of the winter freezing. It
came thundering over the dam, bringing boats, farming implements, posts,
supports, and every sort of floating lumber with it; and cutting under
the flour mill, tipped it cleverly over on its side and went crashing on
its way down river. At Edgewood it pushed colossal blocks of ice up the
banks into the roadway, piling them end upon end ten feet in air. Then,
tearing and rumbling and booming through the narrows, it covered the
intervale at Pleasant Point and made a huge ice bridge below Union
Falls, a bridge so solid that it stood there for days, a sight for all
the neighboring villages.

This exciting event would have forever set apart this winter from all
others in Stephen's memory, even had it not been also the winter when he
was building a house for his future wife. But afterwards, in looking
back on the wild night of the ice freshet, Stephen remembered that
Rose's manner was strained and cold and evasive, and that when he had
seen her talking with Claude Merrill, it had seemed to him that that
whippersnapper had looked at her as no honorable man in Edgewood ever
looked at an engaged girl. He recalled his throb of gratitude that
Claude lived at a safe distance, and his subsequent pang of remorse at
doubting, for an instant, Rose's fidelity.

So at length April came, the Saco was still high, turbid, and angry, and
the boys were waiting at Limington Falls for the "Ossipee drive" to
begin. Stephen joined them there, for he was restless, and the river
called him, as it did every spring. Each stubborn log that he
encountered gave him new courage and power of overcoming. The rush of
the water, the noise and roar and dash, the exposure and danger, all
made the blood run in his veins like new wine. When he came back to the
farm, all the cobwebs had been blown from his brain, and his first
interview with Rose was so intoxicating that he went immediately to
Portland, and bought, in a kind of secret penitence for his former
fears, a pale pink-flowered wall-paper for the bedroom in the new home.
It had once been voted down by the entire advisory committee. Mrs. Wiley
said pink was foolish and was always sure to fade; and the border, being
a mass of solid roses, was five cents a yard, virtually a prohibitive
price. Mr. Wiley said he "should hate to hev a spell of sickness an' lay
abed in a room where there was things growin' all over the place." He
thought "rough-plastered walls, where you could lay an' count the spots
where the roof leaked, was the most entertainin' in sickness." Rose had
longed for the lovely pattern, but had sided dutifully with the prudent
majority, so that it was with a feeling of unauthorized and illegitimate
joy that Stephen papered the room at night, a few strips at a time.

On the third evening, when he had removed all signs of his work, he
lighted two kerosene lamps and two candles, finding the effect, under
this illumination, almost too brilliant and beautiful for belief. Rose
should never see it now, he determined, until the furniture was in
place. They had already chosen the kitchen and bedroom things, though
they would not be needed for some months; but the rest was to wait until
summer, when there would be the hay-money to spend.

Stephen did not go back to the River Farm till one o'clock that night;
the pink bedroom held him in fetters too powerful to break. It looked
like the garden of Eden, he thought. To be sure, it was only fifteen
feet square; Eden might have been a little larger, possibly, but
otherwise the pink bedroom had every advantage. The pattern of roses
growing on a trellis was brighter than any flower-bed in June; and the
border--well, if the border had been five dollars a foot Stephen would
not have grudged the money when he saw the twenty running yards of rosy
bloom rioting under the white ceiling.

Before he blew out the last light he raised it high above his head and
took one fond, final look. "It's the only place I ever saw," he thought,
"that is pretty enough for her. She will look just as if she was growing
here with all the other flowers, and I shall always think of it as the
garden of Eden. I wonder, if I got the license and the ring and took her
by surprise, whether she'd be married in June instead of August? I
could be all ready if I could only persuade her."

At this moment Stephen touched the summit of happiness; and it is a
curious coincidence that as he was dreaming in his garden of Eden, the
serpent, having just arrived at Edgewood, was sleeping peacefully at the
house of Mrs. Brooks.

It was the serpent's fourth visit that season, and he explained to
inquiring friends that his former employer had sold the business, and
that the new management, while reorganizing, had determined to enlarge
the premises, the three clerks who had been retained having two weeks'
vacation with half pay.

It is extraordinary how frequently "wise serpents" are retained by the
management on half, or even full, salary, while the services of the
"harmless doves" are dispensed with, and they are set free to flutter
where they will.




THE SERPENT


Rose Wiley had the brightest eyes in Edgewood. It was impossible to look
at her without realizing that her physical sight was perfect. What
mysterious species of blindness is it that descends, now and then, upon
human creatures, and renders them incapable of judgment or
discrimination?

Claude Merrill was a glove salesman in a Boston fancy-goods store. The
calling itself is undoubtedly respectable, and it is quite conceivable
that a man can sell gloves and still be a man; but Claude Merrill was a
manikin. He inhabited a very narrow space behind a very short counter,
but to him it seemed the earth and the fullness thereof.

When, irreproachably neat and even exquisite in dress, he gave a
Napoleonic glance at his array of glove-boxes to see if the female
assistant had put them in proper order for the day; when, with that
wonderful eye for detail that had wafted him to his present height of
power, he pounced upon the powder-sprinklers and found them, as he
expected, empty; when, with masterly judgment, he had made up and
ticketed a basket of misfits and odd sizes to attract the eyes of women
who were their human counterparts, he felt himself bursting with the
pride and pomp of circumstance. His cambric handkerchief adjusted in his
coat with the monogram corner well displayed, a last touch to the
carefully trained lock on his forehead, and he was ready for his
customers.

"Six, did you say, miss? I should have thought five and three
quarters--Attend to that gentleman, Miss Dix, please; I am very busy.

"Six-and-a-half gray suede? Here they are, an exquisite shade. Shall I
try them on? The right hand, if you will. Perhaps you'd better remove
your elegant ring; I shouldn't like to have anything catch in the
setting."

"Miss Dix! Six-and-a-half black glace--upper shelf, third box--for this
lady. She's in a hurry. We shall see you often after this, I hope,
madam."

"No; we don't keep silk or lisle gloves. We have no call for them; our
customers prefer kid."

Oh, but he was in his element, was Claude Merrill; though the glamour
that surrounded him in the minds of the Edgewood girls did not emanate
wholly from his finicky little person: something of it was the glamour
that belonged to Boston,--remote, fashionable, gay, rich, almost
inaccessible Boston, which none could see without the expenditure of
five or six dollars in railway fare, with the added extravagance of a
night in a hotel, if one would explore it thoroughly and come home
possessed of all its illimitable treasures of wisdom and experience.

When Claude came to Edgewood for a Sunday, or to spend a vacation with
his aunt, he brought with him something of the magic of a metropolis.
Suddenly, to Rose's eye, Stephen looked larger and clumsier, his shoes
were not the proper sort, his clothes were ordinary, his neckties were
years behind the fashion. Stephen's dancing, compared with Claude's, was
as the deliberate motion of an ox to the hopping of a neat little robin.
When Claude took a girl's hand in the "grand right-and-left," it was as
if he were about to try on a delicate glove; the manner in which he
"held his lady" in the polka or schottische made her seem a queen. Mite
Shapley was so affected by it that when Rufus attempted to encircle her
for the mazurka she exclaimed, "Don't act as if you were spearing logs,
Rufus!"

Of the two men, Stephen had more to say, but Claude said more. He was
thought brilliant in conversation; but what wonder, when one considered
his advantages and his dazzling experiences! He had customers who were
worth their thousands; ladies whose fingers never touched dish-water;
ladies who wouldn't buy a glove of anybody else if they went bare-handed
to the grave. He lived with his sister Maude Arthurlena in a house where
there were twenty-two other boarders who could be seated at meals all at
the same time, so immense was the dining-room. He ate his dinner at a
restaurant daily, and expended twenty-five cents for it without
blenching. He went to the theatre once a week, and was often accompanied
by "lady friends" who were "elegant dressers."

In a moment of wrath Stephen had called him a "counter-jumper," but it
was a libel. So short and rough a means of exit from his place of power
was wholly beneath Claude's dignity. It was with a "Pardon me, Miss
Dix," that, the noon hour having arrived, he squeezed by that slave and
victim, and raising the hinged board that separated his kingdom from
that of the ribbon department, passed out of the store, hat in hand,
serene in the consciousness that though other clerks might nibble
luncheon from a brown paper bag, he would speedily be indulging in an
expensive repast; and Miss Dix knew it, and it was a part of his almost
invincible attraction for her.

It seemed flying in the face of Providence to decline the attentions of
such a gorgeous butterfly of fashion simply because one was engaged to
marry another man at some distant day.

All Edgewood femininity united in saying that there never was such a
perfect gentleman as Claude Merrill; and during the time when his
popularity was at its height Rose lost sight of the fact that Stephen
could have furnished the stuff for a dozen Claudes and have had enough
left for an ordinary man besides.

April gave place to May, and a veil hung between the lovers,--an
intangible, gossamer-like thing, not to be seen with the naked eye, but,
oh! so plainly to be felt. Rose hid herself thankfully behind it, while
Stephen had not courage to lift a corner. She had twice been seen
driving with Claude Merrill--that Stephen knew; but she had explained
that there were errands to be done, that her grandfather had taken the
horse, and that Mr. Merrill's escort had been both opportune and
convenient for these practical reasons. Claude was everywhere present,
the centre of attraction, the observed of all observers. He was
irresistible, contagious, almost epidemic. Rose was now gay, now silent;
now affectionate, now distant, now coquettish; in fine, everything that
was capricious, mysterious, agitating, incomprehensible.

One morning Alcestis Crambry went to the post-office for Stephen and
brought him back the newspapers and letters. He had hung about the River
Farm so much that Stephen finally gave him bed and food in exchange for
numberless small errands. Rufus was temporarily confined in a dark room
with some strange pain and trouble in his eyes, and Alcestis proved of
use in many ways. He had always been Rose's slave, and had often brought
messages and notes from the Brier Neighborhood, so that when Stephen saw
a folded note among the papers his heart gave a throb of anticipation.

The note was brief, and when he had glanced through it he said: "This is
not mine, Alcestis; it belongs to Miss Rose. Go straight back and give
it to her as you were told; and another time keep your wits about you,
or I'll send you back to Killick."

Alcestis Crambry's ideas on all subjects were extremely vague. Claude
Merrill had given him a letter for Rose, but his notion was that
anything that belonged to her belonged to Stephen, and the Waterman
place was much nearer than the Wileys', particularly at dinner-time!

When the boy had slouched away, Stephen sat under the apple tree, now a
mass of roseate bloom, and buried his face in his hands.

It was not precisely a love-letter that he had read, nevertheless it
blackened the light of the sun for him. Claude asked Rose to meet him
anywhere on the road to the station and to take a little walk, as he was
leaving that afternoon and could not bear to say good-by to her in the
presence of her grandmother. "Under the circumstances," he wrote, deeply
underlining the words, "I cannot remain a moment longer in Edgewood,
where I have been so happy and so miserable!" He did not refer to the
fact that the time limit on his return-ticket expired that day, for his
dramatic instinct told him that such sordid matters have no place in
heroics.

Stephen sat motionless under the tree for an hour, deciding on some plan
of action.

He had work at the little house, but he did not dare go there lest he
should see the face of dead Love looking from the windows of the pink
bedroom; dead Love, cold, sad, merciless. His cheeks burned as he
thought of the marriage license and the gold ring hidden away upstairs
in the drawer of his shaving stand. What a romantic fool he had been, to
think he could hasten the glad day by a single moment! What a piece of
boyish folly it had been, and how it shamed him in his own eyes!

When train time drew near he took his boat and paddled down stream. If
for the Finland lover's reindeer there was but one path in all the
world, and that the one that led to Her, so it was for Stephen's canoe,
which, had it been set free on the river by day or by night, might have
floated straight to Rose.

He landed at the usual place, a bit of sandy shore near the Wiley house,
and walked drearily up the bank through the woods. Under the shade of
the pines the white stars of the hepatica glistened and the pale
anemones were coming into bloom. Partridge-berries glowed red under
their glossy leaves, and clumps of violets sweetened the air. Squirrels
chattered, woodpeckers tapped, thrushes sang; but Stephen was blind and
deaf to all the sweet harbingers of spring.

Just then he heard voices, realizing with a throb of delight that, at
any rate, Rose had not left home to meet Claude, as he had asked her to
do. Looking through the branches, he saw the two standing together, Mrs.
Brooks's horse; with the offensive trunk in the back of the wagon, being
hitched to a tree near by. There was nothing in the tableau to stir
Stephen to fury, but he read between the lines and suffered as he
read--suffered and determined to sacrifice himself if he must, so that
Rose could have what she wanted, this miserable apology for a man. He
had never been the husband for Rose; she must take her place in a larger
community, worthy of her beauty and charm.

Claude was talking and gesticulating ardently. Rose's head was bent and
the tears were rolling down her cheeks. Suddenly Claude raised his hat,
and with a passionate gesture of renunciation walked swiftly to the
wagon, and looking back once, drove off with the utmost speed of which
the Brooks's horse was capable,--Rose waving him a farewell with one
hand and wiping her eyes with the other.




THE TURQUOISE RING


Stephen stood absolutely still in front of the opening in the trees, and
as Rose turned she met him face to face. She had never dreamed his eyes
could be so stern, his mouth so hard, and she gave a sob like a child.

"You seem to be in trouble," Stephen said in a voice so cold she thought
it could not be his.

"I am not in trouble, exactly," Rose stammered, concealing her
discomfiture as well as possible. "I am a little unhappy because I have
made some one else unhappy; and now that you know it, you will be
unhappy too, and angry besides, I suppose, though you've seen everything
there was to see."

"There is no occasion for sorrow," Stephen said. "I didn't mean to break
in on any interview; I came over to give you back your freedom. If you
ever cared enough for me to marry me, the time has gone by. I am willing
to own that I over-persuaded you, but I am not the man to take a girl
against her inclinations, so we will say good-by and end the thing here
and now. I can only wish"--here his smothered rage at fate almost choked
him--"that, when you were selecting another husband, you had chosen a
whole man!"

Rose quivered with the scorn of his tone. "Size isn't everything!" she
blazed.

"Not in bodies, perhaps; but it counts for something in hearts and
brains, and it is convenient to have a sense of honor that's at least as
big as a grain of mustard-seed."

"Claude Merrill is not dishonorable," Rose exclaimed impetuously; "or at
least he isn't as bad as you think: he has never asked me to marry him."

"Then he probably was not quite ready to speak, or perhaps you were not
quite ready to hear," retorted Stephen, bitterly; "but don't let us have
words,--there'll be enough to regret without adding those. I have seen,
ever since New Year's, that you were not really happy or contented; only
I wouldn't allow it to myself: I kept hoping against hope that I was
mistaken. There have been times when I would have married you, willing
or unwilling, but I didn't love you so well then; and now that there's
another man in the case, it's different, and I'm strong enough to do the
right thing. Follow your heart and be happy; in a year or two I shall be
glad I had the grit to tell you so. Good-by, Rose!"

Rose, pale with amazement, summoned all her pride, and drawing the
turquoise engagement ring from her finger, handed it silently to
Stephen, hiding her face as he flung it vehemently down the river-bank.
His dull eyes followed it and half uncomprehendingly saw it settle and
glisten in a nest of brown pine-needles. Then he put out his hand for a
last clasp and strode away without a word.

[Illustration: HIDING HER FACE AS HE FLUNG IT DOWN THE RIVER-BANK]

Presently Rose heard first the scrape of his boat on the sand, then the
soft sound of his paddles against the water, then nothing but the
squirrels and the woodpeckers and the thrushes, then not even
these,--nothing but the beating of her own heart.

She sat down heavily, feeling as if she were wide awake for the first
time in many weeks. How had things come to this pass with her?

Claude Merrill had flattered her vanity and given her some moments of
restlessness and dissatisfaction with her lot; but he had not until
to-day really touched her heart or tempted her, even momentarily, from
her allegiance to Stephen. His eyes had always looked unspeakable
things; his voice had seemed to breathe feelings that he had never dared
put in words; but to-day he had really stirred her, for although he had
still been vague, it was easy to see that his love for her had passed
all bounds of discretion. She remembered his impassioned farewells, his
despair, his doubt as to whether he could forget her by plunging into
the vortex of business, or whether he had better end it all in the
river, as so many other broken-hearted fellows had done. She had been
touched by his misery, even against her better judgment; and she had
intended to confess it all to Stephen sometime, telling him that she
should never again accept attentions from a stranger, lest a tragedy
like this should happen twice in a lifetime.

She had imagined that Stephen would be his large-minded, great-hearted,
magnanimous self, and beg her to forget this fascinating will-o'the-wisp
by resting in his deeper, serener love. She had meant to be contrite and
faithful, praying nightly that poor Claude might live down his present
anguish, of which she had been the innocent cause.

Instead, what had happened? She had been put altogether in the wrong.
Stephen had almost cast her off, and that, too, without argument. He had
given her her liberty before she had asked for it, taking it for
granted, without question, that she desired to be rid of him. Instead of
comforting her in her remorse, or sympathizing with her for so nobly
refusing to shine in Claude's larger world of Boston, Stephen had
assumed that she was disloyal in every particular.

And pray how was she to cope with such a disagreeable and complicated
situation?

It would not be long before the gossips rolled under their tongues the
delicious morsel of a broken engagement, and sooner or later she must
brave the displeasure of her grandmother.

And the little house--that was worse than anything. Her tears flowed
faster as she thought of Stephen's joy in it, of his faithful labor, of
the savings he had invested in it. She hated and despised her self when
she thought of the house, and for the first time in her life she
realized the limitations of her nature, the poverty of her ideals.

What should she do? She had lost Stephen and ruined his life. Now, in
order that she need not blight a second career, must she contrive to
return Claude's love! To be sure, she thought, it seemed indecent to
marry any other man than Stephen, when they had built a house together,
and chosen wall-papers, and a kitchen stove, and dining-room chairs; but
was it not the only way to evade the difficulties?

Suppose that Stephen, in a fit of pique, should ask somebody else to
share the new cottage?

As this dreadful possibility came into view, Rose's sobs actually
frightened the birds and the squirrels. She paced back and forth under
the trees, wondering how she could have been engaged to a man for eight
months and know so little about him as she seemed to know about Stephen
Waterman to-day. Who would have believed he could be so autocratic, so
severe, so unapproachable! Who could have foreseen that she, Rose Wiley,
would ever be given up to another man,--handed over as coolly as if she
had been a bale of cotton? She wanted to return Claude Merrill's love
because it was the only way out of the tangle; but at the moment she
almost hated him for making so much trouble, for hurting Stephen, for
abasing her in her own eyes, and, above all, for giving her rustic lover
the chance of impersonating an injured emperor.

It did not simplify the situation to have Mite Shapley come in during
the evening and run upstairs, uninvited, to sit on the toot of her bed
and chatter.

Rose had closed her blinds and lay in the dark, pleading a headache.

Mite was in high feather. She had met Claude Merrill going to the
station that afternoon. He was much too early for the train, which the
station agent reported to be behind time, so he had asked her to take a
drive. She didn't know how it happened, for he looked at his watch every
now and then; but, anyway, they got to laughing and "carrying on," and
when they came back to the station the train had gone. Wasn't that the
greatest joke of the season? What did Rose suppose they did next?

Rose didn't know and didn't care; her head ached too badly.

Well, they had driven to Wareham, and Claude had hired a livery team
there, and had been taken into Portland with his trunk, and she had
brought Mrs. Brooks's horse back to Edgewood. Wasn't that ridiculous?
And hadn't she cut out Rose where she least expected?

Rose was distinctly apathetic, and Mite Shapley departed after a very
brief call, leaving behind her an entirely new train of thought.

If Claude Merrill were so love-blighted that he could only by the
greatest self-control keep from flinging himself into the river, how
could he conceal his sufferings so completely from Mite Shapley,--little
shallow-pated, scheming coquette?

"So that pretty Merrill feller has gone, has he, mother?" inquired Old
Kennebec that night, as he took off his wet shoes and warmed his feet at
the kitchen oven. "Well, it ain't a mite too soon. I allers distrust
that pink-an'-white, rosy-posy kind of a man. One of the most turrible
things that ever happened in Gard'ner was brought about by jest sech a
feller. Mothers hedn't hardly ought to name their boy babies Claude
without they expect 'em to play the dickens with the girls. I don' know
nothin' 'bout the fust Claude, there ain't none of 'em in the Bible,
air they, but whoever he was, I bate ye he hed a deceivin' tongue. If it
hedn't be'n for me, that Claude in Gard'ner would 'a' run away with my
brother's fust wife; an' I'll tell ye jest how I contrived to put a
spoke in his wheel."

But Mrs. Wiley, being already somewhat familiar with the circumstances,
had taken her candle and retired to her virtuous couch.




ROSE SEES THE WORLD


Was this the world, after all? Rose asked herself; and, if so, what was
amiss with it, and where was the charm, the bewilderment, the
intoxication, the glamour?

She had been glad to come to Boston, for the last two weeks in Edgewood
had proved intolerable. She had always been a favorite heretofore, from
the days when the boys fought for the privilege of dragging her sled up
the hills, and filling her tiny mitten with peppermints, down to the
year when she came home from the Wareham Female Seminary, an
acknowledged belle and beauty. Suddenly she had felt her popularity
dwindling. There was no real change in the demeanor of her
acquaintances, but there was a certain subtle difference of atmosphere.
Everybody sympathized tacitly with Stephen, and she did not wonder, for
there were times when she secretly took his part against herself. Only a
few candid friends had referred to the rupture openly in conversation,
but these had been blunt in their disapproval.

It seemed part of her ill fortune that just at this time Rufus should be
threatened with partial blindness, and that Stephen's heart, already
sore, should be torn with new anxieties. She could hardly bear to see
the doctor's carriage drive by day after day, and hear night after night
that Rufus was unresigned, melancholy, half mad; while Stephen, as the
doctor said, was brother, mother, and father in one, as gentle as a
woman, as firm as Gibraltar.

These foes to her peace of mind all came from within; but without was
the hourly reproach of her grandmother, whose scorching tongue touched
every sensitive spot in the girl's nature and burned it like fire.

Finally a way of escape opened. Mrs. Wealthy Brooks, who had always been
rheumatic, grew suddenly worse. She had heard of a "magnetic" physician
in Boston, also of one who used electricity with wonderful effect, and
she announced her intention of taking both treatments impartially and
alternately. The neighbors were quite willing that Wealthy Ann Brooks
should spend the deceased Ezra's money in any way she pleased,--she had
earned it, goodness knows, by living with him for twenty-five
years,--but before the day for her departure arrived her right arm and
knee became so much more painful that it was impossible for her to
travel alone.

At this juncture Rose was called upon to act as nurse and companion in a
friendly way. She seized the opportunity hungrily as a way out of her
present trouble; but, knowing what Mrs. Brooks's temper was in time of
health, she could see clearly what it was likely to prove when pain and
anguish wrung the brow.

Rose had been in Boston now for some weeks, and she was sitting in the
Joy Street boarding-house,--Joy Street, forsooth! It was nearly bedtime,
and she was looking out upon a huddle of roofs and back yards, upon a
landscape filled with clothes-lines, ash-barrels, and ill-fed cats.
There were no sleek country tabbies, with the memory in their eyes of
tasted cream, nothing but city-born, city-bred, thin, despairing cats of
the pavement, cats no more forlorn than Rose herself.

[Illustration: SHE HAD GONE WITH MAUDE TO CLAUDE'S STORE]

She had "seen Boston," for she had accompanied Mrs. Brooks in the
horse-cars daily to the two different temples of healing where that lady
worshipped and offered sacrifices. She had also gone with Maude
Arthurlena to Claude Merrill's store to buy pair of gloves, and had
overheard Miss Dix (the fashionable "lady-assistant" before mentioned)
say to Miss Brackett of the ribbon department, that she thought Mr.
Merrill must have worn his blinders that time he stayed so long in
Edgewood. This bit of polished irony was unintelligible to Rose at
first, but she mastered it after an hour's reflection. She wasn't
looking her best that day, she knew; the cotton dresses that seemed so
pretty at home were common and countrified here, and her best black
cashmere looked cheap and shapeless beside Miss Dix's brilliantine. Miss
Dix's figure was her strong point, and her dressmaker was particularly
skillful in the arts of suggestion, concealment, and revelation. Beauty
has its chosen backgrounds. Rose in white dimity, standing knee deep in
her blossoming brier bushes, the river running at her feet, dark pine
trees behind her graceful head, sounded depths and touched heights of
harmony forever beyond the reach of the modish Miss Dix, but she was
out of her element and suffered accordingly.

Rose had gone to walk with Claude one evening when she first arrived. He
had shown her the State House and the Park Street Church, and sat with
her on one of the benches in the Common until nearly ten. She knew that
Mrs. Brooks had told her nephew of the broken engagement, but he made no
reference to the matter, save to congratulate her that she was rid of a
man who was so clumsy, so dull and behind the times, as Stephen
Waterman, saying that he had always marveled she could engage herself to
anybody who could insult her by offering her a turquoise ring.

Claude was very interesting that evening, Rose thought, but rather
gloomy and unlike his former self. He referred to his grave
responsibilities, to the frail health of Maude Arthurlena, and to the
vicissitudes of business. He vaguely intimated that his daily life in
the store was not so pleasant as it had been formerly; that there were
"those" (he would speak no more plainly) who embarrassed him with
undesired attentions, "those" who, without the smallest shadow of right,
vexed him with petty jealousies.

Rose dared not ask questions on so delicate a topic, but she remembered
in a flash Miss Dix's heavy eyebrows, snapping eyes, and high color.
Claude seemed very happy that Rose had come to Boston, though he was
surprised, knowing what a trial his aunt must be, now that she was so
helpless. It was unfortunate, also, that Rose could not go on excursions
without leaving his aunt alone, or he should have been glad to offer his
escort. He pressed her hand when he left her at her door, telling her
she could never realize what a comfort her friendship was to him; could
never imagine how thankful he was that she had courageously freed
herself from ties that in time would have made her wretched. His heart
was full, he said, of feelings he dared not utter; but in the near
future, when certain clouds had rolled by, he would unlock its
treasures, and then--but no more to-night: he could not trust himself.

Rose felt as if she were assuming one of the characters in a mysterious
romance, such as unfolded itself only in books or in Boston; but,
thrilling as it was, it was nevertheless extremely unsatisfactory.

Convinced that Claude Merrill was passionately in love with her, one of
her reasons for coming to Boston had been to fall more deeply in love
with him, and thus heal some, at least, of the wounds she had inflicted.
It may have been a foolish idea, but after three weeks it seemed still
worse,--a useless one; for after several interviews she felt herself
drifting farther and farther from Claude; and if he felt any burning
ambition to make her his own, he certainly concealed it with admirable
art. Given up, with the most offensive magnanimity, by Stephen, and not
greatly desired by Claude,--that seemed the present status of proud Rose
Wiley of the Brier Neighborhood.

It was June, she remembered, as she leaned out of the open window; at
least it was June in Edgewood, and she supposed for convenience's sake
they called it June in Boston. Not that it mattered much what the poor
city prisoners called it. How beautiful the river would be at home, with
the trees along the banks in full leaf! How she hungered and thirsted
for the river,--to see it sparkle in the sunlight; to watch the
moonglade stretching from one bank to the other; to hear the soft lap of
the water on the shore, and the distant murmur of the falls at the
bridge! And the Brier Neighborhood would be at its loveliest, for the
wild roses were in blossom by now. And the little house! How sweet it
must look under the shade of the elms, with the Saco rippling at the
back! Was poor Rufus still lying in a darkened room, and was Stephen
nursing him,--disappointed Stephen,--dear, noble old Stephen?




GOLD AND PINCHBECK


Just then Mrs. Brooks groaned in the next room and called Rose, who went
in to minister to her real needs, or to condole with her fancied ones,
whichever course of action appeared to be the more agreeable at the
moment.

Mrs. Brooks desired conversation, it seemed, or at least she desired an
audience for a monologue, for she recognized no antiphonal obligations
on the part of her listeners. The doctors were not doing her a speck of
good, and she was just squandering money in a miserable boarding-house,
when she might be enjoying poor health in her own home; and she didn't
believe her hens were receiving proper care, and she had forgotten to
pull down the shades in the spare room, and the sun would fade the
carpet out all white before she got back, and she didn't believe Dr.
Smith's magnetism was any more use than a cat's foot, nor Dr. Robinson's
electricity any better than a bumblebee's buzz, and she had a great mind
to go home and try Dr. Lord from Bonnie Eagle; and there was a letter
for Rose on the bureau, which had come before supper, but the shiftless,
lazy, worthless landlady had forgotten to send it up till just now.

The letter was from Mite Shapley, but Rose could read only half of it to
Mrs. Brooks,--little beside the news that the Waterman barn, the finest
barn in the whole township, had been struck by lightning and burned to
the ground. Stephen was away at the time, having taken Rufus to
Portland, where an operation on his eyes would shortly be performed at
the hospital, and one of the neighbors was sleeping at the River Farm
and taking care of the cattle; still the house might not have been
saved but for one of Alcestis Crambry's sudden bursts of common sense,
which occurred now quite regularly. He succeeded not only in getting the
horses out of the stalls, but gave the alarm so promptly that the whole
neighborhood was soon on the scene of action. Stephen was the only man,
Mite reminded Rose, who ever had any patience with, or took any pains to
teach, Alcestis, but he never could have expected to be rewarded in this
practical way. The barn was only partly insured; and when she had met
Stephen at the station next day, and condoled with him on his loss, he
had said: "Oh, well, Mite, a little more or less doesn't make much
difference just now."

"The rest wouldn't interest you, Mrs. Brooks," said Rose, precipitately
preparing to leave the room.

"Something about Claude, I suppose," ventured that astute lady. "I think
Mite kind of fancied him. I don't believe he ever gave her any real
encouragement; but he'd make love to a pump, Claude Merrill would; and
so would his father before him. How my sister Abby made out to land him
we never knew, for they said he'd proposed to every woman in the town of
Bingham, not excepting the wooden Indian girl in front of the cigar
store, and not one of 'em but our Abby ever got a chance to name the
day. Abby was as set as the everlastin' hills, and if she'd made up her
mind to have a man he couldn't wriggle away from her nohow in the world.
It beats all how girls do run after these slick-haired, sweet-tongued,
Miss Nancy kind o' fellers, that ain't but little good as beaux an'
worth less than nothing as husbands."

Rose scarcely noticed what Mrs. Brooks said, she was too anxious to read
the rest of Mite Shapley's letter in the quiet of her own room.

    "Stephen looks thin and pale [so it ran on], but he does not allow
    anybody to sympathize with him. I think you ought to know something
    that I haven't told you before for fear of hurting your feelings;
    but if I were in your place I'd like to hear everything, and then
    you'll know how to act when you come home. Just after you left,
    Stephen plowed up all the land in front of your new house,--every
    inch of it, all up and down the road, between the fence and the
    front door-step,--and then he planted corn where you were going to
    have your flower-beds.

    "He has closed all the blinds and hung a 'To Let' sign on the large
    elm at the gate. Stephen never was spiteful in his life, but this
    looks a little like spite. Perhaps he only wanted to save his
    self-respect and let people know, that everything between you was
    over forever. Perhaps he thought it would stop talk once and for
    all. But you won't mind, you lucky girl, staying nearly three months
    in Boston! [So Almira purled on in violet ink, with shaded letters.]
    How I wish it had come my way, though I'm not good at rubbing
    rheumatic patients, even when they are his aunt. Is he as devoted as
    ever? And when will it be? How do you like the theatre? Mother
    thinks you won't attend; but, by what he used to say, I am sure
    church members in Boston always go to amusements.

                                          "Your loving friend,
                                                       "Almira Shapley.

    "P.S. They say Rufus's doctor's bills here, and the operation and
    hospital expenses in Portland, will mount up to five hundred
    dollars. Of course Stephen will be dreadfully hampered by the loss
    of his barn, and maybe he wants to let your house that was to be,
    because he really needs money. In that case the dooryard won't be
    very attractive to tenants, with corn planted right up to the steps
    and no path left! It's two feet tall now, and by August (just when
    you were intending to move in) it will hide the front windows. Not
    that you'll care, with a diamond on your engagement finger!"

The letter was more than flesh and blood could stand, and Rose flung
herself on her bed to think and regret and repent, and, if possible, to
sob herself to sleep.

She knew now that she had never admired and respected Stephen so much as
at the moment when, under the reproach of his eyes, she had given him
back his ring. When she left Edgewood and parted with him forever she
had really loved him better than when she had promised to marry him.

Claude Merrill, on his native Boston heath, did not appear the romantic,
inspiring figure he had once been in her eyes. A week ago she distrusted
him; to-night she despised him.

What had happened to Rose was the dilation of her vision. She saw
things under a wider sky and in a clearer light. Above all, her heart
was wrung with pity for Stephen--Stephen, with no comforting woman's
hand to help him in his sore trouble; Stephen, bearing his losses alone,
his burdens and anxieties alone, his nursing and daily work alone. Oh,
how she felt herself needed! Needed! that was the magic word that
unlocked her better nature. "Darkness is the time for making roots and
establishing plants, whether of the soil or of the soul," and all at
once Rose had become a woman: a little one, perhaps, but a whole
woman--and a bit of an angel, too, with healing in her wings. When and
how had this metamorphosis come about? Last summer the fragile
brier-rose had hung over the river and looked at its pretty reflection
in the placid surface of the water. Its few buds and blossoms were so
lovely, it sighed for nothing more. The changes in the plant had been
wrought secretly and silently. In some mysterious way, as common to soul
as to plant life, the roots had gathered in more nourishment from the
earth, they had stored up strength and force, and all at once there was
a marvelous fructifying of the plant, hardiness of stalk, new shoots
everywhere, vigorous leafage, and a shower of blossoms.

But everything was awry: Boston was a failure; Claude was a weakling and
a flirt; her turquoise ring was lying on the river-bank; Stephen did not
love her any longer; her flower-beds were plowed up and planted in corn;
and the cottage that Stephen had built and she had furnished, that
beloved cottage, was to let.

She was in Boston; but what did that amount to, after all? What was the
State House to a bleeding heart, or the Old South Church to a pride
wounded like hers?

At last she fell asleep, but it was only by stopping her ears to the
noises of the city streets and making herself imagine the sound of the
river rippling under her bedroom windows at home. The back yards of
Boston faded, and in their place came the banks of the Saco, strewn with
pine needles, fragrant with wild flowers. Then there was the bit of
sunny beach, where Stephen moored his boat. She could hear the sound of
his paddle. Boston lovers came a-courting in the horse-cars, but hers
had floated down stream to her just at dusk in a birch-bark canoe, or
sometimes, in the moonlight, on a couple of logs rafted together.

But it was all over now, and she could see only Stephen's stern face as
he flung the despised turquoise ring down the river bank.




A COUNTRY CHEVALIER


It was early in August when Mrs. Wealthy Brooks announced her speedy
return from Boston to Edgewood.

"It's jest as well Rose is comin' back," said Mr. Wiley to his wife. "I
never favored her goin' to Boston, where that rosy-posy Claude feller is.
When he was down here he was kep' kind o' tied up in a boxstall, but
there he's caperin' loose round the pastur'."

"I should think Rose would be ashamed to come back, after the way she's
carried on," remarked Mrs. Wiley, "but if she needed punishment I guess
she's got it bein' comp'ny-keeper to Wealthy Ann Brooks. Bein' a church
member in good an' reg'lar standin', I s'pose Wealthy Ann'll go to
heaven, but I can only say that it would be a sight pleasanter place for
a good many if she didn't."

"Rose has be'n foolish an' flirty an' wrong-headed," allowed her
grandfather; "but it won't do no good to treat her like a hardened
criminile, same's you did afore she went away. She ain't hardly got her
wisdom teeth cut, in love affairs! She ain't broke the laws of the State
o' Maine, nor any o' the ten commandments; she ain't disgraced the
family, an' there's a chance for her to reform, seein' as how she ain't
twenty year old yet. I was turrible wild an' hot-headed myself afore you
ketched me an' tamed me down."

"You ain't so tame now as I wish you was," Mrs. Wiley replied testily.

"If you could smoke a clay pipe 't would calm your nerves, mother, an'
help you to git some philosophy inter you; you need a little philosophy
turrible bad."

"I need patience consid'able more," was Mrs. Wiley's withering retort.

"That's the way with folks," said Old Kennebec reflectively, as he went
on peacefully puffing. "If you try to indoose 'em to take an int'rest in
a bran'-new virtue, they won't look at it; but they'll run down a side
street an' buy half a yard more o' some turrible old shopworn trait o'
character that they've kep' in stock all their lives, an' that
everybody's sick to death of. There was a man in Gard'ner"--

But alas! the experiences of the Gardiner man, though told in the same
delightful fashion that had won Mrs. Wiley's heart many years before,
now fell upon the empty air. In these years of Old Kennebec's
"anecdotage," his pipe was his best listener and his truest confidant.

Mr. Wiley's constant intercessions with his wife made Rose's home-coming
somewhat easier, and the sight of her own room and belongings soothed
her troubled spirit, but the days went on, and nothing happened to
change the situation. She had lost a lover, that was all, and there were
plenty more to choose from, or there always had been; but the only one
she wanted was the one who made no sign. She used to think that she
could twist Stephen around her little finger; that she had only to
beckon to him and he would follow her to the ends of the earth. Now fear
had entered her heart. She no longer felt sure, because she no longer
felt worthy, of him, and feeling both uncertainty and unworthiness, her
lips were sealed and she was rendered incapable of making any bid for
forgiveness.

So the little world of Pleasant River went on, to all outward seeming,
as it had ever gone. On one side of the stream a girl's heart was
longing, and pining, and sickening, with hope deferred, and growing,
too, with such astonishing rapidity that the very angels marveled! And
on the other, a man's whole vision of life an duty was widening and
deepening under the fructifying influence of his sorrow.

The corn waved high and green in front of the vacant riverside cottage,
but Stephen sent no word or message to Rose. He had seen her once, but
only from a distance. She seemed paler and thinner, he thought,--the
result; probably, of her metropolitan gayeties. He heard no rumor of any
engagement, and he wondered if it were possible that her love for Claude
Merrill had not, after all, been returned in kind. This seemed a wild
impossibility. His mind refused to entertain the supposition that any
man on earth could resist falling in love with Rose, or, having fallen
in, that he could ever contrive to climb out. So he worked on at his
farm harder than ever, and grew soberer and more careworn daily. Rufus
had never seemed so near and dear to him as in these weeks when he had
lived under the shadow of threatened blindness. The burning of the barn
and the strain upon their slender property brought the brothers
together shoulder to shoulder.

"If you lose your girl, Steve," said the boy, "and I lose my eyesight,
and we both lose the barn, why, it'll be us two against the world, for a
spell!"

The "To Let" sign on the little house was an arrant piece of hypocrisy.
Nothing but the direst extremity could have caused him to allow an alien
step on that sacred threshold. The plowing up of the flower-beds and
planting of the corn had served a double purpose. It showed the too
curious public the finality of his break with Rose and her absolute
freedom; it also prevented them from suspecting that he still entered
the place. His visits were not many, but he could not bear to let the
dust settle on the furniture that he and Rose had chosen together; and
whenever he locked the door and went back to the River Farm, he thought
of a verse in the Bible: "Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from
the Garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken."

It was now Friday of the last week in August. The river was full of
logs, thousands upon thousands of them covering the surface of the water
from the bridge almost up to the Brier Neighborhood.

The Edgewood drive was late, owing to a long drought and low water; but
it was to begin on the following Monday, and Lije Dennett and his under
boss were looking over the situation and planning the campaign. As they
leaned over the bridge-rail they saw Mr. Wiley driving down the river
road. When he caught sight of them he hitched the old white horse at the
corner and walked toward them, filling his pipe the while in his usual
leisurely manner.

"We're not busy this forenoon," said Lije Dennett. "S'pose we stand
right here and let Old Kennebec have his say out for once. We've never
heard the end of one of his stories, an' he's be'n talkin' for twenty
years."

"All right," rejoined his companion, with a broad grin at the idea. "I'm
willin', if you are; but who's goin' to tell our fam'lies the reason
we've deserted 'em! I bate yer we sha'n't budge till the crack o' doom.
The road commissioner'll come along once a year and mend the bridge
under our feet, but Old Kennebec'll talk straight on till the day o'
jedgment."

Mr. Wiley had one of the most enjoyable mornings of his life, and felt
that after half a century of neglect his powers were at last appreciated
by his fellow-citizens.

He proposed numerous strategic movements to be made upon the logs,
whereby they would move more swiftly than usual. He described several
successful drives on the Kennebec, when the logs had melted down the
river almost by magic, owing to his generalship; and he paid a tribute,
in passing, to the docility of the boss, who on that occasion had never
moved a single log without asking his advice.

From this topic he proceeded genially to narrate the life-histories of
the boss, the under boss, and several Indians belonging to the
crew,--histories in which he himself played a gallant and conspicuous
part. The conversation then drifted naturally to the exploits of
river-drivers in general, and Mr. Wiley narrated the sorts of feats in
log-riding, pickpole-throwing, and the shooting of rapids that he had
done in his youth. These stories were such as had seldom been heard by
the ear of man; and, as they passed into circulation instantaneously, we
are probably enjoying some of them to this day.

They were still being told when a Crambry child appeared on the bridge,
bearing a note for the old man.

Upon reading it he moved off rapidly in the direction of the store,
ejaculating:

"Bless my soul! I clean forgot that saleratus, and mother's settin' at
the kitchen table with the bowl in her lap, waitin' for it! Got so
int'rested in your list'nin' I never thought o' the time."

The connubial discussion that followed this breach of discipline began
on the arrival of the saleratus, and lasted through supper; and Rose
went to bed almost immediately afterward for very dullness and apathy.
Her life stretched out before her in the most aimless and monotonous
fashion. She saw nothing but heartache in the future; and that she
richly deserved it made it none the easier to bear.

Feeling feverish and sleepless, she slipped on her gray Shaker cloak and
stole quietly downstairs for a breath of air. Her grandfather and
grandmother were talking on the piazza, and good humor seemed to have
been restored.

"I was over to the tavern to-night," she heard him say, as she sat down
at a little distance. "I was over to the tavern to-night, an' a feller
from Gorham got to talkin' an' braggin' 'bout what a stock o' goods they
kep' in the store over there. 'An',' says I, 'I bate ye dollars to
doughnuts that there hain't a darn thing ye can ask for at Bill Pike's
store at Pleasant River that he can't go down cellar, or up attic, or
out in the barn chamber an' git for ye.' Well, sir, he took me up, an' I
borrered the money of Joe Dennett, who held the stakes, an' we went
right over to Bill Pike's with all the boys follerin' on behind. An' the
Gorham man never let on what he was goin' to ask for till the hull crowd
of us got inside the store. Then says he, as p'lite as a basket o'
chips, 'Mr. Pike, I'd like to buy a pulpit if you can oblige me with
one.'

"Bill scratched his head an' I held my breath. Then says he, 'Pears to
me I'd ought to hev a pulpit or two, if I can jest remember where I keep
'em. I don't never cal'late to be out o' pulpits, but I'm so plagued
for room I can't keep 'em in here with the groc'ries. Jim (that's his
new store boy), you jest take a lantern an' run out in the far corner o'
the shed, at the end o' the hickory woodpile, an' see how many pulpits
we've got in stock!' Well, Jim run out, an' when he come back he says,
'We've got two, Mr. Pike. Shall I bring one of 'em in?'

"At that the boys all bust out laughin' an' hollerin' an' tauntin' the
Gorham man, an' he paid up with a good will, I tell ye!"

"I don't approve of bettin'," said Mrs. Wiley grimly, "but I'll try to
sanctify the money by usin' it for a new wash-boiler."

"The fact is," explained old Kennebec, somewhat confused, "that the boys
made me spend every cent of it then an' there."

Rose heard her grandmother's caustic reply, and then paid no further
attention until her keen ear caught the sound of Stephen's name. It was
a part of her unhappiness that since her broken engagement no one would
ever allude to him, and she longed to hear him mentioned, so that
perchance she could get some inkling of his movements.

[Illustration: "AS LONG AS STEPHEN WATERMAN'S ALIVE, ROSE WILEY CAN HAVE
HIM"]

"I met Stephen to-night for the first time in a week," said Mr. Wiley.
"He kind o' keeps out o' my way lately. He's goin' to drive his span
into Portland tomorrow mornin' and bring Rufus home from the hospital
Sunday afternoon. The doctors think they've made a success of their job,
but Rufus has got to be bandaged up a spell longer. Stephen is goin' to
join the drive Monday mornin' at the bridge here, so I'll get the latest
news o' the boy. Land! I'll be turrible glad if he gets out with his
eyesight, if it's only for Steve's sake. He's a turrible good fellow,
Steve is! He said something to-night that made me set more store by him
than ever. I told you I hedn't heard an unkind word ag'in' Rose sence
she come home from Boston, an' no more I hev till this evenin: There
was two or three fellers talkin' in the post-office, an' they didn't
suspicion I was settin' on the steps outside the screen door. That Jim
Jenkins, that Rose so everlastin'ly snubbed at the tavern dance, spoke
up, an' says he: 'This time last year Rose Wiley could 'a' hed the
choice of any man on the river, an' now I bet ye she can't get nary
one.'

"Steve was there, jest goin' out the door, with some bags o' coffee an'
sugar under his arm.

"'I guess you're mistaken about that,' he says, speakin' up jest like
lightnin'; 'so long as Stephen Waterman's alive, Rose Wiley can have
him, for one; and that everybody's welcome to know.'

"He spoke right out, loud an' plain, jest as if he was readin' the
Declaration of Independence. I expected the boys would everlastin'ly
poke fun at him, but they never said a word. I guess his eyes flashed,
for he come out the screen door, slammin' it after him, and stalked by
me as if he was too worked up to notice anything or anybody. I didn't
foiler him, for his long legs git over the ground too fast for me, but
thinks I, 'Mebbe I'll hev some use for my lemonade-set after all.'"

"I hope to the land you will," responded Mrs. Wiley, "for I'm about sick
o' movin' it round when I sweep under my bed. And I shall be glad if
Rose an' Stephen do make it up, for Wealthy Ann Brooks's gossip is too
much for a Christian woman to stand."




HOUSEBREAKING


Where was the pale Rose, the faded Rose, that crept noiselessly down
from her room, wanting neither to speak nor to be spoken to? Nobody ever
knew. She vanished forever, and in her place a thing of sparkles and
dimples flashed up the stairway and closed the door softly. There was a
streak of moonshine lying across the bare floor, and a merry ghost, with
dressing-gown held prettily away from bare feet, danced a gay fandango
among the yellow moonbeams. There were breathless flights to the open
window, and kisses thrown in the direction of the River Farm. There were
impressive declamations at the looking-glass, where a radiant creature
pointed to her reflection and whispered, "Worthless little pig, he
loves you, after all!"

Then, when quiet joy had taken the place of mad delight, there was a
swoop down upon the floor, an impetuous hiding of brimming eyes in the
white counterpane, and a dozen impassioned promises to herself and to
something higher than herself, to be a better girl.

The mood lasted, and deepened, and still Rose did not move. Her heart
was on its knees before Stephen's faithful love, his chivalry, his
strength. Her troubled spirit, like a frail boat tossed about in the
rapids, seemed entering a quiet harbor, where there were protecting
shores and a still, still evening star. Her sails were all torn and
drooping, but the harbor was in sight, and the poor little
weather-beaten craft could rest in peace.

A period of grave reflection now ensued,--under the bedclothes, where
one could think better. Suddenly an inspiration seized her,--an
inspiration so original, so delicious, and above all so humble and
praiseworthy, that it brought her head from her pillow, and she sat bolt
upright, clapping her hands like a child.

"The very thing!" she whispered to herself gleefully. "It will take
courage, but I'm sure of my ground after what he said before them all,
and I'll do it. Grandma in Biddeford buying church carpets, Stephen in
Portland--was ever such a chance?"

The same glowing Rose came downstairs, two steps at a time, next
morning, bade her grandmother good-by with suspicious pleasure, and sent
her grandfather away on an errand which, with attendant conversation,
would consume half the day. Then bundles after bundles and baskets after
baskets were packed into the wagon,--behind the seat, beneath the seat,
and finally under the lap-robe. She gave a dramatic flourish to the
whip, drove across the bridge, went through Pleasant River village, and
up the leafy road to the little house, stared the "To Let" sign
scornfully in the eye, alighted, and ran like a deer through the aisles
of waving corn, past the kitchen windows, to the back door.

"If he has kept the big key in the old place under the stone, where we
both used to find it, then he hasn't forgotten me--or anything," thought
Rose.

The key was there, and Rose lifted it with a sob of gratitude. It was
but five minutes' work to carry all the bundles from the wagon to the
back steps, and another five to lead old Tom across the road into the
woods and tie him to a tree quite out of the sight of any passer-by.

When, after running back, she turned the key in the lock, her heart gave
a leap almost of terror, and she started at the sound of her own
footfall. Through the open door the sunlight streamed into the dark
room. She flew to tables and chairs, and gave a rapid sweep of the hand
over their surfaces.

"He has been dusting here,--and within a few days, too," she thought
triumphantly.

The kitchen was perfection, as she always knew it would be, with one
door opening to the shaded road and the other looking on the river;
windows, too, framing the apple-orchard and the elms. She had chosen the
furniture, but how differently it looked now that it was actually in
place! The tiny shed had piles of split wood, with great boxes of
kindlings and shavings, all in readiness for the bride, who would do her
own cooking. Who but Stephen would have made the very wood ready for a
woman's home-coming; and why had he done so much in May, when they were
not to be married until August? Then the door of the bedroom was
stealthily opened, and here Rose sat down and cried for joy and shame
and hope and fear. The very flowered paper she had refused as too
expensive! How lovely it looked with the white chamber set! She brought
in her simple wedding outfit of blankets, bed-linen, and counterpanes,
and folded them softly in the closet; and then for the rest of the
morning she went from room to room, doing all that could remain
undiscovered, even to laying a fire in the new kitchen stove.

This was the plan. Stephen must pass the house on his way from the River
Farm to the bridge, where he was to join the river-drivers on Monday
morning. She would be out of bed by the earliest peep of dawn, put on
Stephen's favorite pink calico, leave a note for her grandmother, run
like a hare down her side of the river and up Stephen's, steal into the
house, open blinds and windows, light the fire, and set the kettle
boiling. Then with a sharp knife she would cut down two rows of corn,
and thus make a green pathway from the front kitchen steps to the road.
Next, the false and insulting "To Let" sign would be forcibly tweaked
from the tree and thrown into the grass. She would then lay the table in
the kitchen, and make ready the nicest breakfast that two people ever
sat down to. And oh, would two people sit down to it; or would one go
off in a rage and the other die of grief and disappointment?

Then, having done all, she would wait and palpitate, and palpitate and
wait, until Stephen came. Surely no property-owner in the universe could
drive along a road, observe his corn leveled to the earth, his sign
removed, his house open, and smoke issuing from his chimney, without
going in to surprise the rogue and villain who could be guilty of such
vandalism.

And when he came in?

Oh, she had all day Sunday in which to forecast, with mingled dread and
gladness and suspense, that all-important, all-decisive first moment!
All day Sunday to frame and unframe penitent speeches. All day Sunday!
Would it ever be Monday? If so, what would Tuesday bring? Would the sun
rise on happy Mrs. Stephen Waterman of Pleasant River, or on miserable
Miss Rose Wiley of the Brier Neighborhood?




THE DREAM ROOM


Long ago, when Stephen was a boy of fourteen or fifteen, he had gone
with his father to a distant town to spend the night. After an early
breakfast next morning his father had driven off for a business
interview, and left the boy to walk about during his absence. He
wandered aimlessly along a quiet side street, and threw himself down on
the grass outside a pretty garden to amuse himself as best he could.

After a few minutes he heard voices, and, turning, peeped through the
bars of the gate in idle, boyish curiosity. It was a small brown house;
the kitchen door was open, and a table spread with a white cloth was set
in the middle of the room. There was a cradle in a far corner, and a
man was seated at the table as though he might be waiting for his
breakfast.

There is a kind of sentiment about the kitchen in New England, a kind of
sentiment not provoked by other rooms. Here the farmer drops in to spend
a few minutes when he comes back from the barn or field on an errand.
Here, in the great, clean, sweet, comfortable place, the busy housewife
lives, sometimes rocking the cradle, sometimes opening and shutting the
oven door, sometimes stirring the pot, darning stockings, paring
vegetables, or mixing goodies in a yellow bowl. The children sit on the
steps, stringing beans, shelling peas, or hulling berries; the cat
sleeps on the floor near the wood-box; and the visitor feels exiled if
he stays in sitting-room or parlor, for here, where the mother is always
busy, is the heart of the farm-house.

There was an open back door to this kitchen, a door framed in
morning-glories, and the woman (or was she only girl?) standing at the
stove was pretty,--oh, so pretty in Stephen's eyes! His boyish heart
went out to her on the instant. She poured a cup of coffee and walked
with it to the table; then an unexpected, interesting thing
happened--something the boy ought not to have seen, and never forgot.
The man, putting out his hand to take the cup, looked up at the pretty
woman with a smile, and she stooped and kissed him.

Stephen was fifteen. As he looked, on the instant he became a man, with
a man's hopes, desires, ambitions. He looked eagerly, hungrily, and the
scene burned itself on the sensitive plate of his young heart, so that,
as he grew older, he could take the picture out in the dark, from time
to time, and look at it again. When he first met Rose, he did not know
precisely what she was to mean to him; but before long, when he closed
his eyes and the old familiar picture swam into his field of vision,
behold, by some spiritual chemistry, the pretty woman's face had given
place to that of Rose!

All such teasing visions had been sternly banished during this sorrowful
summer, and it was a thoughtful, sober Stephen who drove along the road
on this mellow August morning. The dust was deep; the goldenrod waved
its imperial plumes, making the humble waysides gorgeous; the river
chattered and sparkled till it met the logs at the Brier Neighorhood,
and then, lapsing into silence, flowed steadily under them till it found
a vent for its spirits in the dashing and splashing of the falls.

Haying was over; logging was to begin that day; then harvesting; then
wood-cutting; then eternal successions of plowing, sowing, reaping,
haying, logging, harvesting, and so on, to the endless end of his days.
Here and there a red or a yellow branch, painted only yesterday, caught
his eye and made him shiver. He was not ready for winter; his heart
still craved the summer it had missed.

Hello! What was that? Corn-stalks prone on the earth? Sign torn down and
lying flat in the grass? Blinds open, fire in the chimney?

He leaped from the wagon, and, flinging the reins to Alcestis Crambry,
said, "Stay right here out of sight, and don't you move till I call
you!" and striding up the green pathway, flung open the kitchen door.

A forest of corn waving in the doorway at the back, morning-glories
clambering round and round the window-frames, table with shining white
cloth, kettle humming and steaming, something bubbling in a pan on the
stove, fire throwing out sweet little gleams of welcome through the open
damper. All this was taken in with one incredulous, rapturous twinkle of
an eye; but something else, too: Rose of all roses, Rose of the river,
Rose of the world, standing behind a chair, her hand pressed against
her heart, her lips parted, her breath coming and going! She was
glowing like a jewel, glowing with the extraordinary brilliancy that
emotion gives to some women. She used to be happy in a gay, sparkling
way, like the shallow part of the stream as it chatters over white
pebbles and bright sands. Now it was a broad, steady, full happiness
like the deeps of the river under the sun.

"Don't speak, Stephen, till you hear what I have to say. It takes a good
deal of courage for a girl to do as I am doing; but I want to show how
sorry I am, and it's the only way." She was trembling, and the words
came faster and faster. "I've been very wrong and foolish, and made you
very unhappy, but I haven't done what you would have hated most. I
haven't been engaged to Claude Merrill; he hasn't so much as asked me. I
am here to beg you to forgive me, to eat breakfast with me, to drive me
to the minister's and marry me quickly, quickly, before anything
happens to prevent us, and then to bring me home here to live all the
days of my life. Oh, Stephen dear, honestly, honestly, you haven't lost
anything in all this long, miserable summer. I've suffered, too, and I'm
better worth loving than I was. Will you take me back?"

Rose had a tremendous power of provoking and holding love, and Stephen
of loving. His was too generous a nature for revilings and complaints
and reproaches.

The shores of his heart were strewn with the wreckage of the troubled
summer, but if the tide of love is high enough, it washes such things
out of remembrance. He just opened his arms and took Rose to his heart,
faults and all, with joy and gratitude; and she was as happy as a child
who has escaped the scolding it richly deserved, and who determines, for
very thankfulness' sake, never to be naughty again.

[Illustration: "DON'T SPEAK, STEPHEN, TILL YOU HEAR WHAT I HAVE TO SAY"]

"You don't know what you've done for me, Stephen," she whispered, with
her face hidden on his shoulder. "I was just a common little prickly
rosebush when you came along like a good gardener and 'grafted in'
something better; the something better was your love, Stephen dear, and
it's made everything different. The silly Rose you were engaged to long
ago has disappeared somewhere; I hope you won't be able to find her
under the new leaves."

"She was all I wanted," said Stephen.

"You thought she was," the girl answered, "because you didn't see the
prickles, but you'd have felt them sometime. The old Rose was a selfish
thing, not good enough for you; the new Rose is going to be your wife,
and Rufus's sister, and your mother's daughter, all in one."

Then such a breakfast was spread as Stephen, in his sorry years of
bachelor existence, had forgotten could exist; but before he broke his
fast he ran out to the wagon and served the astonished Alcestis with his
wedding refreshments then and there, bidding him drive back to the River
Farm and bring him a package that lay in the drawer of his
shaving-stand,--a package placed there when hot youth and love and longing
had inspired him to hurry on the marriage day.

"There's an envelope, Alcestis," he cried, "a long envelope way, way
back in the corner, and a small box on top of it. Bring them both, and
my wallet too, and if you find them all and get them to me safely you
shall be bridesmaid and groomsman and best man and usher and maid of
honor at a wedding, in less than an hour! Off with you! Drive straight
and use the whip on Dolly!"

When he reentered the kitchen, flushed with joy and excitement, Rose put
the various good things on the table and he almost tremblingly took his
seat, fearing that contact with the solid wood might wake him from this
entrancing vision.

"I'd like to put you in your chair like a queen and wait on you," he
said with a soft boyish stammer; "but I am too dazed with happiness to
be of any use."

"It's my turn to wait upon you, and I--Oh! how I love to have you
dazed," Rose answered. "I'll be at the table presently myself; but we
have been housekeeping only three minutes, and we have nothing but the
tin coffee-pot this morning, so I'll pour the coffee from the stove."

She filled a cup with housewifely care and brought it to Stephen's side.
As she set it down and was turning, she caught his look,--a look so full
of longing that no loving woman, however busy, could have resisted it;
then she stooped and kissed him fondly, fervently.

Stephen put his arm about her, and, drawing her down to his knee, rested
his head against her soft shoulder with a sigh of comfort, like that of
a tired child. He had waited for it ten years, and at last the
dream-room had come true.

========================================
========================================

THE VILLAGE WATCH-TOWER

by Kate Douglas Wiggin


INTRODUCTION TO THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EDITION

These days the name of Kate Douglas Wiggin is virtually unknown. But
if one mentions the title "Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm," recognition (at
least in America) is instant. Everyone has heard of Rebecca; her story
has been in print continuously since it was first published in 1903.
It is certainly Mrs. Wiggin's most famous book, and the only one of her
many books that is still in print. Everything else she wrote has slipped
into complete obscurity. Occasionally in an antique shop, one may
still find a copy of her immensely popular seasonal book, "The Birds'
Christmas Carol", but that is about the extent of what is readily
available, even second-hand.

The Birds' Christas Carol is available as our Etext #721, Nov. 1996.

In 1904, Jack London wrote (from Manchuria!) to say that Rebecca had won
his heart. ("She is real," he wrote, "she lives; she has given me many
regrets, but I love her.") Some eighty years later I happened to pick
up and read "Rebecca" for the first time. The book was so thoroughly
enjoyable that when I had finished it, I began at once a search for
other works by the same author--especially for a sequel to "Rebecca",
which seemed practically to demand one. There was never a sequel
written, but "The New Chronicles of Rebecca" was published in 1907, and
contained some further chapters in the life of its heroine. I had to be
satisfied with that, for the time being. Then, well over a year after
jotting down Mrs. Wiggin's name on my list of authors to "purchase on
sight", I finally ran across a copy of "The Village Watch-Tower"; and it
was not even a book of which I had heard. It was first published in
1895 by Houghton, who published much of her other work at the time, and
apparently was never published again. Shortly thereafter I found a copy
of her autobiography.

Kate Douglas Wiggin (nee Smith) was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
on September 28, 1856. She was raised for the most-part in Maine, which
forms a backdrop to much of her fiction. She moved to California in
the 1870s, and became involved in the "free kindergarten" movement. She
opened the Silver Street Free Kindergarten in San Francisco, the first
free kindergarten in California, and there she worked until the late
1880s (meantime opening her own training school for teachers). Her first
husband, Samuel Wiggin, died in 1889. By then famous, she returned to
New York and Maine. She moved in international social circles, lecturing
and giving readings from her work. In 1895 she married for the second
time (to George Riggs).

At her home in San Francisco, overlooking the Golden Gate and Marin
County, she wrote her first book, "The Birds' Christmas Carol", to raise
money for her school. The book also proved to be her means of entrance
into publishing, translation, and travel in elite circles throughout
Europe. The book was republished many times thereafter, and translated
into several languages. In addition to factual and educational works
(undertaken together with her sister, Nora Archibald Smith) she also
wrote a number of other popular novels in the early years of the 20th
century, including "Rebecca", and "The Story of Waitstill Baxter"
(1913). She died in 1923, on August 23, at Harrow-on-Hill, England.

Beverly Seaton observed, in "American Women Writers", that Mrs. Wiggin
was "a popular writer who expressed what her contemporaries themselves
thought of as 'real life'" (p. 413). "The Village Watch-Tower" I think
is a perfect example of that observation; it captures vividly a few
frozen moments of rural America, right at the twilight of the 19th
century. Most of it was written in the village of Quillcote, Maine,
her childhood home--and certainly the model for the village of these
stories.

No attempt has been made to edit this book for consistency or to
update or "correct" the spelling. Mrs. Wiggin's spelling is somewhat
transitional between modern American and British spellings. The only
liberty taken is that of removing extra spaces in contractions. E.g.,
I have used "wouldn't" where the original has consistently "would
n't"; this is true for all such contractions with "n't" which appeared
inordinately distracting to the modern reader.

R. McGowan, San Jose, March 1997





THE VILLAGE WATCH-TOWER


Dear old apple-tree, under whose gnarled branches these stories were
written, to you I dedicate the book. My head was so close to you, who
can tell from whence the thoughts came? I only know that when all the
other trees in the orchard were barren, there were always stories to be
found under your branches, and so it is our joint book, dear apple-tree.
Your pink blossoms have fallen on the page as I wrote; your ruddy fruit
has dropped into my lap; the sunshine streamed through your leaves and
tipped my pencil with gold. The birds singing in your boughs may have
lent a sweet note here and there; and do you remember the day when the
gentle shower came? We just curled the closer, and you and I and the sky
all cried together while we wrote "The Fore-Room Rug."

It should be a lovely book, dear apple-tree, but alas! it is not
altogether that, because I am not so simple as you, and because I have
strayed farther away from the heart of Mother Nature.

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN

"Quillcote," Hollis, Maine, August 12, 1895.




CONTENTS.

     The Village Watch-Tower                 1
     Tom o' the Blueb'ry Plains             31
     The Nooning Tree                       55
     The Fore-Room Rug                      95
     A Village Stradivarius                123
     The Eventful Trip of the Midnight Cry 195





THE VILLAGE WATCH-TOWER.


It stood on the gentle slope of a hill, the old gray house, with its
weather-beaten clapboards and its roof of ragged shingles. It was in the
very lap of the road, so that the stage-driver could almost knock on the
window pane without getting down from his seat, on those rare occasions
when he brought "old Mis' Bascom" a parcel from Saco.

Humble and dilapidated as it was, it was almost beautiful in the
springtime, when the dandelion-dotted turf grew close to the great stone
steps; or in the summer, when the famous Bascom elm cast its graceful
shadow over the front door. The elm, indeed, was the only object that
ever did cast its shadow there. Lucinda Bascom said her "front door 'n'
entry never hed ben used except for fun'rals, 'n' she was goin' to keep
it nice for that purpose, 'n' not get it all tracked up."

She was sitting now where she had sat for thirty years. Her high-backed
rocker, with its cushion of copperplate patch and its crocheted tidy,
stood always by a southern window that looked out on the river. The
river was a sheet of crystal, as it poured over the dam; a rushing,
roaring torrent of foaming white, as it swept under the bridge and
fought its way between the rocky cliffs beyond, sweeping swirling,
eddying, in its narrow channel, pulsing restlessly into the ragged
fissures of its shores, and leaping with a tempestuous roar into the
Witches' Eel-pot, a deep wooded gorge cleft in the very heart of the
granite bank.

But Lucinda Bascom could see more than the river from her favorite
window. It was a much-traveled road, the road that ran past the house
on its way from Liberty Village to Milliken's Mills. A tottering old
sign-board, on a verdant triangle of turf, directed you over Deacon
Chute's hill to the "Flag Medder Road," and from thence to Liberty
Centre; the little post-office and store, where the stage stopped twice
a day, was quite within eyeshot; so were the public watering-trough,
Brigadier Hill, and, behind the ruins of an old mill, the wooded path
that led to the Witches' Eel-pot, a favorite walk for village lovers.
This was all on her side of the river. As for the bridge which knit
together the two tiny villages, nobody could pass over that without
being seen from the Bascoms'. The rumble of wheels generally brought
a family party to the window,--Jot Bascom's wife (she that was Diadema
Dennett), Jot himself, if he were in the house, little Jot, and grandpa
Bascom, who looked at the passers-by with a vacant smile parting his
thin lips. Old Mrs. Bascom herself did not need the rumble of wheels
to tell her that a vehicle was coming, for she could see it fully ten
minutes before it reached the bridge,--at the very moment it appeared
at the crest of Saco Hill, where strangers pulled up their horses, on
a clear day, and paused to look at Mount Washington, miles away in the
distance. Tory Hill and Saco Hill met at the bridge, and just there,
too, the river road began its shady course along the east side of the
stream: in view of all which "old Mis' Bascom's settin'-room winder"
might well be called the "Village Watch-Tower," when you consider
further that she had moved only from her high-backed rocker to her bed,
and from her bed to her rocker, for more than thirty years,--ever since
that july day when her husband had had a sun-stroke while painting the
meeting-house steeple, and her baby Jonathan had been thereby hastened
into a world not in the least ready to receive him.

She could not have lived without that window, she would have told you,
nor without the river, which had lulled her to sleep ever since she
could remember. It was in the south chamber upstairs that she had been
born. Her mother had lain there and listened to the swirl of the water,
in that year when the river was higher than the oldest inhabitant had
ever seen it,--the year when the covered bridge at the Mills had been
carried away, and when the one at the Falls was in hourly danger of
succumbing to the force of the freshet.

All the men in both villages were working on the river, strengthening
the dam, bracing the bridge, and breaking the jams of logs; and with the
parting of the boom, the snapping of the bridge timbers, the crashing
of the logs against the rocks, and the shouts of the river-drivers,
the little Lucinda had come into the world. Some one had gone for
the father, and had found him on the river, where he had been since
day-break, drenched with the storm, blown fro his dangerous footing time
after time, but still battling with the great heaped-up masses of logs,
wrenching them from one another's grasp, and sending them down the
swollen stream.

Finally the jam broke; and a cheer of triumph burst from the excited
men, as the logs, freed from their bondage, swept down the raging
flood, on and ever on in joyous liberty, faster and faster, till they
encountered some new obstacle, when they heaped themselves together
again, like puppets of Fate, and were beaten by the waves into another
helpless surrender.

With the breaking of the jam, one dead monarch of the forest leaped into
the air as if it had been shot from a cannon's mouth, and lodged between
two jutting peaks of rock high on the river bank. Presently another log
was dashed against it, but rolled off and hurried down the stream; then
another, and still another; but no force seemed enough to drive the
giant from its intrenched position.

"Hurry on down to the next jam, Raish, and let it alone," cried the men.
"Mebbe it'll git washed off in the night, and anyhow you can't budge it
with no kind of a tool we've got here."

Then from the shore came a boy's voice calling, "There's a baby up to
your house!" And the men repeated in stentorian tones, "Baby up to your
house, Raish! Leggo the log; you're wanted!"

"Boy or girl?" shouted the young father.

"Girl!" came back the answer above the roar of the river.

Whereupon Raish Dunnell steadied himself with his pick and taking a
hatchet from his belt, cut a rude letter "L" on the side of the stranded
log.

"L's for Lucindy," he laughed. "Now you log if you git's fur as Saco,
drop in to my wife's folks and tell 'em the baby's name."

There had not been such a freshet for years before, and there had never
been one since; so, as the quiet seasons went by, "Lucindy's log" was
left in peace, the columbines blooming all about it, the harebells
hanging their heads of delicate blue among the rocks that held it in
place, the birds building their nests in the knot-holes of its withered
side.

Seventy years had passed, and on each birthday, from the time when she
was only "Raish Dunnell's little Lou," to the years when she was Lucinda
Bascom, wife and mother, she had wandered down by the river side, and
gazed, a little superstitiously perhaps, on the log that had been marked
with an "L" on the morning she was born. It had stood the wear and tear
of the elements bravely, but now it was beginning, like Lucinda, to show
its age. Its back was bent, like hers; its face was seamed and wrinkled,
like her own; and the village lovers who looked at it from the opposite
bank wondered if, after all, it would hold out as long as "old Mis'
Bascom."

She held out bravely, old Mrs. Bascom, though she was "all skin, bones,
and tongue," as the neighbors said; for nobody needed to go into the
Bascoms' to brighten up aunt Lucinda a bit, or take her the news; one
went in to get a bit of brightness, and to hear the news.

"I should get lonesome, I s'pose," she was wont to say, "if it wa'n't
for the way this house is set, and this chair, and this winder, 'n' all.
Men folks used to build some o' the houses up in a lane, or turn 'em
back or side to the road, so the women folks couldn't see anythin' to
keep their minds off their churnin' or dish-washin'; but Aaron Dunnell
hed somethin' else to think about, 'n' that was himself, first, last,
and all the time. His store was down to bottom of the hill, 'n' when he
come up to his meals, he used to set where he could see the door; 'n'
if any cust'mer come, he could call to 'em to wait a spell till he got
through eatin'. Land! I can hear him now, yellin' to 'em, with his mouth
full of victuals! They hed to wait till he got good 'n' ready, too.
There wa'n't so much comp'tition in business then as there is now, or
he'd 'a' hed to give up eatin' or hire a clerk. ... I've always felt to
be thankful that the house was on this rise o' ground. The teams hev to
slow up on 'count o' the hill, 'n' it gives me consid'ble chance to see
folks 'n' what they've got in the back of the wagon, 'n' one thing 'n'
other. ... The neighbors is continually comin' in here to talk about
things that's goin' on in the village. I like to hear 'em, but land!
they can't tell me nothing'! They often say, 'For massy sakes, Lucindy
Bascom, how d' you know that?' 'Why,' says I to them, 'I don't ask no
questions, 'n' folks don't tell me no lies; I just set in my winder,
'n' put two 'n' two together,--that's all I do.' I ain't never ben in a
playhouse, but I don't suppose the play-actors git down off the platform
on t' the main floor to explain to the folks what they've ben doin',
do they? I expect, if folks can't understand their draymas when the're
actin' of 'em out, they have to go ignorant, don't they? Well, what do I
want with explainin', when everythin' is acted out right in the road?"

There was quite a gathering of neighbors at the Bascoms' on this
particular July afternoon. No invitations had been sent out, and none
were needed. A common excitement had made it vital that people should
drop in somewhere, and speculate about certain interesting matters well
known to be going on in the community, but going on in such an underhand
and secretive fashion that it well-nigh destroyed one's faith in human
nature.

The sitting-room door was open into the entry, so that whatever breeze
there was might come in, and an unusual glimpse of the new foreroom rug
was afforded the spectators. Everything was as neat as wax, for Diadema
was a housekeeper of the type fast passing away. The great coal stove
was enveloped in its usual summer wrapper of purple calico, which, tied
neatly about its ebony neck and portly waist, gave it the appearance
of a buxom colored lady presiding over the assembly. The kerosene lamps
stood in a row on the high, narrow mantelpiece, each chimney protected
from the flies by a brown paper bag inverted over its head. Two plaster
Samuels praying under the pink mosquito netting adorned the ends of
the shelf. There were screens at all the windows, and Diadema fidgeted
nervously when a visitor came in the mosquito netting door, for fear a
fly should sneak in with her.

On the wall were certificates of membership in the Missionary Society; a
picture of Maidens welcoming Washington in the Streets of Alexandria, in
a frame of cucumber seeds; and an interesting document setting forth the
claims of the Dunnell family as old settlers long before the separation
of Maine from Massachusetts,--the fact bein' established by an obituary
notice reading, "In Saco, December 1791, Dorcas, daughter of Abiathar
Dunnell, two months old of Fits unbaptized."

"He may be goin' to marry Eunice, and he may not," observed Almira
Berry; "though what she wants of Reuben Hobson is more 'n I can make
out. I never see a widower straighten up as he has this last year. I
guess he's been lookin' round pretty lively, but couldn't find anybody
that was fool enough to give him any encouragement."

"Mebbe she wants to get married," said Hannah Sophia, in a tone that
spoke volumes. "When Parson Perkins come to this parish, one of his
first calls was on Eunice Emery. He always talked like the book o'
Revelation; so says he, 'have you got your weddin' garment on, Miss
Emery?' says he. 'No,' says she, 'but I ben tryin' to these twenty
years.' She was always full of her jokes, Eunice was!"

"The Emerys was always a humorous family," remarked Diadema, as she
annihilated a fly with a newspaper. "Old Silas Emery was an awful
humorous man. He used to live up on the island; and there come a freshet
one year, and he said he got his sofy 'n' chairs off, anyhow!" That was
just his jokin'. He hadn't a sign of a sofy in the house; 't was his
wife Sophy he meant, she that was Sophy Swett. Then another time, when
I was a little mite of a thin runnin' in 'n' out o' his yard, he caught
holt o' me, and says he, 'You'd better take care, sissy; when I kill you
and two more, thet'll be three children I've killed!' Land! you couldn't
drag me inside that yard for years afterwards. ... There! she's got
a fire in the cook-stove; there's a stream o' smoke comin' out o'
the kitchen chimbley. I'm willin' to bet my new rug she's goin' to be
married tonight!'

"Mebbe she's makin' jell'," suggested Hannah Sophia.

"Jell'!" ejaculated Mrs. Jot scornfully. "Do you s'pose Eunice Emery
would build up a fire in the middle o' the afternoon 'n' go to makin' a
jell', this hot day? Besides, there ain't a currant gone into her house
this week, as I happen to know."

"It's a dretful thick year for fol'age," mumbled grandpa Bascom,
appearing in the door with his vacant smile. "I declare some o' the
maples looks like balls in the air."

"That's the twentieth time he's hed that over since mornin'," said
Diadema. "Here, father, take your hat off 'n' set in the kitchen door
'n' shell me this mess o' peas. Now think smart, 'n' put the pods in the
basket 'n' the peas in the pan; don't you mix 'em."

The old man hung his hat on the back of the chair, took the pan in his
trembling hands, and began aimlessly to open the pods, while he chuckled
at the hens that gathered round the doorstep when they heard the peas
rattling in the pan.

"Reuben needs a wife bad enough, if that's all," remarked the Widow
Buzzell, as one who had given the matter some consideration.

"I should think he did," rejoined old Mrs. Bascom. "Those children 'bout
git their livin' off the road in summer, from the time the dand'lion
greens is ready for diggin' till the blackb'ries 'n' choke-cherries
is gone. Diademy calls 'em in 'n' gives 'em a cooky every time they go
past, 'n' they eat as if they was famished. Rube Hobson never was any
kind of a pervider, 'n' he's consid'able snug besides."

"He ain't goin' to better himself much," said Almira. "Eunice Emery
ain't fit to housekeep for a cat. The pie she took to the pie supper at
the church was so tough that even Deacon Dyer couldn't eat it; and the
boys got holt of her doughnuts, and declared they was goin' fishin' next
day 'n' use 'em for sinkers. She lives from hand to mouth Eunice Emery
does. She's about as much of a doshy as Rube is. She'll make tea that's
strong enough to bear up an egg, most, and eat her doughnuts with it
three times a day rather than take the trouble to walk out to the meat
or the fish cart. I know for a fact she don't make riz bread once a
year."

"Mebbe her folks likes buttermilk bread best; some do," said the Widow
Buzzell. "My husband always said, give him buttermilk bread to work on.
He used to say my riz bread was so light he'd hev to tread on it to
keep it anywheres; but when you'd eat buttermilk bread he said you'd got
somethin' that stayed by you; you knew where it was every time. ... For
massy sake! there's the stage stoppin' at the Hobson's door. I wonder if
Rube's first wife's mother has come from Moderation? If 't is, they must
'a' made up their quarrel, for there was a time she wouldn't step foot
over that doorsill. She must be goin' to stay some time, for there's a
trunk on the back o' the stage. ... No, there ain't nobody gettin' out.
Land, Hannah Sophia, don't push me clean through the glass! It beats me
why they make winders so small that three people can't look out of 'em
without crowdin'. Ain't that a wash-boiler he's handin' down? Well, it's
a mercy; he's ben borrowin' long enough!"

"What goes on after dark I ain't responsible for," commented old Mrs.
Bascom, "but no new wash-boiler has gone into Rube Hobson's door in the
daytime for many a year, and I'll be bound it means somethin'. There
goes a broom, too. Much sweepin' he'll get out o' Eunice; it's a slick
'n' a promise with her!"

"When did you begin to suspicion this, Diademy?" asked Almira Berry.
"I've got as much faculty as the next one, but anybody that lives on
the river road has just got to give up knowin' anything. You can't keep
runnin' to the store every day, and if you could you don't find out much
nowadays. Bill Peters don't take no more interest in his neighbors than
a cow does in election."

"I can't get mother Bascom to see it as I do," said Diadema, "but for
one thing she's ben carryin' home bundles 'bout every other night for
a month, though she's ben too smart to buy anythin' here at this store.
She had Packard's horse to go to Saco last week. When she got home, jest
at dusk, she drove int' the barn, 'n' bimeby Pitt Packard come to git
his horse,--'t was her own buggy she went with. She looked over here
when she went int' the house, 'n' she ketched my eye, though 't was half
a mile away, so she never took a thing in with her, but soon as't was
dark she made three trips out to the barn with a lantern, 'n' any fool
could tell 't her arms was full o' pa'cels by the way she carried the
lantern. The Hobsons and the Emerys have married one another more 'n
once, as fur as that goes. I declare if I was goin' to get married I
should want to be relation to somebody besides my own folks."

"The reason I can hardly credit it," said Hannah Sophia, "is because
Eunice never had a beau in her life, that I can remember of. Cyse
Higgins set up with her for a spell, but it never amounted to nothin'.
It seems queer, too, for she was always so fond o' seein' men folks
round that when Pitt Packard was shinglin' her barn she used to go out
nights 'n' rip some o' the shingles off, so 't he'd hev more days' work
on it."

"I always said 't was she that begun on Rube Hobson, not him on her,"
remarked the Widow Buzzell. "Their land joinin' made courtin' come
dretful handy. His critters used to git in her field 'bout every other
day (I always suspicioned she broke the fence down herself), and then
she'd hev to go over and git him to drive 'em out. She's wed his onion
bed for him two summers, as I happen to know, for I've been ou' doors
more 'n common this summer, tryin' to fetch my constitution up. Diademy,
don't you want to look out the back way 'n' see if Rube's come home
yet?"

"He ain't," said old Mrs. Bascom, "so you needn't look; can't you see
the curtains is all down? He's gone up to the Mills, 'n' it's my opinion
he's gone to speak to the minister."

"He hed somethin' in the back o' the wagon covered up with an old linen
lap robe; 't ain't at all likely he 'd 'a' hed that if he'd ben goin' to
the minister's," objected Mrs. Jot.

"Anybody'd think you was born yesterday, to hear you talk, Diademy,"
retorted her mother-in-law. "When you 've set in one spot's long's I
hev, p'raps you'll hev the use o' your faculties! Men folks has more 'n
one way o' gettin' married, 'specially when they 're ashamed of it. ...
Well, I vow, there's the little Hobson girls comin' out o' the door
this minute, 'n' they 're all dressed up, and Mote don't seem to be with
'em."

Every woman in the room rose to her feet, and Diadema removed her
murderous eye from a fly which she had been endeavoring to locate for
some moments.

"I guess they 're goin' up to the church to meet their father 'n'
Eunice, poor little things," ventured the Widow Buzzell.

"P'raps they be," said old Mrs. Bascom sarcastically; "p'raps they be
goin' to church, takin' a three-quart tin pail 'n' a brown paper bundle
along with 'em. ... They 're comin' over the bridge, just as I s'posed.
... Now, if they come past this house, you head 'em off, Almiry, 'n' see
if you can git some satisfaction out of 'em. ... They ain't hardly old
enough to hold their tongues."

An exciting interview soon took place in the middle of the road, and
Almira reentered the room with the expression of one who had penetrated
the inscrutable and solved the riddle of the Sphinx. She had been
vouch-safed one of those gleams of light in darkness which almost dazzle
the beholder.

"That's about the confirmingest thing I've heern yet!" she ejaculated,
as she took off her shaker bonnet. "They say they're goin' up to their
aunt Hitty's to stay two days. They're dressed in their best, clean to
the skin, for I looked; 'n' it's their night gownds they've got in the
bundle. They say little Mote has gone to Union to stop all night with
his uncle Abijah, 'n' that leaves Rube all alone, for the smith girl
that does his chores is home sick with the hives. And what do you s'pose
is in the pail? _Fruit_ _cake_,--that's what 't is, no more 'n' no less!
I knowed that Smith girl didn't bake it, 'n' so I asked 'em, 'n' they
said Miss Emery give it to 'em. There was two little round try-cakes,
baked in muffin-rings. Eunice hed took some o' the batter out of a
big loaf 'n' baked it to se how it was goin' to turn out. That means
wedding-cake, or I'm mistaken!"

"There ain't no gittin' round that," agreed the assembled company, "now
is there, Mis' Bascom?"

Old Mrs. Bascom wet her finger, smoothed the parting of her false front,
and looked inscrutable.

"I don't see why you're so secret," objected Diadema.

"I've got my opinions, and I've had 'em some time," observed the good
lady. "I don't know 's I'm bound to tell 'em and have 'em held up to
ridicule. Let the veal hang, I say. If any one of us is right, we'll all
know to-morrow."

"Well, all any of us has got to judge from is appearances," said
Diadema, "and how you can twist 'em one way, and us another, stumps me!"

"Perhaps I see more appearances than you do," retorted her
mother-in-law. "Some folks mistakes all they see for all there is. I was
reading a detective story last week. It seems there was an awful murder
in Schenectady, and a mother and her two children was found dead in one
bed, with bullet holes in their heads. The husband was away on business,
and there wasn't any near neighbors to hear her screech. Well, the
detectives come from far and from near, and begun to work up the case.
One of 'em thought 't was the husband,--though he set such store by his
wife he went ravin' crazy when he heard she was dead,--one of 'em laid
it on the children,--though they was both under six years old; and one
decided it was suicide,--though the woman was a church member and
didn't know how to fire a gun off, besides. And then there come along
a detective younger and smarter than all the rest, and says he, 'If
all you bats have seen everything you can see, I guess I'll take a look
around,' says he. Sure enough, there was a rug with 'Welcome' on it
layin' in front of the washstand, and when he turned it up he found
an elegant diamond stud with a man's full name and address on the gold
part. He took a train and went right to the man's house. He was so taken
by surprise (he hadn't missed the stud, for he had a full set of 'em)
that he owned right up and confessed the murder."

"I don't see as that's got anything to do with this case," said Diadema.

"It's got this much to do with it," replied old Mrs. Bascom, "that
perhaps you've looked all round the room and seen everything you had
eyes to see, and perhaps I've had wit enough to turn up the rug in front
o' the washstand."

"Whoever he marries now, Mis' Bascom'll have to say 't was the one she
meant," laughed the Widow Buzzell.

"I never was caught cheatin' yet, and if I live till Saturday I shall be
seventy-one years old," said the old lady with some heat. "Hand me Jot's
lead pencil, Diademy, and that old envelope on the winder sill. I'll
write the name I think of, and shut it up in the old Bible. My hand's
so stiff to-day I can't hardly move it, but I guess I can make it plain
enough to satisfy you."

"That's fair 'n' square," said Hannah Sophia, "and for my pat I hope it
ain't Eunice, for I like her too well. What they're goin' to live on is
more 'n I can see. Add nothin' to nothin' 'n' you git nothin',--that's
arethmetic! He ain't hed a cent o' ready money sence he failed up four
years ago, 'thout it was that hundred dollars that fell to him from his
wife's aunt. Eunice'll hev her hands full this winter, I guess, with
them three hearty children 'n' him all wheezed up with phthisic from
October to April!... Who's that coming' down Tory Hill? It's Rube's
horse 'n' Rube's wagon, but it don't look like Rube."

"Yes, it's Rube; but he's got a new Panama hat, 'n' he 's hed his linen
duster washed," said old Mrs. Bascom. ... "Now, do you mean to tell me
that that woman with a stuck-up hat on is Eunice Emery? It ain't, 'n'
that green parasol don't belong to this village. He's drivin' her into
his yard!... Just as I s'posed, it's that little, smirkin' worthless
school-teacher up to the Mills.--Don't break my neck, Diademy; can't you
see out the other winder?--Yes, he's helpin' her out, 'n' showin' her
in. He can't 'a' ben married more'n ten minutes, for he's goin' clear up
the steps to open the door for her!"

"Wait 'n' see if he takes his horse out," said Hannah Sophia. "Mebbe
he'll drive her back in a few minutes. ... No, he's onhitched! ...
There, he's hangin' up the head-stall!"

"I've ben up in the attic chamber," called the Widow Buzzell, as she
descended the stairs; "she's pulled up the curtains, and took off her
hat right in front o' the winder, 's bold as a brass kettle! She's come
to stay! Ain't that Rube Hobson all over,--to bring another woman int'
this village 'stid o' weedin' one of 'em out as he'd oughter. He ain't
got any more public sperit than a--hedgehog, 'n' never had!"

Almira drew on her mitts excitedly, tied on her shaker, and started for
the door.

"I'm goin' over to Eunice's," she said, "and I'm goin' to take my bottle
of camphire. I shouldn't wonder a mite if I found her in a dead faint on
the kitchen floor. Nobody need tell me she wa'n't buildin' hopes."

"I'll go with you," said the Widow Buzzell. "I'd like to see with my
own eyes how she takes it, 'n' it'll be too late to tell if I wait
till after supper. If she'd ben more open with me 'n' ever asked for my
advice, I could 'a' told her it wa'n't the first time Rube Hobson has
played that trick."

"I'd come too if 't wa'n't milkin' but Jot ain't home from the Centre,
and I've got to do his chores; come in as you go along back, will you?"
asked Diadema.

Hannah Sophia remained behind, promising to meet them at the post-office
and hear the news. As the two women walked down the hill she drew the
old envelope from the Bible and read the wavering words scrawled upon it
in old Mrs. Bascom's rheumatic and uncertain hand,--

_the_ _milikins_ _Mills_ _Teecher._


"Well Lucindy, you do make good use o' your winder," she exclaimed, "but
how you pitched on anything so onlikely as her is more'n I can see."

"Just because 't was onlikely. A man's a great sight likelier to do an
onlikely thing than he is a likely one, when it comes to marryin'. In
the first place, Rube sent his children to school up to the Mills 'stid
of to the brick schoolhouse, though he had to pay a little something to
get 'em taken in to another deestrick. They used to come down at night
with their hands full o' 'ward o' merit cards. Do you s'pose I thought
they got 'em for good behavior, or for knowin' their lessons? Then aunt
Hitty told me some question or other Rube had asked examination day.
Since when has Rube Hobson 'tended examinations, thinks I. And when I
see the girl, a red-and-white paper doll that wouldn't know whether to
move the churn-dasher up 'n' down or round 'n' round, I made up my
mind that bein' a man he'd take her for certain, and not his next-door
neighbor of a sensible age and a house 'n' farm 'n' cow 'n' buggy!"

"Sure enough," agreed Hannah Sophia, "though that don't account for
Eunice's queer actions, 'n' the pa'cels 'n' the fruit cake."

"When I make out a case," observed Mrs. Bascom modestly, "I ain't one to
leave weak spots in it. If I guess at all, I go all over the ground
'n' stop when I git through. Now, sisters or no sisters, Maryabby Emery
ain't spoke to Eunice sence she moved to Salem. But if Eunice has ben
bringin' pa'cels home, Maryabby must 'a' paid for what was in 'em; and
if she's ben bakin' fruit cake this hot day, why Maryabby used to be
so font o' fruit cake her folks were afraid she'd have fits 'n' die.
I shall be watchin' here as usual to-morrow morning', 'n' if Maryabby
don't drive int' Eunice's yard before noon I won't brag any more for a
year to come."

Hannah Sophia gazed at old Mrs. Bascom with unstinted admiration. "You
do beat all," she said; "and I wish I could stay all night 'n' see how
it turns out, but Almiry is just comin' over the bridge, 'n' I must
start 'n' meet her. Good-by. I'm glad to see you so smart; you always
look slim, but I guess you'll tough it out's long 's the rest of us. I
see your log was all right, last time I was down side o' the river."


"They say it 's jest goin' to break in two in the middle, and fall into
the river," cheerfully responded Lucinda. "They say it's just hanging'
on by a thread. Well, that's what they 've ben sayin' about me these
ten years, 'n' here I be still hanging! It don't make no odds, I guess,
whether it's a thread or a rope you 're hangin' by, so long as you
hang."

* * *


The next morning, little Mote Hobson, who had stayed all night with his
uncle in Union, was walking home by the side of the river. He strolled
along, the happy, tousle-headed, barefooted youngster, eyes one moment
on the trees in the hope of squirrels and birds'-nests, the next on the
ground in search of the first blueberries. As he stooped to pick up a
bit of shining quartz to add to the collection in his ragged trousers'
pockets he glanced across the river, and at that very instant Lucinda's
log broke gently in twain, rolled down the bank, crumbling as it went,
and, dropping in like a tired child, was carried peacefully along on the
river's breast.

Mote walked more quickly after that. It was quite a feather in his cap
to see, with his own eyes, the old landmark slip from its accustomed
place and float down the stream. The other boys would miss it and say,
"It's gone!" He would say, "I saw it go!"

Grandpa Bascom was standing at the top of the hill. His white locks were
uncovered, and he was in his shirt-sleeves. Baby Jot, as usual, held
fast by his shaking hand, for they loved each other, these two. The
cruel stroke of the sun that had blurred the old man's brain had spared
a blessed something in him that won the healing love of children.

"How d' ye, Mote?" he piped in his feeble voice. "They say Lucindy's
dead. ... Jot says she is, 'n' Diademy says she is, 'n' I guess she is.
... It 's a dretful thick year for fol'age; ... some o' the maples looks
like balls in the air."

Mote looked in at the window. The neighbors were hurrying to and fro.
Diadema sat with her calico apron up to her face, sobbing; and for the
first morning in thirty years, old Mrs. Bascom's high-backed rocker was
empty, and there was no one sitting in the village watch-tower.




TOM O' THE BLUEB'RY PLAINS.


The sky is a shadowless blue; the noon-day sun glows fiercely; a cloud
of dust rises from the burning road whenever the hot breeze stirs the
air, or whenever a farm wagon creaks along, its wheels sinking into the
deep sand.

In the distance, where the green of the earth joins the blue of the sky,
gleams the silver line of a river.

As far as the eye an reach, the ground is covered with blueberry bushes;
red leaves peeping among green ones; bloom of blue fruit hanging in full
warm clusters,--spheres of velvet mellowed by summer sun, moistened with
crystal dew, spiced with fragrance of woods.

In among the blueberry bushes grow huckleberries, "choky pears," and
black-snaps.

Gnarled oaks and stunted pines lift themselves out of the wilderness of
shrubs. They look dwarfed and gloomy, as if Nature had been an untender
mother, and denied them proper nourishment.

The road is a little-traveled one, and furrows of feathery grasses grow
between the long, hot, sandy stretches of the wheel-ruts.

The first goldenrod gleams among the loose stones at the foot of the
alder bushes. Whole families of pale butterflies, just out of their
long sleep, perch on the brilliant stalks and tilter up and down in the
sunshine.

Straggling processions of wooly brown caterpillars wend their way in
the short grass by the wayside, where the wild carrot and the purple
bull-thistle are coming into bloom.

The song of birds is seldom heard, and the blueberry plains are given
over to silence save for the buzzing of gorged flies, the humming of
bees, and the chirping of crickets that stir the drowsy air when the
summer begins to wane.

It is so still that the shuffle-shuffle of a footstep can be heard in
the distance, the tinkle of a tin pail swinging musically to and fro,
the swish of an alder switch cropping the heads of the roadside weeds.
All at once a voice breaks the stillness. Is it a child's, a woman's, or
a man's? Neither yet all three.

     "I'd much d'ruth-er walk in the bloom-in' gy-ar-ding,
     An' hear the whis-sle of the jol-ly
     --swain."

Everybody knows the song, and everybody knows the cracked voice. The
master of this bit of silent wilderness is coming home: it is Tom o' the
blueb'ry plains.

He is more than common tall, with a sandy beard, and a mop of tangled
hair straggling beneath his torn straw hat. A square of wet calico drips
from under the back of the hat. His gingham shirt is open at the throat,
showing his tanned neck and chest. Warm as it is, he wears portions of
at least three coats on his back. His high boots, split in foot and leg,
are mended and spliced and laced and tied on with bits of shingle rope.
He carries a small tin pail of molasses. It has a bail of rope, and
a battered cover with a knob of sticky newspaper. Over one shoulder,
suspended on a crooked branch, hangs a bundle of basket stuff,--split
willow withes and the like; over the other swings a decrepit,
bottomless, three-legged chair.


I call him the master of the plains, but in faith he had no legal claim
to the title. If he owned a habitation or had established a home on any
spot in the universe, it was because no man envied him what he took; for
Tom was one of God's fools, a foot-loose pilgrim in this world of
ours, a poor addle-pated, simple-minded, harmless creature,--in village
parlance, a "softy."

Mother or father, sister or brother, he had none, nor ever had, so far
as any one knew; but how should people who had to work from sun-up to
candlelight to get the better of the climate have leisure to discover
whether or no Blueb'ry Tom had any kin?

At some period in an almost forgotten past there had been a house on
Tom's particular patch of the plains. It had long since tumbled
into ruins and served for fire-wood and even the chimney bricks had
disappeared one by one, as the monotonous seasons came and went.

Tom had settled himself in an old tool-shop, corn-house, or rude
out-building of some sort that had belonged to the ruined cottage. Here
he had set up his house-hold gods; and since no one else had ever wanted
a home in this dreary tangle of berry bushes, where the only shade came
from stunted pines that flung shriveled arms to the sky and dropped dead
cones to the sterile earth, here he remained unmolested.

In the lower part of the hut he kept his basket stuff and his collection
of two-legged and three-legged chairs. In the course of evolution they
never sprouted another leg, those chairs; as they were given to him,
so they remained. The upper floor served for his living-room, and was
reached by a ladder from the ground, for there was no stairway inside.

No one had ever been in the little upper chamber. When a passer-by
chanced to be-think him that Tom's hermitage was close at hand, he
sometimes turned in his team by a certain clump of white birches and
drove nearer to the house, intending to remind Tom that there was a
chair to willow-bottom the next time he came to the village. But at
the noise of the wheels Tom drew in his ladder; and when the visitor
alighted and came within sight, it was to find the inhospitable host
standing in the opening of the second-story window, a quaint figure
framed in green branches, the ladder behind him, and on his face a kind
of impenetrable dignity, as he shook his head and said, "Tom ain't ter
hum; Tom's gone to Bonny Eagle."

There was something impressive about his way of repelling callers; it
was as effectual as a door slammed in the face, and yet there was a sort
of mendacious courtesy about it. No one ever cared to go further;
and indeed there was no mystery to tempt the curious, and no spoil to
attract the mischievous or the malicious. Any one could see, without
entering, the straw bed in the far corner, the beams piled deep with
red and white oak acorns, the strings of dried apples and bunches of
everlastings hanging from the rafters, and the half-finished baskets
filled with blown bird's-eggs, pine cones, and pebbles.

No home in the village was better loved than Tom's retreat in the
blueberry plains. Whenever he approached it, after a long day's tramp,
when he caught the first sight of the white birches that marked the
gateway to his estate and showed him where to turn off the public road
into his own private grounds, he smiled a broader smile than usual, and
broke into his well-known song:

     "I'd much d'ruth-er walk in the bloom-in' gy-ar-ding,
     An' hear the whis-sle of the jol-ly
     --swain."

Poor Tom could never catch the last note. He had sung the song for more
than forty years, but the memory of this tone was so blurred, and his
cherished ideal of it so high (or so low, rather), that he never managed
to reach it.

Oh, if only summer were eternal! Who could wish a better supper than
ripe berries and molasses? Nor was there need of sleeping under roof nor
of lighting candles to grope his way to pallet of straw, when he might
have the blue vault of heaven arching over him, and all God's stars for
lamps, and for a bed a horse blanket stretched over an elastic couch of
pine needles. There were two gaunt pines that had been dropping their
polished spills for centuries, perhaps silently adding, year by year,
another layer of aromatic springiness to poor Tom's bed. Flinging his
tired body on this grateful couch, burying his head in the crushed sweet
fern of his pillow with one deep-drawn sigh of pleasure,--there, haunted
by no past and harassed by no future, slept God's fool as sweetly as a
child.

Yes, if only summer were eternal, and youth as well!

But when the blueberries had ripened summer after summer, and the gaunt
pine-trees had gone on for many years weaving poor Tom's mattress, there
came a change in the aspect of things. He still made his way to the
village, seeking chairs to mend; but he was even more unkempt than of
old, his tall figure was bent, and his fingers trembled as he wove the
willow strands in and out, and over and under.

There was little work to do, moreover, for the village had altogether
retired from business, and was no longer in competition with its
neighbors: the dam was torn away, the sawmills were pulled down;
husbands and fathers were laid in the churchyard, sons and brothers and
lovers had gone West, and mothers and widows and spinsters stayed on,
each in her quiet house alone. "'T ain't no hardship when you get used
to it," said the Widow Buzzell. "Land sakes! a lantern 's 's good 's a
man any time, if you only think so, 'n' 't ain't half so much trouble to
keep it filled up!"

But Tom still sold a basket occasionally, and the children always
gathered about him for the sake of hearing him repeat his well-worn
formula,--"Tom allers puts two handles on baskets: one to take 'em up by,
one to set 'em down by." This was said with a beaming smile and a wise
shake of the head, as if he were announcing a great discovery to an
expectant world. And then he would lay down his burden of basket stuff,
and, sitting under an apple-tree in somebody's side yard, begin his task
of willow-bottoming an old chair. It was a pretty sight enough, if one
could keep back the tears,--the kindly, simple fellow with the circle of
children about his knees. Never a village fool without a troop of babies
at his heels. They love him, too, till we teach them to mock.

When he was younger, he would sing,

     "Rock-a-by, baby, on the treetop,"

and dance the while, swinging his unfinished basket to and fro for a
cradle. He was too stiff in the joints for dancing nowadays, but
he still sang the "bloomin' gy-ar-ding" when ever they asked him,
particularly if some apple-cheeked little maid would say, "Please, Tom!"
He always laughed then, and, patting the child's hand, said, "Pooty
gal,--got eyes!" The youngsters dance with glee at this meaningless
phrase, just as their mothers had danced years before when it was said
to them.

Summer waned. In the moist places the gentian uncurled its blue fringes;
purple asters and gay Joe Pye waved their colors by the roadside; tall
primroses put their yellow bonnets on, and peeped over the brooks to see
themselves; and the dusty pods of the milkweed were bursting with their
silky fluffs, the spinning of the long summer. Autumn began to paint the
maples red and the elms yellow, for the early days of September brought
a frost. Some one remarked at the village store that old Blueb'ry Tom
must not be suffered to stay on the plains another winter, now that he
was getting so feeble,--not if the "_se_leckmen" had to root him out
and take him to the poor-farm. He would surely starve or freeze, and his
death would be laid at their door.

Tom was interviewed. Persuasion, logic, sharp words, all failed to move
him one jot or tittle. He stood in his castle door, with the ladder
behind him, smiling, always smiling (none but the fool smiles always,
nor always weeps), and saying to all visitors, "Tom ain't ter hum; Tom's
gone to Bonny Eagle; Tom don' want to go to the poor-farm."

November came in surly.

The cheerful stir and bustle of the harvest were over, the corn was
shocked, the apples and pumpkins were gathered into barns. The problem
of Tom's future was finally laid before the selectmen; and since the
poor fellow's mild obstinancy had defeated all attempts to conquer it,
the sheriff took the matter in hand.

The blueberry plains looked bleak and bare enough now. It had rained
incessantly for days, growing ever colder and colder as it rained. The
sun came out at last, but it shone in a wintry sort of way,--like a duty
smile,--as if light, not heat, were its object. A keen wind blew the
dead leaves hither and thither in a wild dance that had no merriment in
it. A blackbird flew under an old barrel by the wayside, and, ruffling
himself into a ball, remarked despondently that feathers were no sort of
protection in this kind of climate. A snowbird, flying by, glanced in
at the barrel, and observed that anybody who minded a little breeze like
that had better join the woodcocks, who were leaving for the South by
the night express.

The blueberry bushes were stripped bare of green. The stunted pines and
sombre hemlocks looked in tone with the landscape now; where all was
dreary they did not seem amiss.

"Je-whilikins!" exclaimed the sheriff as he drew up his coat collar.
"A madhouse is the place for the man who wants to live ou'doors in the
winter time; the poor-farm is too good for him."

But Tom was used to privation, and even to suffering. "Ou'doors" was the
only home he knew, and with all its rigors he loved it. He looked over
the barren plains, knowing, in a dull sort of way, that they would
shortly be covered with snow; but he had three coats, two of them with
sleeves, and the crunch-crunch of the snow under his tread was music
to his ears. Then, too, there were a few hospitable firesides where he
could always warm himself; and the winter would soon be over, the birds
would come again,--new birds, singing the old songs,--the sap would
mount in the trees, the buds swell on the blueberry bushes, and the
young ivory leaves push their ruddy tips through the softening ground.
The plains were fatherland and mother-country, home and kindred, to
Tom. He loved the earth that nourished him, and he saw through all the
seeming death in nature the eternal miracle of the resurrection. To him
winter was never cruel. He looked underneath her white mantle, saw the
infant spring hidden in her warm bosom, and was content to wait. Content
to wait? Content to starve, content to freeze, if only he need not be
carried into captivity.

The poor-farm was not a bad place, either, if only Tom had been a
reasonable being. To be sure, when Hannah Sophia Palmer asked old Mrs.
Pinkham how she liked it, she answered, with a patient sigh, that
"her 'n' Mr. Pinkham hed lived there goin' on nine year, workin' their
fingers to the bone 'most, 'n' yet they hadn't been able to lay up a
cent!" If this peculiarity of administration was its worst feature, it
was certainly one that would have had no terrors for Tom o' the blueb'ry
plains. Terrors of some sort, nevertheless, the poor-farm had for him;
and when the sheriff's party turned in by the clump of white birches and
approached the cabin, they found that fear had made the simple wise. Tom
had provished the little upper chamber, and, in place of the piece of
sacking that usually served him for a door in winter, he had woven a
defense of willow. In fine, he had taken all his basket stuff, and,
treating the opening through which he entered and left his home
precisely as if it were a bottomless chair, he had filled it in solidly,
weaving to and fro, by night as well as by day, till he felt, poor fool,
as safely intrenched as if he were in the heart of a fortress.

The sheriff tied his horse to a tree, and Rube Hobson and Pitt Packard
got out of the double wagon. Two men laughed when they saw the pathetic
defense, but the other shut his lips together and caught his breath.
(He had been born on a poor-farm, but no one knew it at Pleasant River.)
They called Tom's name repeatedly, but no other sound broke the silence
of the plains save the rustling of the wind among the dead leaves.

"Numb-head!" muttered the sheriff, pounding on the side of the cabin
with his whip-stock. "Come out and show yourself! We know you're in
there, and it's no use hiding!"

At last in response to a deafening blow from Rube Hobson's hard fist,
there came the answering note of a weak despairing voice.

"Tom ain't ter hum," it said; "Tom's gone to Bonny Eagle."

"That's all right!" guffawed the men; "but you've got to go some more,
and go a diff'rent way. It ain't no use fer you to hold back; we've got
a ladder, and by Jiminy! you go with us this time!"

The ladder was put against the side of the hut, and Pitt Packard climbed
up, took his jack-knife, slit the woven door from top to bottom, and
turned back the flap.

The men could see the inside of the chamber now. They were humorous
persons who could strain a joke to the snapping point, but they felt,
at last, that there was nothing especially amusing in the situation.
Tom was huddled in a heap on the straw bed in the far corner. The vacant
smile had fled from his face, and he looked, for the first time in his
life, quite distraught.

"Come along, Tom," said the sheriff kindly; "we 're going to take you
where you can sleep in a bed, and have three meals a day."

     "I'd much d'ruth-er walk in the bloom-in' gy-ar-ding,"

sang Tom quaveringly, as he hid his head in a paroxysm of fear.

"Well, there ain't no bloomin' gardings to walk in jest now, so come
along and be peaceable."

"Tom don' want to go to the poor-farm," he wailed piteously.

But there was no alternative. They dragged him off the bed and down the
ladder as gently as possible; then Rube Hobson held him on the back seat
of the wagon, while the sheriff unhitched the horse. As they were on
the point of starting, the captive began to wail and struggle more than
ever, the burden of his plaint being a wild and tremulous plea for his
pail of molasses.

"Dry up, old softy, or I'll put the buggy robe over your head!" muttered
Rube Hobson, who had not had much patience when he started on the trip,
and had lost it all by this time.

"By thunder! he shall hev his molasses, if he thinks he wants it!" said
Pitt Packard, and he ran up the ladder and brought it down, comforting
the shivering creature thus, for he lapsed into a submissive silence
that lasted until the unwelcome journey was over.

Tom remained at the poorhouse precisely twelve hours. It did not enter
the minds of the authorities that any one so fortunate as to be admitted
into that happy haven would decline to stay there. The unwilling guest
disappeared early on the morrow of his arrival, and, after some search,
they followed him to the old spot. He had climbed into his beloved
retreat, and, having learned nothing from experience, had mended the
willow door as best he could, and laid him down in peace. They dragged
him out again, and this time more impatiently; for it was exasperating
to see a man (even if he were a fool) fight against a bed and three
meals a day.

The second attempt was little more successful than the first. As a
place of residence, the poor-farm did not seem any more desirable or
attractive on near acquaintance than it did at long range. Tom remained
a week, because he was kept in close confinement; but when they judged
that he was weaned from his old home, they loosed his bonds, and--back
to the plains he sped, like an arrow shot from the bow, or like a bit of
iron leaping to the magnet.

What should be done with him?

Public opinion was divided. Some people declared that the village had
done its duty, and if the "dog-goned lunk-head" wanted to starve
and freeze, it was his funeral, not theirs. Others thought that
the community had no resource but to bear the responsibility of its
irresponsible children, however troublesome they might be. There was
entire unanimity of view so far as the main issues were concerned. It
was agreed that nobody at the poor-farm had leisure to stand guard over
Tom night and day, and that the sheriff could not be expected to spend
his time forcing him out of his hut on the blueberry plains.

There was but one more expedient to be tried, a very simple and
ingenious but radical and comprehensive one, which, in Rube Hobson's
opinion, would strike at the root of the matter.

Tom had fled from captivity for the third time.

He had stolen out at daybreak, and, by an unexpected stroke of fortune,
the molasses pail was hanging on a nail by the shed door. The remains of
a battered old bushel basket lay on the wood-pile: bottom it had none,
nor handles; rotundity of side had long since disappeared, and none
but its maker would have known it for a basket. Tom caught it up in his
flight, and, seizing the first crooked stick that offered, he slung the
dear familiar burden over his shoulder and started off on a jog-trot.

Heaven, how happy he was! It was the rosy dawn of an Indian summer
day,--a warm jewel of a day, dropped into the bleak world of yesterday
without a hint of beneficent intention; one of those enchanting weather
surprises with which Dame Nature reconciles us to her stern New England
rule.

The joy that comes of freedom, and the freedom that comes of joy, unbent
the old man's stiffened joints. He renewed his youth at every mile. He
ran like a lapwing. When his feet first struck the sandy soil of the
plains, he broke into old song of the "bloom-in' gy-ar-ding" and the
"jolly swain," and in the marvelous mental and spiritual exhilaration
born of the supreme moment he almost grasped that impossible last note.
His heard could hardly hold its burden of rapture when he caught the
well-known gleam of the white birches. He turned into the familiar
path, boy's blood thumping in old man's veins. The past week had been
a dreadful dream. A few steps more and he would be within sight, within
touch of home,--home at last! No--what was wrong? He must have gone
beyond it, in his reckless haste! Strange that he could have forgotten
the beloved spot! Can lover mistake the way to sweetheart's window? Can
child lose the path to mother's knee?

He turned,--ran hither and thither, like one distraught. A nameless
dread flitted through his dull mind, chilling his warm blood, paralyzing
the activity of the moment before. At last, with a sob like that of a
frightened child who flies from some imagined evil lurking in darkness,
he darted back to the white birches and started anew. This time
he trusted to blind instinct; his feet knew the path, and, left to
themselves, they took him through the tangle of dry bushes straight to
his--

It had vanished!

Nothing but ashes remained to mark the spot,--nothing but ashes! And
these, ere many days, the autumn winds would scatter, and the leafless
branches on which they fell would shake them off lightly, never dreaming
that they hid the soul of a home. Nothing but ashes!

Poor Tom o' the blueb'ry plains!




THE NOONING TREE.


The giant elm stood in the centre of the squire's fair green meadows,
and was known to all the country round about as the "Bean ellum." The
other trees had seemingly retired to a respectful distance, as if they
were not worthy of closer intimacy; and so it stood alone, king of the
meadow, monarch of the village.

It shot from the ground for a space, straight, strong, and superb,
and then bust into nine splendid branches, each a tree in itself, all
growing symmetrically from the parent trunk, and casting a grateful
shadow under which all the inhabitants of the tiny village might have
gathered.

It was not alone its size, its beauty, its symmetry, its density of
foliage, that made it the glory of the neighborhood, but the low grown
of its branches and the extra-ordinary breadth of its shade. Passers-by
from the adjacent towns were wont to hitch their teams by the wayside,
crawl through the stump fence and walk across the fields, for a nearer
view of its magnificence. One man, indeed, was known to drive by the
tree every day during the summer, and lift his hat to it, respectfully,
each time he passed; but he was a poet and his intellect was not greatly
esteemed in the village.

The elm was almost as beautiful in one season as in another. In the
spring it rose from moist fields and mellow ploughed ground, its tiny
brown leaf buds bursting with pride at the thought of the loveliness
coiled up inside. In summer it stood in the midst of a waving garden of
buttercups and whiteweed, a towering mass of verdant leafage, a shelter
from the sun and a refuge from the storm; a cool, splendid, hospitable
dome, under which the weary farmer might fling himself, and gaze upward
as into the heights and depths of an emerald heaven. As for the birds,
they made it a fashionable summer resort, the most commodious and
attractive in the whole country; with no limit to the accommodations
for those of a gregarious turn of mind, liking the advantages of select
society combined with country air. In the autumn it held its own; for
when the other elms changed their green to duller tints, the nooning
tree put on a gown of yellow, and stood out against the far background
of sombre pine woods a brilliant mass of gold and brown. In winter, when
there was no longer dun of upturned sod, nor waving daisy gardens, nor
ruddy autumn grasses, it rose above the dazzling snow crust, lifting
its bare, shapely branches in sober elegance and dignity, and seeming to
say, "Do not pity me; I have been, and, please God, I shall be!"

Whenever the weather was sufficiently mild, it was used as a "nooning"
tree by all the men at work in the surrounding fields; but it was in
haying time that it became the favorite lunching and "bangeing" place
for Squire Bean's hands and those of Miss Vilda Cummins, who owned the
adjoining farm. The men congregated under the spreading branches
at twelve o' the clock, and spent the noon hour there, eating and
"swapping" stories, as they were doing to-day.

Each had a tin pail, and each consumed a quantity of "flour food" that
kept the housewives busy at the cook stove from morning till night. A
glance at Pitt Packard's luncheon, for instance, might suffice as
an illustration, for, as Jabe Slocum said, "Pitt took after both his
parents; one et a good deal, 'n' the other a good while." His pail
contained four doughnuts, a quarter section of pie, six buttermilk
biscuits, six ginger cookies, a baked cup custard, and a quart of cold
coffee. This quantity was a trifle unusual, but every man in the group
was lined throughout with pie, cemented with buttermilk bread, and
riveted with doughnuts.

Jabe Slocum and Brad Gibson lay extended slouchingly, their cowhide
boots turned up to the sky; Dave Milliken, Steve Webster, and the others
leaned back against the tree-trunk, smoking clay pipes, or hugging their
knees and chewing blades of grass reflectively.

One man sat apart from the rest, gloomily puffing rings of smoke into
the air. After a while he lay down in the grass with his head buried
in his hat, sleeping to all appearances, while the others talked and
laughed; for he had no stories, though he put in an absent-minded word
or two when he was directly addressed. This was the man from Tennessee,
Matt Henderson, dubbed "Dixie" for short. He was a giant fellow,--a
"great gormin' critter," Samantha Ann Milliken called him; but if he
had held up his head and straightened his broad shoulders, he would have
been thought a man of splendid presence.

He seemed a being from another sphere instead of from another section
of the country. It was not alone the olive tint of the skin, the mass
of wavy dark hair tossed back from a high forehead, the sombre eyes,
and the sad mouth,--a mouth that had never grown into laughing curves
through telling Yankee jokes,--it was not these that gave him what the
boys called a "kind of a downcasted look." The man from Tennessee had
something more than a melancholy temperament; he had, or physiognomy was
a lie, a sorrow tugging at his heart.

"I'm goin' to doze a spell," drawled Jabe Slocum, pulling his straw hat
over his eyes. "I've got to renew my strength like the eagle's, 'f I'm
goin' to walk to the circus this afternoon. Wake me up, boys, when you
think I'd ought to sling that scythe some more, for if I hev it on my
mind I can't git a wink o' sleep."

This was apparently a witticism; at any rate, it elicited roars of
laughter.

"It's one of Jabe's useless days; he takes 'em from his great-aunt
Lyddy," said David Milliken.

"You jest dry up, Dave. Ef it took me as long to git to workin' as it
did you to git a wife, I bate this hay wouldn't git mowed down to crack
o' doom. Gorry! ain't this a tree! I tell you, the sun 'n' the airth,
the dew 'n' the showers, 'n' the Lord God o' creation jest took holt 'n'
worked together on this tree, 'n' no mistake!"

"You're right, Jabe." (This from Steve Webster, who was absently cutting
a _D_ in the bark. He was always cutting _D_'s these days.) "This ellum
can't be beat in the State o' Maine, nor no other state. My brother that
lives in California says that the big redwoods, big as they air, don't
throw no sech shade, nor ain't so han'some, 'specially in the fall o'
the year, as our State o' Maine trees; 'assiduous trees,' he called
'em."

"_Assidyus_ trees? Why don't you talk United States while you're about
it, 'n' not fire yer long-range words round here? _Assidyus!_ What does
it mean, anyhow?"

"Can't prove it by me. That's what he called 'em, 'n' I never forgot
it."

"Assidyus--assidyus--it don't sound as if it meant nothing', to me."

"Assiduous means 'busy,'" said the man from Tennessee, who had suddenly
waked from a brown study, and dropped off into another as soon as he had
given the definition.

"Busy, does it? Wall, I guess we ain't no better off now 'n we ever was.
One tree's 'bout 's busy as another, as fur 's I can see."

"Wall, there is kind of a meanin' in it to me, but it'sturrible far
fetched," remarked Jabe Slocum, rather sleepily. "You see, our ellums
and maples 'n' all them trees spends part o' the year in buddin' 'n'
gittin' out their leaves 'n' hangin' em all over the branches; 'n' then,
no sooner air they full grown than they hev to begin colorin' of 'em red
or yeller or brown, 'n' then shakin' 'em off; 'n' this is all extry, you
might say, to their every-day chores o' growin' 'n' cirkerlatin' sap,
'n' spreadin' 'n' thickenin' 'n' shovin' out limbs, 'n' one thing 'n'
'nother; 'n' it stan's to reason that the first 'n' hemlocks 'n' them
California redwoods, that keeps their clo'es on right through the year,
can't be so busy as them that keeps a-dressin' 'n' ondressin' all the
time."

"I guess you're 'bout right," allowed Steve, "but I shouldn't never 'a'
thought of it in the world. What yer takin' out o' that bottle, Jabe? I
thought you was a temperance man."

"I guess he 's like the feller over to Shandagee schoolhouse, that said
he was in favor o' the law, but agin its enforcement!" laughed Pitt
Packard.

"I ain't breakin' no law; this is yarb bitters," Jabe answered, with a
pull at the bottle.

"It's to cirkerlate his blood," said Ob Tarbox; "he's too dog-goned lazy
to cirkerlate it himself."

"I'm takin' it fer what ails me," said Jabe oracularly; "the heart
knoweth its own bitterness, 'n' it 's a wise child that knows its own
complaints 'thout goin' to a doctor."

"Ain't yer scared fer fear it'll start yer growth, Laigs?" asked little
Brad Gibson, looking at Jabe's tremendous length of limb and foot. "Say,
how do yer git them feet o' yourn uphill? Do yer start one ahead, 'n'
side-track the other?"

The tree rang with the laughter evoked by this sally, but the man from
Tennessee never smiled.

Jabe Slocum's imperturbable good humor was not shaken in the very least
by these personal remarks. "If I thought 't was a good growin' medicine,
I'd recommend it to your folks, Brad," he replied cheerfully. "Your
mother says you boys air all so short that when you're diggin' potatoes,
yer can't see her shake the dinner rag 'thout gittin' up 'n' standing
on the potato hills! If I was a sinikitin feller like you, I wouldn't
hector folks that had made out to grow some."

"Speakin' o' growin'," said Steve Webster, "who do you guess I seen in
Boston, when I was workin' there? That tall Swatkins girl from the
Duck Pond, the one that married Dan Robinson. It was one Sunday, in the
Catholic meetin'-house. I'd allers wanted to go to a Catholic meetin',
an' I declare it's about the solemnest one there is. I mistrusted I was
goin' to everlastin'ly giggle, but I tell yer I was the awedest cutter
yer ever see. But anyway, the Swatkins girl--or Mis' Robinson, she is
now--was there as large as life in the next pew to me, jabberin' Latin,
pawin' beads, gettin' up 'n' kneelin' down, 'n' crossin' herself north,
south, east, 'n' west, with the best of 'em. Poor Dan! 'Grinnin' Dan,'
we used to call him. Well, he don't grin nowadays. He never was good for
much, but he 's hed more 'n his comeuppance!"

"Why, what 's the matter with him? Can't he git work in Boston?"

"Matter? Why, his wife, that I see makin' believe be so dreadful pious
in the Catholic meetin', she 's carried on wuss 'n the Old Driver for
two years, 'n' now she 's up 'n' left him,--gone with a han'somer man."

Down on Steve Webster's hand came Jabe Slocum's immense paw with a grasp
that made him cringe.

"What the"--began Steve, when the man from Tennessee took up his scythe
and slouched away from the group by the tree.

"Didn't yer know no better 'n that, yer thunderin' fool? Can't yer see a
hole in a grindstun 'thout it's hung on yer nose?"

"What hev I done?" asked Steve, as if dumfounded.

"Done? Where 've yer ben, that yer don't know Dixie's wife 's left him?"

"Where 've I ben? Hain't I ben workin' in Boston fer a year; 'n' since
I come home last week, hain't I ben tendin' sick folks, so 't I
couldn't git outside the dooryard? I never seen the man in my life till
yesterday, in the field, 'n' I thought he was one o' them dark-skinned
Frenchies from Guildford that hed come up here fer hayin'."

"Mebbe I spoke too sharp," said Jabe apologetically; "but we 've ben
scared to talk wives, or even women folks, fer a month o' Sundays, fer
fear Dixie 'd up 'n' tumble on his scythe, or do somethin' crazy. You
see it's this way (I'd ruther talk than work; 'n' we ain't workin' by
time to-day, anyway, on account of the circus comin'): 'Bout a year 'n'
a half ago, this tall, han'some feller turned up here in Pleasant River.
He inhailed from down South somewheres, but he didn't like his work
there, 'n' drifted to New York, 'n' then to Boston; 'n' then he
remembered his mother was a State o' Maine woman, 'n' he come here to
see how he liked. We didn't take no stock in him at first,--we never
hed one o' that nigger-tradin' secedin' lot in amongst us,--but he was
pleasant spoken 'n' a square, all-round feller, 'n' didn't git off any
secesh nonsense, 'n' it ended in our likin' him first-rate. Wall, he got
work in the cannin' fact'ry over on the Butterfield road, 'n' then he
fell in with the Maddoxes. You 've hearn tell of 'em; they're relation
to Pitt here."


"I wouldn't own 'em if I met 'em on Judgement Bench!" exclaimed Pitt
Packard hotly. "My stepfather's second wife married Mis' Maddox's first
husband after he got divorced from her, 'n' that's all there is to it;
they ain't no bloody-kin o' mine, 'n' I don't call 'em relation."

"Wall, Pitt's relations or not, they're all wuss 'n the Old Driver,
as yer said 'bout Dan Robinson's wife. Dixie went to board there. Mis
Maddox was all out o' husbands jest then,--she 'd jest disposed of her
fourth, somehow or 'nother; she always hed a plenty 'n' to spare, though
there's lots o' likely women folks round here that never hed one chance,
let alone four. Her daughter Fidelity was a chip o' the old block. Her
father hed named her Fidelity after his mother, when she wa'n't nothin'
but a two-days-old baby, 'n' he didn't know how she was goin' to turn
out; if he 'd 'a' waited two months, I believe I could 'a' told him.
_In_fidelity would 'a' ben a mighty sight more 'propriate; but either
of 'em is too long fer a name, so they got to callin' her Fiddy. Wall,
Fiddy didn't waste no time; she was nigh onto eighteen years old when
Dixie went there to board, 'n' she begun huneyfuglin' him's soon as ever
she set eyes on him. Folks warned him, but 't wa'n't no use; he was kind
o' bewitched with her from the first. She wa'n't so han'some, neither.
Blamed 'f I know how they do it; let 'em alone, 'f yer know when yer
're well off, 's my motter. She was red-headed, but her hair become her
somehow when she curled 'n' frizzed it over a karosene lamp, 'n' then
wound it round 'n' round her head like ropes o' carnelian. She hedn't
any particular kind of a nose nor mouth nor eyes, but gorry! when she
looked at yer, yer felt kind as if yer was turnin' to putty inside."

"I know what yer mean," said Steve interestedly.

"She hed a figger jest like them fashion-paper pictures you 've seen,
an' the very day any new styles come to Boston Fiddy Maddox would hev
'em before sundown; the biggest bustles 'n' the highest hats 'n' the
tightest skirts 'n' the longest tails to 'em; she'd git 'em somehow,
anyhow! Dixie wa'n't out o' money when he come here, an' a spell
afterwards there was more 'n a thousand dollars fell to him from his
father's folks down South. Well, Fiddy made that fly, I tell you! Dixie
bought a top buggy 'n' a sorrel hoss, 'n' they was on the road most o'
the time when he wa'n't to work; 'n' when he was, she 'd go with Lem
Simmons, 'n' Dixie none the wiser. Mis Maddox was lookin' up a new
husband jest then, so 't she didn't interfere"--

"She was the same kind o' goods, anyhow," interpolated Ob Tarbox.

"Yes, she was one of them women folks that air so light-minded you can't
anchor 'em down with a sewin'-machine, nor a dishpan, nor a husband 'n'
young ones, nor no namable kind of a thing; the least wind blows 'em
here 'n' blows 'em there, like dandelion puffs. As time went on, the
widder got herself a beau now 'n' then; but as fast as she hooked 'em,
Fiddy up 'n' took 'em away from her. You see she 'd gethered in most of
her husbands afore Fiddy was old enough to hev her finger in the pie;
but she cut her eye-teeth early, Fiddy did, 'n' there wa'n't no kind of
a feller come to set up with the widder but she 'd everlastin'ly grab
him, if she hed any use fer him, 'n' then there 'd be Hail Columby, I
tell yer. But Dixie, he was 's blind 's a bat 'n' deef 's a post. He
could n't see nothin' but Fiddy, 'n' he couldn't see her very plain."

"He hed warnin's enough," put in Pitt Packard, though Jabe Slocum never
needed any assistance in spinning a yarn.

"Warnin's! I should think he hed. The Seventh Day Baptist minister went
so fur as to preach at him. 'The Apostle Paul gin heed,' was the text.
'Why did he gin heed?' says he. 'Because he heerd. If he hadn't 'a'
heerd, he couldn't 'a' gin heed, 'n' 't wouldn't 'a' done him no good
to 'a' heerd 'thout he gin heed!' Wall, it helped consid'ble many in
the congregation, 'specially them that was in the habit of hearin' 'n'
heedin', but it rolled right off Dixie like water off a duck's back. He
'n' Fiddy was seen over to the ballin' alley to Wareham next day, 'n'
they didn't come back for a week."

     "'He gin her his hand,
     And he made her his own,'"

sang little Brad Gibson.

"He hed gin her his hand, but no minister nor trial-jestice nor
eighteen-carat ring nor stificate could 'a' made Fiddy Maddox anybody's
own 'ceptin' the devil's, an' he wouldn't 'a' married her; she'd 'a'
ben too near kin. We'd never 'spicioned she 'd git 's fur 's marryin'
anybody, 'n' she only married Dixie 'cause he told her he 'd take her to
the Wareham House to dinner, 'n' to the County Fair afterwards; if any
other feller hed offered to take her to supper, 'n' the theatre on top
o' that, she 'd 'a' married him instid."

"How 'd the old woman take it?" asked Steve.

"She disowned her daughter _punctilio:_ in the first place, fer runnin'
away 'stid o' hevin' a church weddin'; 'n' second place, fer marryin' a
pauper (that was what she called him; 'n' it was true, for they 'd spent
every cent he hed); 'n' third place, fer alienatin' the 'fections of a
travelin' baker-man she hed her eye on fer herself. He was a kind of a
flour-food peddler, that used to drive a cart round by Hard Scrabble,
Moderation, 'n' Scratch Corner way. Mis' Maddox used to buy all her
baked victuals of him, 'specially after she found out he was a widower
beginnin' to take notice. His cart used to stand at her door so long
everybody on the rout would complain o' stale bread. But bime bye Fiddy
begun to set at her winder when he druv up, 'n' bime bye she pinned a
blue ribbon in her collar. When she done that, Mis' Maddox alles hed to
take a back seat. The boys used to call it a danger signal. It kind o'
drawed yer 'tention to p'ints 'bout her chin 'n' mouth 'n' neck, 'n' one
thing 'n' 'nother, in a way that was cal'lated to snarl up the thoughts
o' perfessors o' religion 'n' turn 'em earthways. There was a spell
I hed to say, '_Remember_ _Rhapseny!_ _Remember_ _Rhapseny!_' over to
myself whenever Fiddy put on her blue ribbons. Wall, as I say, Fiddy set
at the winder, the baker-man seen the blue ribbons, 'n' Mis' Maddox's
cake was dough. She put on a red ribbon; but land! her neck looked 's if
somebody 'd gone over it with a harrer! Then she stomped round 'n' slat
the dish-rag, but 't wa'n't no use. 'Gracious, mother,' says Fiddy, 'I
don't do nothin' but set at the winder. The sun shines for all.' 'You're
right it does,' says Mis' Maddox, ''n' that's jest what I complain of.
I'd like to get a change to shine on something myself.'

"But the baker-man kep' on comin', though when he got to the Maddoxes'
doorsteps he couldn't make change for a quarter nor tell pie from bread;
an' sure 's you're born, the very day Fiddy went away to be married to
Dixie, that mornin' she drawed that everlastin' numhead of a flour-food
peddler out into the orchard, 'n' cut off a lock o' her hair, 'n' tied
it up with a piece o' her blue ribbon, 'n' give it to him; an' old Mis'
Bascom says, when he went past her house he was gazin' at it 'n' kissin'
of it, 'n' his horse meanderin' on one side the road 'n' the other, 'n'
the door o' the cart open 'n' slammin' to 'n' fro, 'n' ginger cookies
spillin' out all over the lot. He come back to the Maddoxes next
morning' ('t wa'n't his day, but his hoss couldn't pull one way when
Fiddy's ribbon was pullin' t'other); an' when he found out she 'd gone
with Dixie, he cussed 'n' stomped 'n' took on like a loontic; an' when
Mis' Maddox hinted she was ready to heal the wownds Fiddy 'd inflicted,
he stomped 'n' cussed wuss 'n' ever, 'n' the neighbors say he called her
a hombly old trollop, an' fired the bread loaves all over the dooryard,
he was so crazy at bein' cheated.

"Wall, to go back to Dixie--I'll be comin' right along, boys." (This to
Brad Gibson, who was taking his farewell drink of ginger tea preparatory
to beginning work.)

"I pity you, Steve!" exclaimed Brad, between deep swallows. "If you 'd
known when you was well off, you 'd 'a' stayed in Boston. If Jabe hed a
story started, he 'd talk three days after he was dead."

"Go 'long; leave me be! Wall, as I was sayin', Dixie brought Fiddy home
('Dell,' he called her), an' they 'peared bride 'n' groom at meetin'
next Sunday. The last hundred dollars he hed in the world hed gone into
the weddin' tower 'n' on to Fiddy's back. He hed a new suit, 'n' he
looked like a major. You ain't got no idea what he was, 'cause his eyes
is dull now, 'n' he 's bowed all over, 'n' ain't shaved nor combed,
hardly; but they was the han'somest couple that ever walked up the broad
aisle. She hed on a green silk dress, an' a lace cape that was like a
skeeter nettin' over her neck an' showed her bare skin through, an' a
hat like an apple orchard in full bloom, hummin'-bird an' all. Dixie
kerried himself as proud as Lucifer. He didn't look at the minister 'n'
he didn't look at the congregation; his great eyes was glued on Fiddy,
as if he couldn't hardly keep from eatin' of her up. An' she behaved
consid'able well for a few months, as long 's the novelty lasted an' the
silk dresses was new. Before Christmas, though, she began to peter out
'n' git slack-twisted. She allers hated housework as bad as a pig would
a penwiper, an' Dixie hed to git his own breakfast afore he went to
work, or go off on an empty stomach. Many 's the time he 's got her
meals for her 'n' took 'em to her on a waiter. Them secesh fellers'll
wait on women folks long as they can stan' up.

"Then bime bye the baby come along; but that made things wuss 'stid o'
better. She didn't pay no more 'tention to it than if it hed belonged
to the town. She 'd go off to dances, an' leave Dixie to home tendin'
cradle; but that wa'n't no hardship to him for he was 'bout as much
wropped up in the child as he was in Fiddy. Wall, sir, 'bout a month ago
she up 'n' disappeared off the face o' the airth 'thout sayin' a word or
leavin' a letter. She took her clo'es, but she never thought o' takin'
the baby; one baby more or less didn't make no odds to her s' long 's
she hed that skeeter-nettin' cape. Dixie sarched fer her high an' low
fer a fortnight, but after that he give it up as a bad job. He found out
enough, I guess, to keep him pretty busy thinkin' what he 'd do next.
But day before yesterday the same circus that plays here this afternoon
was playin' to Wareham. A lot of us went over on the evenin' train, an'
we coaxed Dixie into goin', so 's to take his mind off his trouble. But
land! he didn't see nothin'. He 'd walk right up the lions 'n' tigers
in the menagerie as if they was cats 'n' chickens, an' all the time the
clown was singin' he looked like a dumb animile that 's hed a bullet put
in him. There was lots o' side shows, mermaids 'n' six-legged calves
'n' spotted girls, 'n' one thing 'n' 'nother, an' there was one o' them
whirligig machines with a mess o' rocking'-hosses goin' round 'n' round,
'n' an organ in the middle playin' like sixty. I wish we 'd 'a' kept
clear o' the thing, but as bad luck would hev it, we stopped to look,
an' there on top o' two high-steppin' white wooden hosses, set Mis'
Fiddy an' that dod-gasted light-complected baker-man! If ever she was
suited to a dot, it was jest then 'n' there. She could 'a' gone prancin'
round that there ring forever 'n' forever, with the whoopin' 'n'
hollerin' 'n' whizzin' 'n' whirlin' soundin' in her ears, 'n' the music
playin' like mad, 'n' she with nothin' to do but stick on 'n' let some
feller foot the bills. Somebody must 'a' ben thinkin' o' Fiddy Maddox
when the invented them whirl-a-go-rounds. She was laughin' 'n' carryin'
on like the old Scratch; her apple-blossom hat dome off, 'n' the
baker-man put it on, 'n' took consid'able time over it, 'n' pulled her
ear 'n' pinched her cheek when he got through; an' that was jest the
blamed minute we ketched sight of 'em. I pulled Dixie off, but I was
too late. He give a groan I shall remember to my dyin' day, 'n' then
he plunged out o' the crowd 'n' through the gate like a streak o'
lightnin'. We follered, but land! we couldn't find him, an' true as I
set here, I never expected to see him alive agin. But I did; I forgot
all about one thing, you see, 'n' that was the baby. If it wa'n't no
attraction to its mother, I guess he cal'lated it needed a father all
the more. Anyhow, he turned up in the field yesterday mornin', ready for
work, but lookin' as if he 'd hed his heart cut out 'n' a piece o' lead
put in the place of it."

"I don't seem as if she 'd 'a' ben brazen enough to come back so near
him," said Steve.

"Wall, I don't s'pose she hed any idea o' Dixie's bein' at a circus over
Wareham jest then; an' ten to one she didn't care if the whole town seen
her. She wanted to get rid of him, 'n' she didn't mind how she did it.
Dixie ain't one of the shootin' kinds, an' anyhow, Fiddy Maddox wa'n't
one to look ahead; whatever she wanted to do, that she done, from the
time she was knee high to a grasshopper. I've seen her set down by a
peck basket of apples, 'n' take a couple o' bites out o' one, 'n' then
heave it fur 's she could heave it 'n' start in on another, 'n' then
another; 'n' 't wa'n't a good apple year, neither. She'd everlastin'ly
spile 'bout a dozen of 'em 'n' smaller 'bout two mouthfuls. Doxy Morton,
now, would eat an apple clean down to the core, 'n' then count the seeds
'n' put 'em on the window-sill to dry, 'n' get up 'n' put the core
in the stove, 'n' wipe her hands on the roller towel, 'n' take up her
sewin' agin; 'n' if you 've got to be cuttin' 'nitials in tree bark an'
writin' of 'em in the grass with a stick like you 've ben doin' for the
last half-hour, you 're blamed lucky to be doin' _D_'s not _F_'s, like
Dixie there!"


*****


It was three o'clock in the afternoon. The men had dropped work and
gone to the circus. The hay was pronounced to be in a condition where
it could be left without much danger; but, for that matter, no man would
have stayed in the field to attend to another man's hay when there was a
circus in the neighborhood.

Dixie was mowing on alone, listening as in a dream to that subtle
something in the swish of the scythe that makes one seek to know the
song it is singing to the grasses.


     "Hush, ah, hush, the scythes are saying,
     Hush, and heed not, and fall asleep;
     Hush, they say to the grasses swaying,
     Hush, they sing to the clover deep;
     Hush,--'t is the lullaby Time is singing,--
     Hush, and heed not, for all things pass.
     Hush, ah, hush! and the scythes are swinging
     Over the clover, over the grass."


And now, spent with fatigue and watching and care and grief,--heart
sick, mind sick, body sick, sick with past suspense and present
certainty and future dread,--he sat under the cool shade of the nooning
tree, and buried his face in his hands. He was glad to be left alone
with his miseries,--glad that the other men, friendly as he felt them
to be, had gone to the circus, where he would not see or hear them for
hours to come.

How clearly he could conjure up the scene that they were enjoying with
such keen relish! Only two days before, he had walked among the same
tents, staring at horses and gay trappings and painted Amazons as one
who noted nothing; yet the agony of the thing he now saw at last lit up
all the rest as with a lightning flash, and burned the scene forever
on his brain and heart. It was at Wareham, too,--Wareham, where she had
promised to be his wife, where she had married him only a year before.
How well he remembered the night! They left the parsonage; they had
ten miles to drive in the moonlight before reaching their
stopping-place,--ten miles of such joy as only a man could know, he
thought, who had had the warm fruit of life hanging within full vision,
but just out of reach,--just above his longing lips; and then, in an
unlooked-for, gracious moment, his! He could swear she had loved him
that night, if never again.

But this picture passed away, and he saw that maddening circle with the
caracoling steeds. He head the discordant music, the monotonous creak of
the machinery, the strident laughter of the excited riders. As first the
thing was a blur, a kaleidoscope of whirling colors, into which there
presently crept form and order. ... A boy who had cried to get on, and
was now crying to get off. ... Old Rube Hobson and his young wife; Rube
looking white and scared, partly by the whizzing motion, and partly
by the prospect of paying out ten cents for the doubtful pleasure. ...
Pretty Hetty Dunnell with that young fellow from Portland; she too timid
to mount one of the mettle-some chargers, and snuggling close to him in
one of the circling seats. The, good Got!--Dell! sitting on a prancing
white horse, with the man he knew, the man he feared, riding beside her;
a man who kept holding on her hat with fingers that trembled,--the very
hat she "'peared bride in" a man who brushed a grasshopper from her
shoulder with an air of ownership, and, when she slapped his hand
coquettishly, even dared to pinch her pink cheek,--his wife's
cheek,--before that crowd of on-lookers! Merry-go-round, indeed! The
horrible thing was well named; and life was just like it,--a whirl of
happiness and misery, in which the music cannot play loud enough to
drown the creak of the machinery, in which one soul cries out in pain,
another in terror, and the rest laugh; but the prancing steeds gallop
on, gallop on, and once mounted, there is no getting off, unless...

There were some things it was not possible for a mean to bear! The
river! The river! He could hear it rippling over the sunny sands,
swirling among the logs, dashing and roaring under the bridge, rushing
to the sea's embrace. Could it tell whither it was hurrying? NO; but it
was escaping from its present bonds; it would never have to pass over
these same jagged rocks again. "On, on to the unknown!" called the
river. "I come! I come!" he roused himself to respond, when a faint,
faint, helpless voice broke in upon the mad clatter in his brain,
cleaving his torn heart in twain; not a real voice,--the half-forgotten
memory of one; a tender wail that had added fresh misery to his night's
vigil,--the baby!

But the feeble pipe was borne down by the swirl of the water as it
dashed between the rocky banks, still calling to him. If he could only
close his ears to it! But it still called--called still--the river! And
still the child's voice pierced the rush of sound with its pitiful
flute note, until the two resolved themselves into contesting strains,
answering each other antiphonally. The river--the baby--the river--the
baby; and in and through, and betwixt and between, there spun the
whirling merry-go-round, with its curveting wooden horses, its
discordant organ, and its creaking machinery.

But gradually the child's voice gained in strength, and as he heard it
more plainly the other sounds grew fainter, till at last, thank God!
they were hushed. The din, the whirlwind, and the tempest in his brain
were lulled into silence, as under a "Peace, be still!" and, worn out
with the contest, the man from Tennessee fell asleep under the grateful
shade of the nooning tree. So deep was the slumber that settled over
exhausted body and troubled spirit that the gathering clouds, the sudden
darkness, the distant muttering of thunder, the frightened twitter of
the birds, passed unnoticed. A heavy drop of rain pierced the thick
foliage and fell on his face, but the storm within had been too fierce
for him to heed the storm without. He slept on.


*****


Almost every man, woman, and child in the vicinity of Pleasant River
was on the way to the circus,--Boomer's Grand Six-in-One Universal
Consolidated Show; Brilliant Constellations of Fixed Stars shining in
the same Vast Firmament; Glittering Galaxies of World-Famous Equestrian
Artists; the biggest elephants, the funniest clowns, the pluckiest
riders, the stubbornest mules, the most amazing acrobats, the tallest
man and the shortest man, the thinnest woman and the thickest woman,
on the habitable globe; and no connection with any other show on earth,
especially Sypher's Two-in-One Show now devastating the same State.

If the advertisements setting forth these attractions were couched in
language somewhat rosier than the facts would warrant, there were few
persons calm enough to perceive it, when once the glamour of the village
parade and the smell of the menagerie had intoxicated the senses.

The circus had been the sole topic of conversation for a fortnight. Jot
Bascom could always be relied on for the latest and most authentic news
of its triumphant progress from one town to another. Jot was a sort of
town crier; and whenever the approach of a caravan was announced, he
would go over on the Liberty road to find out just where it was and what
were its immediate plans, for the thrilling pleasure of calling at every
one of the neighbors' on his way home, and delivering his budget of
news. He was an attendant at every funeral, and as far as possible at
every wedding, in the village; at every flag-raising and husking, and
town and county fair. When more pressing duties did not hinder, he
endeavored to meet the two daily trains that passed through Milliken's
Mills, a mile or two from Pleasant River. He accompanied the sheriff on
all journeys entailing serving of papers and other embarrassing duties
common to the law. On one occasion, when the two lawyers of the village
held an investigation before Trial Justice Simeon Porter, they waited
an hour because Jot Bascom did not come. They knew that something was
amiss, but it was only on reflection that they remembered that Jot was
not indispensable. He went with all paupers to the Poor Farm, and never
missed a town meeting. He knew all the conditions attending any swapping
of horses that occurred within a radius of twenty miles,--the terms of
the trade and the amount paid to boot. He knew who owed the fish-man and
who owed the meat-man, and who could not get trusted by either of them.
In fact, so far as the divine attributes of omniscience and omnipresence
could be vested in a faulty human creature, they were present in Jot
Bascom. That he was quite unable to attend conscientiously to home
duties, when overborne by press of public service, was true. When
Diadema Bascom wanted kindling split, wood brought in, the cows milked,
or the pigs fed, she commonly found her spouse serving humanity in bulk.

All the details of the approach of the Grand Six-in-One Show had,
therefore, been heralded to those work-sodden and unambitious persons
who tied themselves to their own wood-piles or haying-fields.

These were the bulletins issues:--

The men were making a circle in the Widow Buzzell's field, in the same
place where the old one had been,--the old one, viewed with awe for five
years by all the village small boys.

The forerunners, outriders, proprietors, whatever they might be, had
arrived and gone to the tavern.

An elephant was quartered in the tavern shed!

The elephant had stepped through the floor!!

The advance guard of performers and part of the show itself had come!

And the "Cheriot"!!

This far-famed vehicle had paused on top of Deacon Chute's hill, to
prepare for the street parade. Little Jim Chute had been gloating over
the fact that it must pass by his house, and when it stopped short under
the elms in the dooryard his heart almost broke for joy. He pinched the
twenty-five-cent piece in his pocket to assure himself that he was alive
and in his right mind. The precious coin had been the result of careful
saving, and his hot, excited hands had almost worn it thin. But alas for
the vanity of human hopes! When the magnificent red-and-gold "Cheriot"
was uncovered, that its glories might shine upon the waiting world, the
door opened, and a huddle of painted Indians tumbled out, ready to lead
the procession, or, if so disposed, to scalp the neighborhood. Little
Jim gave one panic-stricken look as they leaped over the chariot steps,
and then fled to the barn chamber, whence he had to be dragged by his
mother, and cuffed into willingness to attend the spectacle that had
once so dazzled his imagination.

On the eventful afternoon of the performance the road was gay with
teams. David and Samantha Milliken drove by in Miss Cummin's neat
carryall, two children on the back seat, a will-o'-the-wisp baby girl
held down by a serious boy. Steve Webster was driving Doxy Morton in his
mother's buggy. Jabe Slocum, Pitt Packard, Brad Gibson, Cyse Higgins,
and scores of others were riding "shank's mare," as they would have
said.

It had been a close, warm day, and as the afternoon wore away it grew
hotter and closer. There was a dead calm in the air, a threatening
blackness in the west that made the farmers think anxiously of their
hay. Presently the thunderheads ran together into big black clouds,
which melted in turn into molten masses of smoky orange, so that the
heavens were like burnished brass. Drivers whipped up their horses, and
pedestrians hastened their steps. Steve Webster decided not to run even
the smallest risk of injuring so precious a commodity as Doxy Morton by
a shower of rain, so he drove into a friend's yard, put up his horse,
and waited till the storm should pass by. Brad Gibson stooped to drink
at a wayside brook, and as he bent over the water he heard a low,
murmuring, muttering sound that seemed to make the earth tremble.

Then from hill to hill "leapt the live thunder." Even the distant
mountains seemed to have "found a tongue." A zigzag chain of lightning
flashed in the lurid sky, and after an appreciable interval another
peal, louder than the first, and nearer.

The rain began to fall, the forked flashes of flame darted hither and
thither in the clouds, and the boom of heaven's artillery grew heavier
and heavier. The blinding sheets of light and the tumultuous roar
of sound now followed each other so quickly that they seemed almost
simultaneous. Flash--crash--flash--crash--flash--crash; blinding and
deafening eye and ear at once. Everybody who could find a shelter of any
sort hastened to it. The women at home set their children in the midst
of feather beds, and some of them even huddled there themselves, their
babies clinging to them in sympathetic fear, as the livid shafts of
light illuminated the dark rooms with more than noonday glare.

The air was full of gloom; a nameless terror lurked within it; the
elements seemed at war with each other. Horses whinnied in the stables,
and colts dashed about the pastures. The cattle sought sheltered places;
the cows ambling clumsily towards some refuge, their full bags dripping
milk as they swung heavily to and fro. The birds flew towards the
orchards and the deep woods; the swallows swooped restlessly round the
barns, and hid themselves under the eaves or in the shadow of deserted
nests.

The rain now fell in sheets.

"Hurry up 'n' git under cover, Jabe," said Brad Gibson; "you're jest the
kind of a pole to draw lightnin'!"

"You hain't, then!" retorted Jabe. "There ain't enough o' you fer
lightnin' to ketch holt of!"

Suddenly a ghastly streak of light leaped out of a cloud, and then
another, till the sky seemed lit up by cataracts of flame. A breath of
wind sprang into the still air. Then a deafening crash, clap, crack,
roar, peal! and as Jabe Slocum looked out of a protecting shed door,
he saw a fiery ball burst from the clouds, shooting brazen arrows as it
fell. Within the instant the meeting-house steeple broke into a tongue
of flame, and then, looking towards home, he fancied that the fireball
dropped to earth in Squire Bean's meadow.

The wind blew more fiercely now. There was a sudden crackling of wood,
falling of old timers, and breaking of glass. The deadly fluid ran in a
winding course down a great maple by the shed, leaving a narrow charred
channel through the bark to tell how it passed to earth. A sombre pine
stood up, black and burned, its heart gaping through a ghastly wound in
the split trunk.

The rain now subsided; there was only an occasional faint rumbling of
thunder, as if it were murmuring over the distant sea; the clouds broke
away in the west; the sun peeped out, as if to see what had been going
on in the world since he hid himself an hour before. A delicate rainbow
bridge stretched from the blackened church steeple to the glittering
weathercock on the squire's barn; and there, in the centre of the fair
green meadows from which it had risen in glorious strength and beauty
for a century or more, lay the nooning tree.

The fireball, if ball of fire indeed there were, had struck in the very
centre of its splendid dome, and ploughed its way from feather tip to
sturdy root, riving the tree in twain, cleaving its great boughs left
and right, laying one majestic half level with the earth, and bending
the other till the proud head almost touched the grass.

The rainbow was reflected in the million drops glittering upon the bowed
branches, turning each into a tear of liquid opal. The birds hopped on
the prone magnificence, and eyed timorously a strange object underneath.

There had been one swift, pitiless, merciful stroke! The monarch of the
meadow would never again feel the magic thrill of the sap in its veins,
nor the bursting of brown bud into green leaf.

The birds would build their nests and sing their idyls in other boughs.
The "time of pleasure and love" was over with the nooning tree; over
too, with him who slept beneath; for under its fallen branches, with the
light of a great peace in his upturned face, lay the man from Tennessee.




THE FORE-ROOM RUG.


Diadema, wife of Jot Bascom, was sitting at the window of the village
watch-tower, so called because it commanded a view of nearly everything
that happened in Pleasant River; those details escaping the physical
eye being supplied by faith and imagination working in the light of
past experience. She sat in the chair of honor, the chair of choice,
the high-backed rocker by the southern window, in which her husband's
mother, old Mrs. Bascom, had sat for thirty years, applying a still
more powerful intellectual telescope to the doings of her neighbors.
Diadema's seat had formerly been on the less desirable side of the
little light-stand, where Priscilla Hollis was now installed.

Mrs. Bascom was at work on a new fore-room rug, the former one having
been transferred to Miss Hollis's chamber; for, as the teacher at the
brick schoolhouse, a graduate of a Massachusetts normal school, and
the daughter of a deceased judge, she was a boarder of considerable
consequence. It was a rainy Saturday afternoon, and the two women were
alone. It was a pleasant, peaceful sitting-room, as neat as wax in every
part. The floor was covered by a cheerful patriotic rag carpet woven
entirely of red, white, and blue rags, and protected in various exposed
localities by button rugs,--red, white, and blue disks superimposed one
on the other.

Diadema Bascom was a person of some sentiment. When her old father,
Captain Dennett, was dying, he drew a wallet from under his pillow, and
handed her a twenty-dollar bill to get something to remember him by.
This unwonted occurrence burned itself into the daughter's imagination,
and when she came as a bride to the Bascom house she refurnished the
sitting-room as a kind of monument to the departed soldier, whose sword
and musket were now tied to the wall with neatly hemmed bows of bright
red cotton.

The chair cushions were of red-and-white glazed patch, the turkey
wings that served as hearth brushes were hung against the white-painted
chimney-piece with blue skirt braid, and the white shades were finished
with home-made scarlet "tossels." A little whatnot in one corner was
laden with the trophies of battle. The warrior's brass buttons were
strung on a red picture cord and hung over his daguerreotype on the
upper shelf; there was a tarnished shoulder strap, and a flattened
bullet that the captain's jealous contemporaries swore _he_ never
stopped, unless he got it in the rear when he was flying from the foe.
There was also a little tin canister in which a charge of powder had
been sacredly preserved. The scoffers, again, said that "the cap'n put
it in his musket when he went into the war, and kep' it there till he
come out." These objects were tastefully decorated with the national
colors. In fact, no modern aesthete could have arranged a symbolic
symphony of grief and glory with any more fidelity to an ideal than
Diadema Bascom, in working out her scheme of red, white, and blue.

Rows of ripening tomatoes lay along the ledges of the windows, and a
tortoise-shell cat snoozed on one of the broad sills. The tall clock in
the corner ticked peacefully. Priscilla Hollis never tired of looking
at the jolly red-cheeked moon, the group of stars on a blue ground, the
trig little ship, the old house, and the jolly moon again, creeping one
after another across the open space at the top.

Jot Bascom was out, as usual, gathering statistics of the last horse
trade; little Jot was building "stickin'" houses in the barn; Priscilla
was sewing long strips for braiding; while Diadema sat at the drawing-in
frame, hook in hand, and a large basket of cut rags by her side.

Not many weeks before she had paid one of her periodical visits to the
attic. No housekeeper in Pleasant River save Mrs. Jonathan Bascom would
have thought of dusting a garret, washing the window and sweeping down
the cobwebs once a month, and renewing the camphor bags in the chests
twice a year; but notwithstanding this zealous care the moths had
made their way into one of her treasure-houses, the most precious of
all,--the old hair trunk that had belonged to her sister Lovice. Once
ensconced there, they had eaten through its hoarded relics, and reduced
the faded finery to a state best described by Diadema as "reg'lar
riddlin' sieves." She had brought the tattered pile down in to the
kitchen, and had spent a tearful afternoon in cutting the good pieces
from the perforated garments. Three heaped-up baskets and a full
dish-pan were the result; and as she had snipped and cut and sorted,
one of her sentimental projects had entered her mind and taken complete
possession there.

"I declare," she said, as she drew her hooking-needle in and out, "I
wouldn't set in the room with some folks and work on these pieces; for
every time I draw in a scrap of cloth Lovice comes up to me for all the
world as if she was settin' on the sofy there. I ain't told you my plan,
Miss Hollis, and there ain't many I shall tell; but this rug is going to
be a kind of a hist'ry of my life and Lovey's wrought in together, just
as we was bound up in one another when she was alive. Her things and
mine was laid in one trunk, and the moths sha'n't cheat me out of 'em
altogether. If I can't look at 'em wet Sundays, and shake 'em out, and
have a good cry over 'em, I'll make 'em up into a kind of dumb show that
will mean something to me, if it don't to anybody else.

"We was the youngest of thirteen, Lovey and I, and we was twins. There
's never been more 'n half o' me left sence she died. We was born
together, played and went to school together, got engaged and married
together, and we all but died together, yet we wa'n't a mite alike.
There was an old lady come to our house once that used to say, 'There's
sister Nabby, now: she 'n' I ain't no more alike 'n if we wa'n't two;
she 's jest as diff'rent as I am t' other way.' Well, I know what I want
to put into my rag story, Miss Hollis, but I don't hardly know how to
begin."

Priscilla dropped her needle, and bent over the frame with interest.

"A spray of two roses in the centre,--there 's the beginning; why, don't
you see, dear Mrs. Bascom?"

"Course I do," said Diadema, diving to the bottom of the dish-pan. "I've
got my start now, and don't you say a word for a minute. The two roses
grow out of one stalk; they'll be Lovey and me, though I'm consid'able
more like a potato blossom. The stalk 's got to be green, and here
is the very green silk mother walked bride in, and Lovey and I had
roundabouts of it afterwards. She had the chicken-pox when we was about
four years old, and one of the first things I can remember is climbing
up and looking over mother's footboard at Lovey, all speckled. Mother
had let her slip on her new green roundabout over her nightgown, just to
pacify her, and there she set playing with the kitten Reuben Granger had
brought her. He was only ten years old then, but he 'd begun courting
Lovice.

"The Grangers' farm joined ours. They had eleven children, and mother
and father had thirteen, and we was always playing together. Mother
used to tell a funny story about that. We were all little young ones and
looked pretty much alike, so she didn't take much notice of us in the
daytime when we was running out 'n' in; but at night when the turn-up
bedstead in the kitchen was taken down and the trundle-beds were full,
she used to count us over, to see if we were all there. One night, when
she 'd counted thirteen and set down to her sewing, father come in and
asked if Moses was all right, for one of the neighbors had seen him
playing side of the river about supper-time. Mother knew she 'd counted
us straight, but she went round with a candle to make sure. Now, Mr.
Granger had a head as red as a shumac bush; and when she carried the
candle close to the beds to take another tally, there was thirteen
children, sure enough, but if there wa'n't a red-headed Granger right in
amongst our boys in the turn-up bedstead! While father set out on a hunt
for our Moses, mother yanked the sleepy little red-headed Granger out o'
the middle and took him home, and father found Moses asleep on a pile of
shavings under the joiner's bench.

"They don't have such families nowadays. One time when measles went
all over the village, they never came to us, and Jabe Slocum said there
wa'n't enough measles to go through the Dennett family, so they didn't
start in on 'em. There, I ain't going to finish the stalk; I'm going
to draw in a little here and there all over the rug, while I'm in the
sperit of plannin' it, and then it will be plain work of matching colors
and filling out.

"You see the stalk is mother's dress, and the outside green of the moss
roses is the same goods, only it 's our roundabouts. I meant to make 'em
red, when I marked the pattern, and then fill out round 'em with a light
color; but now I ain't satisfied with anything but white, for nothing
will do in the middle of the rug but our white wedding dresses. I shall
have to fill in dark, then, or mixed. Well, that won't be out of the
way, if it 's going to be a true rag story; for Lovey's life went out
altogether, and mine hasn't been any too gay.

"I'll begin on Lovey's rose first. She was the prettiest and the
liveliest girl in the village, and she had more beaux than you could
shake a stick at. I generally had to take what she left over. Reuben
Granger was crazy about her from the time she was knee-high; but when
he went away to Bangor to study for the ministry, the others had it
all their own way. She was only seventeen; she hadn't ever experienced
religion, and she was mischeevous as a kitten.

"You remember you laughed, this morning, when Mr. Bascom told about
Hogshead Jowett? Well, he used to want to keep company with Lovey; but
she couldn't abide him, and whenever he come to court her she clim' into
a hogshead, and hid till after he 'd gone. The boys found it out, and
used to call him 'Hogshead Jowett." He was the biggest fool in Foxboro'
Four Corners; and that 's saying consid'able, for Foxboro' is famous
for its fools, and always has been. There was thirteen of 'em there one
year. They say a man come out from Portland, and when he got as fur
as Foxboro' he kep' inquiring the way to Dunstan; and I declare if he
didn't meet them thirteen fools, one after another, standing in their
front dooryards ready to answer questions. When he got to Dunstan, says
he, 'For the Lord's sake, what kind of a village is that I've just went
through? Be they _all_ fools there?'

"Hogshead was scairt to death whenever he come to see Lovice. One night,
when he 'd been there once, and she 'd hid, as she always done, he come
back a second time, and she went to the door, not mistrusting it was
him. 'Did you forget anything?' says she, sparkling out at him through
a little crack. He was all taken aback by seeing her, and he stammered
out, 'Yes, I forgot my han'k'chief; but it don't make no odds, for I
didn't pay out but fifteen cents for it two year ago, and I don't make
no use of it 'ceptins to wipe my nose on.' How we did laugh over that!
Well, he had a conviction of sin pretty soon afterwards, and p'r'aps
it helped his head some; at any rate he quit farming, and become a
Bullockite preacher.

"It seems odd, when Lovice wa'n't a perfessor herself, she should have
drawed the most pious young men in the village, but she did: she had
good Orthodox beaux, Free and Close Baptists, Millerites and Adventists,
all on her string together; she even had one Cochranite, though the
sect had mostly died out. But when Reuben Granger come home, a
full-feathered-out minister, he seemed to strike her fancy as he never
had before, though they were always good friends from children. He had
light hair and blue eyes and fair skin (his business being under cover
kep' him bleached out), and he and Lovey made the prettiest couple you
ever see; for she was dark complected, and her cheeks no otherways than
scarlit the whole durin' time. She had a change of heart that winter; in
fact she had two of 'em, for she changed hers for Reuben's, and found a
hope at the same time. 'T was a good honest conversion, too, though she
did say to me she was afraid that if Reuben hadn't taught her what love
was or might be, she 'd never have found out enough about it to love God
as she 'd ought to.

"There, I've begun both roses, and hers is 'bout finished. I sha'n't
have more 'n enough white alapaca. It's lucky the moths spared one
breadth of the wedding dresses; we was married on the same day, you
know, and dressed just alike. Jot wa'n't quite ready to be married, for
he wa'n't any more forehanded 'bout that than he was 'bout other things;
but I told him Lovey and I had kept up with each other from the start,
and he 'd got to fall into line or drop out o' the percession.--Now what
next?"

"Wasn't there anybody at the wedding but you and Lovice?" asked
Priscilla, with an amused smile.

"Land, yes! The meeting-house was cram jam full. Oh, to be sure! I know
what you 're driving at! Well, I have to laugh to think I should have
forgot the husbands! They'll have to be worked into the story, certain;
but it'll be consid'able of a chore, for I can't make flowers out of
coat and pants stuff, and there ain't any more flowers on this branch
anyway."

Diadema sat for a few minutes in rapt thought, and then made a sudden
inspired dash upstairs, where Miss Hollis presently heard her rummaging
in an old chest. She soon came down, triumphant.

"Wa'n't it a providence I saved Jot's and Reuben's wedding ties! And
here they are,--one yellow and green mixed, and one brown. Do you know
what I'm going to do? I'm going to draw in a butterfly hovering over
them two roses, and make it out of the neckties,--green with brown
spots. That'll bring in the husbands; and land! I wouldn't have either
of 'em know it for the world. I'll take a pattern of that lunar moth you
pinned on the curtain yesterday."

Miss Hollis smiled in spite of herself. "You have some very ingenious
ideas and some very pretty thoughts, Mrs. Bascom, do you know it?"

"It's the first time I ever heard tell of it," said Diadema cheerfully.
"Lovey was the pretty-spoken, pretty-appearing one; I was always plain
and practical. While I think of it, I'll draw in a little mite of this
red into my carnation pink. It was a red scarf Reuben brought Lovey from
Portland. It was the first thing he ever give her, and aunt Hitty said
if one of the Abel Grangers give away anything that cost money, it meant
business. That was all fol-de-rol, for there never was a more liberal
husband, though he was a poor minister; but then they always _are_ poor,
without they're rich; there don't seem to be any halfway in ministers.

"We was both lucky that way. There ain't a stingy bone in Jot Bascom's
body. He don't make much money, but what he does make goes into the
bureau drawer, and the one that needs it most takes it out. He never
asks me what I done with the last five cents he give me. You 've never
been married Miss Hollis, and you ain't engaged, so you don't know much
about it; but I tell you there 's a heap o' foolishness talked about
husbands. If you get the one you like yourself, I don't know as it
matters if all the other women folks in town don't happen to like him
as well as you do; they ain't called on to do that. They see the face
he turns to them, not the one he turns to you. Jot ain't a very good
provider, nor he ain't a man that 's much use round a farm, but he 's
such a fav'rite I can't blame him. There 's one thing: when he does
come home he 's got something to say, and he 's always as lively as a
cricket, and smiling as a basket of chips. I like a man that 's good
comp'ny, even if he ain't so forehanded. There ain't anything specially
lovable about forehandedness, when you come to that. I shouldn't ever
feel drawed to a man because he was on time with his work. He 's got
such pleasant ways, Jot has! The other afternoon he didn't get home
early enough to milk; and after I done the two cows, I split the
kindling and brought in the wood, for I knew he 'd want to go to the
tavern and tell the boys 'bout the robbery up to Boylston. There ain't
anybody but Jot in this village that has wit enough to find out what 's
going on, and tell it in an int'resting way round the tavern fire. And
he can do it without being full of cider, too; he don't need any apple
juice to limber _his_ tongue!

"Well, when he come in, he see the pails of milk, and the full wood-box,
and the supper laid out under the screen cloth on the kitchen table, and
he come up to me at the sink, and says he, 'Diademy, you 're the best
wife in this county, and the brightest jewel in my crown,--that 's what
_you_ are!' (He got that idea out of a duet he sings with Almiry Berry.)
Now I'd like to know whether that ain't pleasanter than 't is to have a
man do all the shed 'n' barn work up smart, and then set round the stove
looking as doleful as a last year's bird's nest? Take my advice, Miss
Hollis: get a good provider if you can, but anyhow try to find you a
husband that'll keep on courting a little now and then, when he ain't
too busy; it smooths things consid'able round the house.

"There, I got so int'rested in what I was saying, I've went on and
finished the carnation, and some of the stem, too. Now what comes next?
Why, the thing that happened next, of course, and that was little Jot.

"I'll work in a bud on my rose and one on Lovey's, and my bud'll be made
of Jot's first trousers. The goods ain't very appropriate for a rosebud,
but it'll have to do, for the idee is the most important thing in this
rug. When I put him into pants, I hadn't any cloth in the house, and it
was such bad going Jot couldn't get to Wareham to buy me anything; so I
made 'em out of an old gray cashmere skirt, and lined 'em with flannel."

"Buds are generally the same color as the roses, aren't they?" ventured
Priscilla.

"I don't care if they be," said Diadema obstinately. "What's to hender
this bud's bein' grafted on? Mrs. Granger was as black as an Injun, but
the little Granger children were all red-headed, for they took after
their father. But I don't know; you've kind o' got me out o' conceit
with it. I s'pose I could have taken a piece of his baby blanket; but
the moths never et a mite o' that, and it's too good to cut up. There's
one thing I can do: I can make the bud up with a long stem, and have it
growing right up alongside of mine,--would you?"

"No, it must be stalk of your stalk, bone of your bone, flesh of your
flesh, so to speak. I agree with you, the idea is the first thing.
Besides, the gray is a very light shade, and I dare say it will look
like a bluish white."

"I'll try it and see, but I wish to the land the moths _had_ eat
the pinning-blanket, and then I could have used it. Lovey worked the
scallops on the aidge for me. My grief! what int'rest she took in my
baby clothes! Little Jot was born at Thanksgiving time, and she come
over from Skowhegan, where Reuben was settled pastor of his first
church. I shall never forget them two weeks to the last day of my life.
There was deep snow on the ground. I had that chamber there, with the
door opening into the setting-room. Mother and father Bascom kep' out in
the dining-room and kitchen, where the work was going on, and Lovey and
the baby and me had the front part of the house to ourselves, with Jot
coming in on tiptoe, heaping up wood in the fireplace so 't he 'most
roasted us out. He don't forget his chores in time o' sickness.

"I never took so much comfort in all my days. Jot got one of the
Billings girls to come over and help in the housework, so 't I could
lay easy 's long as I wanted to; and I never had such a rest before nor
since. There ain't any heaven in the book o' Revelations that 's any
better than them two weeks was. I used to lay quiet in my good feather
bed, fingering the pattern of my best crochet quilt, and looking at the
fire-light shining on Lovey and the baby. She 'd hardly leave him in the
cradle a minute. When I did n't want him in bed with me, she 'd have
him in her lap. Babies are common enough to most folks, but Lovey was
diff'rent. She 'd never had any experience with children, either, for we
was the youngest in our family; and it wa'n't long before we come near
being the oldest, too, for mother buried seven of us before she went
herself. Anyway, I never saw nobody else look as she done when she held
my baby. I don't mean nothing blasphemious when I say 't was for all the
world like your photograph of Mary, the mother of Jesus.

"The nights come in early, so it was 'most dark at four o'clock.
The little chamber was so peaceful! I could hear Jot rattling the
milk-pails, but I'd draw a deep breath o' comfort, for I knew the milk
would be strained and set away without my stepping foot to the floor.
Lovey used to set by the fire, with a tall candle on the light-stand
behind her, and a little white knit cape over her shoulders. She had the
pinkest cheeks, and the longest eyelashes, and a mouth like a little red
buttonhole; and when she bent over the baby, and sung to him,--though
his ears wa'n't open, I guess for his eyes wa'n't,--the tears o' joy
used to rain down my cheeks. It was pennyrial hymns she used to sing
mostly, and the one I remember best was


     "'Daniel's wisdom may I know,
     Stephen's faith and spirit show;
     John's divine communion feel,
     Moses' meekness, Joshua's zeal,
     Run like the unwearied Paul,
     Win the day and conquer all.


     "'Mary's love may I possess,
     Lydia's tender-heartedness,
     Peter's fervent spirit feel,
     James's faith by works reveal,
     Like young Timothy may I
     Every sinful passion fly.'


"'Oh Diademy,' she 'd say, 'you was always the best, and it 's nothing
more 'n right the baby should have come to you. P'r'aps God will think
I'm good enough some time; and if he does, Diademy, I'll offer up a
sacrifice every morning and every evening. But I'm afraid,' says she,
'he thinks I can't stand any more happiness, and be a faithful follower
of the cross. The Bible says we 've got to wade through fiery floods
before we can enter the kingdom. I don't hardly know how Reuben and I
are going to find any way to wade through; we're both so happy, they 'd
have to be consid'able hot before we took notice,' says she, with the
dimples all breaking out in her cheeks.

"And that was true as gospel. She thought everything Reuben done was
just right, and he thought everything she done was just right. There
wa'n't nobody else; the world was all Reuben 'n' all Lovey to them.
If you could have seen her when she was looking for him to come from
Skowhegan! She used to watch at the attic window; and when she seen him
at the foot of the hill she 'd up like a squirrel, and run down the road
without stopping for anything but to throw a shawl over her head. And
Reuben would ketch her up as if she was a child, and scold her for not
putting a hat on, and take her under his coat coming up the hill. They
was a sight for the neighbors, I must confess, but it wa'n't one you
could hardly disapprove of, neither. Aunt Hitty said it was tempting
Providence and couldn't last, and God would visit his wrath on 'em for
making idols of sinful human flesh.

"She was right one way,--it didn't last; but nobody can tell me God was
punishing of 'em for being too happy. I guess he 'ain't got no objection
to folks being happy here below, if they don't forget it ain't the whole
story.

"Well, I must mark in a bud on Lovey's stalk now, and I'm going to make
it of her baby's long white cloak. I earned the money for it myself,
making coats, and put four yards of the finest cashmere into it; for
three years after little Jot was born I went over to Skowhegan to help
Lovey through her time o' trial. Time o' trial! I thought I was happy,
but I didn't know how to be as happy as Lovey did; I wa'n't made on that
pattern.

"When I first showed her the baby (it was a boy, same as mine), her eyes
shone like two evening stars. She held up her weak arms, and gathered
the little bundle o' warm flannen into 'em; and when she got it close
she shut her eyes and moved her lips, and I knew she was taking her lamb
to the altar and offering it up as a sacrifice. Then Reuben come in. I
seen him give one look at the two dark heads laying close together on
the white piller, and then go down on his knees by the side of the bed.
'T wa'n't no place for me; I went off, and left 'em together. We didn't
mistrust it then, but they only had three days more of happiness, and
I'm glad I give 'em every minute."

The room grew dusky as twilight stole gently over the hills of Pleasant
River. Priscilla's lip trembled; Diadema's tears fell thick and fast on
the white rosebud, and she had to keep wiping her eyes as she followed
the pattern.


"I ain't said as much as this about it for five years," she went on,
with a tell-tale quiver in her voice, "but now I've got going I can't
stop. I'll have to get the weight out o' my heart somehow.

"Three days after I put Lovey's baby into her arms the Lord called her
home. 'When I prayed so hard for this little new life, Reuben,' says she
holding the baby as if she could never let it go, 'I didn't think I'd
got to give up my own in place of it; but it's the first fiery flood
we've had, dear, and though it burns to my feet I'll tread it as brave
as I know how.'

"She didn't speak a word after that; she just faded away like a
snowdrop, hour by hour. And Reuben and I stared at one another in the
face as if we was dead instead of her, and we went about that house o'
mourning like sleep-walkers for days and says, not knowing whether we et
or slept, or what we done.

"As for the baby, the poor little mite didn't live many hours after its
mother, and we buried 'em together. Reuben and I knew what Lovey would
have liked. She gave her life for the baby's, and it was a useless
sacrifice, after all. No, it wa'n't neither; it _could_n't have been!
You needn't tell me God'll let such sacrifices as that come out useless!
But anyhow, we had one coffin for 'em both, and I opened Lovey's arms
and laid the baby in 'em. When Reuben and I took our last look, we
thought she seemed more 'n ever like Mary, the mother of Jesus. There
never was another like her, and there never will be. 'Nonesuch,' Reuben
used to call her."

There was silence in the room, broken only by the ticking of the old
clock and the tinkle of a distant cowbell. Priscilla made an impetuous
movement, flung herself down by the basket of rags, and buried her head
in Diadema's gingham apron.

"Dear Mrs. Bascom, don't cry. I'm sorry, as the children say."

"No, I won't more 'n a minute. Jot can't stand it to see me give way.
You go and touch a match to the kitchen fire, so 't the kettle will
be boiling, and I'll have a minute to myself. I don't know what the
neighbors would think to ketch me crying over my drawing-in frame; but
the spell's over now, or 'bout over, and when I can muster up courage
I'll take the rest of the baby's cloak and put a border of white
everlastings round the outside of the rug. I'll always mean the baby's
birth and Lovey's death to me; but the flowers will remind me it 's life
everlasting for both of 'em, and so it's the most comforting end I can
think of."

It was indeed a beautiful rug when it was finished and laid in front of
the sofa in the fore-room. Diadema was very choice of it. When company
was expected she removed it from its accustomed place, and spread it in
a corner of the room where no profane foot could possibly tread on it.
Unexpected callers were managed by a different method. If they seated
themselves on the sofa, she would fear they did not "set easy" or "rest
comfortable" there, and suggest their moving to the stuffed chair by
the window. The neighbors thought this solicitude merely another sign of
Diadema's "p'ison neatness," excusable in this case as there was so much
white in the new rug.

The fore-room blinds were ordinarily closed, and the chillness of death
pervaded the sacred apartment; but on great occasions, when the sun was
allowed to penetrate the thirty-two tiny panes of glass in each window,
and a blaze was lighted in the fire-place, Miss Hollis would look in as
she went upstairs, and muse a moment over the pathetic little romance
of rags, the story of two lives worked into a bouquet of old-fashioned
posies, whose gay tints were brought out by a setting of sombre threads.
Existence had gone so quietly in this remote corner of the world that
all its important events, babyhood, childhood, betrothal, marriage,
motherhood, with all their mysteries of love and life and death, were
chronicled in this narrow space not two yards square.

Diadema came in behind the little school-teacher one afternoon.

"I cal'late," she said, "that being kep' in a dark room, and never being
tread on, it will last longer 'n I do. If it does, Priscilla, you know
that white crepe shawl of mine I wear to meeting hot Sundays: that would
make a second row of everlastings round the border. You could piece
out the linings good and smooth on the under side, draw in the white
flowers, and fill 'em round with black to set 'em off. The rug would be
han'somer than ever then, and the story--would be finished."




A VILLAGE STRADIVARIUS.


I.


     "Goodfellow, Puck and goblins,
     Know more than any book.
     Down with your doleful problems,
     And court the sunny brook.
     The south-winds are quick-witted,
     The schools are sad and slow,
     The masters quite omitted
     The lore we care to know."

     Emerson's _April._


"Find the 317th page, Davy, and begin at the top of the right-hand
column."

The boy turned the leaves of the old instruction book obediently, and
then began to read in a sing-song, monotonous tone:--

"'One of Pag-pag'"--

"Pag-a-ni-ni's."

"'One of Paggernyner's' (I wish all the fellers in your stories didn't
have such tough old names!) 'most dis-as-ter-ous triumphs he had when
playing at Lord Holland's.' (Who was Lord Holland, uncle Tony?) 'Some
one asked him to im-pro-vise on the violin the story of a son who kills
his father, runs a-way, becomes a highway-man, falls in love with a
girl who will not listen to him; so he leads her to a wild country site,
suddenly jumping with her from a rock into an a-b-y-double-s'"--

"Abyss."

"'--a--rock--into--an--abyss, were they disappear forever. Paggernyner
listened quietly, and when the story was at an end he asked that all the
lights should be distinguished.'"

"Look closer, Davy."

"'Should be extinguished. He then began playing, and so terrible was
the musical in-ter-pre-ta-tion of the idea which had been given him
that several of the ladies fainted, and the sal-salon-s_a_lon, when
relighted, looked like a battle-field.' Cracky! Wouldn't you like to
have been there, uncle Tony? But I don't believe anybody ever played
that way, do you?"

"Yes," said the listener, dreamily raising his sightless eyes to the
elm-tree that grew by the kitchen door. "I believe it, and I can hear
it myself when you read the story to me. I feel that the secret of
everything in the world that is beautiful, or true, or terrible, is
hidden in the strings of my violin, Davy, but only a master can draw it
from captivity."

"You make stories on your violin, too, uncle Tony, even if the ladies
don't faint away in heaps, and if the kitchen doesn't look like a
battle-field when you 've finished. I'm glad it doesn't, for my part,
for I should have more housework to do than ever."

"Poor Davy! you couldn't hate housework any worse if you were a woman;
but it is all done for to-day. Now paint me one of your pictures,
laddie; make me see with your eyes."

The boy put down the book and leaped out of the open door, barely
touching the old millstone that served for a step. Taking a stand in
the well-worn path, he rested his hands on his hips, swept the landscape
with the glance of an eagle, and began like a young improvisator:--

"The sun is just dropping behind Brigadier Hill."

"What color is it?"

"Red as fire, and there isn't anything near it,--it 's almost alone
in the sky; there 's only teenty little white feather clouds here and
there. The bridge looks as if it was a silver string tying the two sides
of the river together. The water is pink where the sun shines into it.
All the leaves of the trees are kind of swimming in the red light,--I
tell you, nunky, just as if I was looking through red glass. The weather
vane on Squire Bean's barn dazzles so the rooster seems to be shooting
gold arrows into the river. I can see the tip top of Mount Washington
where the peak of its snow-cap touches the pink sky. The hen-house door
is open. The chickens are all on their roost, with their heads cuddled
under their wings."

"Did you feed them?"

The boy clapped his hand over his mouth with a comical gesture of
penitence, and dashed into the shed for a panful of corn, which he
scattered over the ground, enticing the sleepy fowls by insinuating
calls of "Chick, chick, chick, chick! _Come,_ biddy, biddy, biddy,
biddy! _Come,_ chick, chick, chick, chick, chick!"

The man in the doorway smiled as over the misdemeanor of somebody very
dear and lovable, and rising from his chair felt his way to a corner
shelf, took down a box, and drew from it a violin swathed in a silk bag.
He removed the covering with reverential hands. The tenderness of the
face was like that of a young mother dressing or undressing her child.
As he fingered the instrument his hands seemed to have become all eyes.
They wandered caressingly over the polished surface as if enamored of
the perfect thing that they had created, lingering here and there with
rapturous tenderness on some special beauty,--the graceful arch of
the neck, the melting curves of the cheeks, the delicious swell of the
breasts.

When he had satisfied himself for the moment, he took the bow, and
lifting the violin under his chin, inclined his head fondly toward it
and began to play.

The tune at first seemed muffled, but had a curious bite, that began
in distant echoes, but after a few minutes' the playing grew firmer and
clearer, ringing out at last with velvety richness and strength until
the atmosphere was satiated with harmony. No more ethereal note ever
flew out of a bird's throat than Anthony Croft set free from this
violin, his _liebling_, his "swan song," made in the year he had lost
his eyesight.

Anthony Croft had been the only son of his mother, and she a widow. His
boyhood had been exactly like that of all the other boys in Edgewood,
save that he hated school a trifle more, if possible, than any of the
others; though there was a unanimity of aversion in this matter that
surprised and wounded teachers and parents.

The school was the ordinary "deestrick" school of that time; there were
not enough scholars for what Cyse Higgins called a "degraded" school.
The difference between Anthony and the other boys lay in the reason as
well as the degree of his abhorrence.

He had come into the world a naked, starving human soul; he longed to
clothe himself, and he was hungry and ever hungrier for knowledge; but
never within the four walls of the village schoolhouse could he get hold
of one fact that would yield him its secret sense, one glimpse of clear
light that would shine in upon the "darkness which may be felt" in his
mind, one thought or word that would feed his soul.

The only place where his longings were ever stilled, where he seemed at
peace with himself, where he understood what he was made for, was out
of doors in the woods. When he should have been poring over the sweet,
palpitating mysteries of the multiplication table, his vagrant gaze was
always on the open window near which he sat. He could never study when a
fly buzzed on the window-pane; he was always standing on the toes of his
bare feet, trying to locate and understand the buzz that puzzled him.
The book was a mute, soulless thing that had no relation to his
inner world of thought and feeling. He turned ever from the dead
seven-times-six to the mystery of life about him.

He was never a special favorite with his teachers; that was scarcely to
be expected. In his very early years, his pockets were gone through with
every morning when he entered the school door, and the contents, when
confiscated, would comprise a jew's-harp, a bit of catgut, screws
whittled out of wood, tacks, spools, pins, and the like. But when robbed
of all these he could generally secrete a piece of elastic, which, when
put between his teeth and stretched to its utmost capacity, would yield
a delightful twang when played upon with the forefinger. He could also
fashion an interesting musical instrument in his desk by means of spools
and catgut and bits of broken glass. The chief joy of his life was an
old tuning-fork that the teacher of the singing school had given him,
but, owing to the degrading and arbitrary censorship of pockets that
prevailed, he never dared bring it into the schoolroom. There were ways,
however, of evading inexorable law and circumventing base injustice.
He hid the precious thing under a thistle just outside the window. The
teacher had sometimes a brief season of apathy on hot afternoons, when
she was hearing the primer class read, "_I see a pig. The pig is big.
The big pig can dig;_" which stirring in phrases were always punctuated
by the snores of the Hanks baby, who kept sinking down on his fat little
legs in the line and giving way to slumber during the lesson. At such
a moment Anthony slipped out of the window and snapped the tuning-fork
several times,--just enough to save his soul from death,--and then
slipped in again. He was caught occasionally, but not often; and even
when he was, there were mitigating circumstances, for he was generally
put under the teacher's desk for punishment. It was a dark, close,
sultry spot, but when he was well seated, and had grown tied of looking
at the triangle of elastic in the teacher's congress boot, and tired
of wishing it was his instead of hers, he would tie one end of a bit of
thread to the button of his gingham shirt, and, carrying it round his
left ear several times, make believe he was Paganini languishing in
prison and playing on a violin with a single string.

As he grew older there was no marked improvement, and Tony Croft was by
general assent counted the laziest boy in the village. That he was lazy
in certain matters merely because he was in a frenzy of industry to
pursue certain others had nothing to do with the case, of course.

If any one had ever given him a task in which he could have seen cause
working to effect, in which he could have found by personal experiment a
single fact that belonged to him, his own by divine right of discovery,
he would have counted labor or study all joy.

He was one incarnate Why and How, one brooding wonder and interrogation
point. "Why does the sun drive away the stars? Why do the leaves turn
red and gold? What makes the seed swell in the earth? From whence comes
the life hidden in the egg under the bird's breast? What holds the moon
in the sky? Who regulates her shining? Who moves the wind? Who made
me, and what am I? Who, why, how whither? If I came from God but only
lately, teach me his lessons first, put me into vital relation with
life and law, and then give me your dead signs and equivalents for real
things, that I may learn more and more, and ever more and ever more."

There was no spirit in Edgewood bold enough to conceive that Tony
learned anything in the woods, but as there was never sufficient school
money to keep the village seat of learning open more than half the year
the boy educated himself at the fountain head of wisdom, and knowledge
of the other half. His mother, who owned him for a duckling hatched
from a hen's egg, and was never quite sure he would not turn out a black
sheep and a crooked stick to boot, was obliged to confess that Tony had
more useless information than any boy in the village. He knew just where
to find the first Mayflowers, and would bring home the waxen beauties
when other people had scarcely begun to think about the spring. He could
tell where to look for the rare fringed gentian, the yellow violet, the
Indian pipe. There were clefts in the rocks of the Indian Cellar where,
when every one else failed, he could find harebells and columbines.

When his tasks were done, and the other boys were amusing themselves
each in his own way, you would find Tony lying flat on the pine needles
in the woods, listening to the notes of the wild birds, and imitating
them patiently, til you could scarcely tell which was boy and which was
bird; and if you could, the birds couldn't, for many a time he coaxed
the bobolinks and thrushes to perch on the low boughs above his head and
chirp to him as if he were a feathered brother. There was nothing about
the building of nests with which he was not familiar. He could have
taken hold and helped if the birds had not been so shy, and if he had
had beak and claw instead of clumsy fingers. He would sit near a beehive
for hours without moving, or lie prone in the sandy road, under the
full glare of the sun, watching the ants acting out their human comedy;
sometimes surrounding a favorite hill with stones, that the comedy might
not be turned into a tragedy by a careless footfall. The cottage on the
river road grew more and more to resemble a museum and herbarium as the
years went by, and the Widow Croft's weekly house-cleaning was a matter
that called for the exercise of Christian grace.

Still, Tony was a good son, affectionate, considerate, and obedient.
His mother had no idea that he would ever be able, or indeed willing,
to make a living; but there was a forest of young timber growing up, a
small hay farm to depend upon, and a little hoard that would keep him
out of the poorhouse when she died and left him to his own devices.
It never occurred to her that he was in any way remarkable. If he were
difficult to understand, it reflected more upon his eccentricity than
upon her density. What was a woman to do with a boy of twelve who, when
she urged him to drop the old guitar he was taking apart and hurry off
to school, cried, "Oh, mother! when there is so much to learn in this
world, it is wicked, wicked to waste time in school."

About this period Tony spent hours in the attic arranging bottles and
tumblers into a musical scale. He also invented an instrument made
of small and great, long and short pins, driven into soft board to
different depths, and when the widow passed his door on the way to bed
she invariable saw this barbaric thing locked up to the boy's breast,
for he often played himself to sleep with it.

At fifteen he had taken to pieces and put together again, strengthened,
soldered, tinkered, mended, and braced every accordion, guitar,
melodeon, dulcimer, and fiddle in Edgewood, Pleasant River, and the
neighboring villages. There was a little money to be earned in this way,
but very little, as people in general regarded this "tinkering" as a
pleasing diversion in which they could indulge him without danger. As
an example of this attitude, Dr. Berry's wife's melodeon had lost two
stops, the pedals had severed connection with the rest of the works,
it wheezed like an asthmatic, and two black keys were missing. Anthony
worked more than a week on its rehabilitation, and received in return
Mrs. Berry's promise that the doctor would pull a tooth for him some
time! This, of course, was a guerdon for the future, but it seemed
pathetically distant to the lad who had never had a toothache in his
life. He had to plead with Cyse Higgins for a week before that prudent
young farmer would allow him to touch his five-dollar fiddle. He
obtained permission at last only because by offering to give Cyse his
calf in case he spoiled the violin. "That seems square," said Cyse
doubtfully, "but after all, you can't play on a calf!" "Neither will
your fiddle give milk, if you keep it long enough," retorted Tony; and
this argument was convincing.

So great was his confidence in Tony's skill that Squire Bean trusted his
father's violin to him, one that had been bought in Berlin seventy years
before. It had been hanging on the attic wall for a half century, so
that the back was split in twain, the sound-post lost, the neck and the
tailpiece cracked. The lad took it home, and studied it for two whole
evenings before the open fire. The problem of restoring it was quite
beyond his abilities. He finally took the savings of two summers'
"blueberry money" and walked sixteen miles to Portland, where he bought
a book called The Practical Violinist. The Supplement proved to be
a mine of wealth. Even the headings appealed to his imagination and
intoxicated him with their suggestions,--On Scraping, Splitting, and
Repairing Violins, Violin Players, Great Violinists, Solo Playing,
etc.; and at the very end a Treatise on the Construction, Preservation,
Repair, and Improvement of the Violin, by Jacob Augustus Friedheim,
Instrument Maker to the Court of the Archduke of Weimar.

There was a good deal of moral advice in the preface that sadly puzzled
the boy, who was always in a condition of chronic amazement at the
village disapprobation of his favorite fiddle. That the violin did not
in some way receive the confidence enjoyed by other musical instruments,
he perceived from various paragraphs written by the worthy author of The
Practical Violinist, as for example:--

"Some very excellent Christian people hold a strong prejudice against
the violin because they have always known it associated with dancing and
dissipation. Let it be understood that your violin is 'converted,' and
such an obligation will no longer lie against it. ... Many delightful
hours may be enjoyed by a young man, if he has obtained a respectable
knowledge of his instrument, who otherwise would find the time hang
heavy on his hands; or, for want of some better amusement, would
frequent the dangerous and destructive paths of vice and be ruined
forever. ... I am in hopes, therefore, my dear young pupil, that your
violin will occupy your attention at just those very times when, if you
were immoral or dissipated, you would be at the grogshop, gaming-table,
or among vicious females. Such a use of the violin, notwithstanding the
prejudices many hold against it, must contribute to virtue, and furnish
abundance of innocent and entirely unobjectionable amusement. These are
the views with which I hope you have adopted it, and will continue to
cherish and cultivate it."


II.


     "There is no bard in all the choir,
    .......
     Not one of all can put in verse,
     Or to this presence could rehearse
     The sights and voices ravishing
     The boy knew on the hills in spring,
     When pacing through the oaks he heard
     Sharp queries of the sentry-bird,
     The heavy grouse's sudden whir,
     The rattle of the kingfisher."

     Emerson's _Harp._


Now began an era of infinite happiness, of days that were never long
enough, of evenings when bedtime came all too soon. Oh that there had
been some good angel who would have taken in hand Anthony Croft the
boy, and, training the powers that pointed so unmistakably in certain
directions, given to the world the genius of Anthony Croft, potential
instrument maker to the court of St. Cecilia; for it was not only that
he had the fingers of a wizard; his ear caught the faintest breath of
harmony or hint of discord, as


     "Fairy folk a-listening
     Hear the seed sprout in the spring,
     And for music to their dance
     Hear the hedge-rows wake from trance;
     Sap that trembles into buds
     Sending little rhythmic floods
     Of fairy sound in fairy ears.
     Thus all beauty that appears
     Has birth as sound to finer sense
     And lighter-clad intelligence."


As the universe is all mechanism to one man, all form and color to
another, so to Anthony Croft the world was all melody. Notwithstanding
all these gifts and possibilities, the doctor's wife advised the Widow
Croft to make a plumber of him, intimating delicately that these freaks
of nature, while playing no apparent part in the divine economy, could
sometimes be made self-supporting.

The seventeenth year of his life marked a definite epoch in his
development. He studied Jacob Friedheim's treatise until he knew
the characteristics of all the great violin models, from the Amatis,
Hieronymus, Antonius, and Nicolas, to those of Stradivarius, Guarnerius,
and Steiner.

It was in this year, also, that he made a very precious discovery. While
browsing in the rubbish in Squire Bean's garret to see if he could find
the missing sound-post of the old violin, he came upon a billet of wood
wrapped in cloth and paper. When unwrapped, it was plainly labeled "Wood
from the Bean Maple at Pleasant Point; the biggest maple in York County,
and believed to be one of the biggest in the State of Maine." Anthony
found that the oldest inhabitant of Pleasant River remembered the stump
of the tree, and that the boys used to jump over it and admire
its proportions whenever they went fishing at the Point. The wood,
therefore, was perhaps eighty or ninety years old. The squire agreed
willingly that it should be used to mend the old violin, and told Tony
he should have what was left for himself. When, by careful calculation,
he found that the remainder would make a whole violin, he laid it
reverently away for another twenty years, so that he should be sure it
had completed its century of patient waiting for service, and falling on
his knees by his bedside said, "I thank Thee, Heavenly Father, for
this precious gift, and I promise from this moment to gather the most
beautiful wood I can find, and lay it by where it can be used some time
to make perfect violins, so that if any creature as poor and helpless as
I am needs the wherewithal to do good work, I shall have helped him as
Thou hast helped me." And according to his promise so he did, and the
pieces of richly curled maple, of sycamore, and of spruce began to
accumulate. They were cut from the sunny side of the trees, in just
the right season of the year, split so as to have a full inch thickness
towards the bark, and a quarter inch towards the heart. They were then
laid for weeks under one of the falls in Wine Brook, where the musical
tinkle, tinkle of the stream fell on the wood already wrought upon by
years of sunshine and choruses of singing birds.


This boy, toiling not alone for himself, but with full and conscious
purpose for posterity also, was he not worthy to wear the mantle of
Antonius Stradivarius?


"That plain white-aproned man who stood at work Patient and accurate
full fourscore years, Cherished his sight and touch by temperance,
And since keen sense is love of perfectness, Made perfect violins, the
needed paths For inspiration and high mastery."

And as if the year were not full enough of glory, the school-teacher
sent him a book with a wonderful poem in it.

That summer's teaching had been the freak of a college student, who had
gone back to his senior year strengthened by his experience of village
life. Anthony Croft, who was only three or four years his junior, had
been his favorite pupil and companion.

"How does Tony get along?" asked the Widow Croft when the teacher came
to call.

"Tony? Oh, I can't teach him anything."

Tears sprang to the mother's eyes.

"I know he ain't much on book learning," she said apologetically, "but
I'm bound he don't make you no trouble in deportment."

"I mean," said the school-teacher gravely, "that I can show him how to
read a little Latin and do a little geometry, but he knows as much in
one day as I shall ever know in a year."

Tony crouched by the old fireplace in the winter evenings, dropping his
knife or his compasses a moment to read aloud to his mother, who sat in
the opposite corner knitting:--


     "Of old Antonio Stradivari,--him
     Who a good quarter century and a half ago
     Put his true work in the brown instrument,
     And by the nice adjustment of its frame
     Gave it responsive life, continuous
     With the master's finger-tips, and perfected
     Like them by delicate rectitude of use."


The mother listened with painful intentness. "I like the sound of it,"
she said, "but I can't hardly say I take in the full sense."

"Why mother," said the lad, in a rare moment of self-expression, "you
know the poetry says he cherished his sight and touch by temperance;
that an idiot might see a straggling line and be content, but he had
an eye that winced at false work, and loved the true. When it says his
finger-tips were perfected by delicate rectitude of use, I think it
means doing everything as it is done in heaven, and that anybody
who wants to make a perfect violin must keep his eye open to all the
beautiful things God has made, and his ear open to all the music he has
put into the world, and then never let his hands touch a piece of work
that is crooked or straggling or false, till, after years and years of
rightness, they are fit to make a violin like the squire's, a violin
that can say everything, a violin that an angel wouldn't be ashamed to
play on."

Do these words seem likely ones to fall from the lips of a lad who had
been at the tail of his class ever since his primer days? Well,
Anthony was seventeen now, and he was "educated," in spite of sorry
recitations,--educated, the Lord knows how! Yes, in point of fact the
Lord does know how! He knows how the drill and pressure of the daily
task, still more the presence of the high ideal, the inspiration working
from within, how these educate us.

The blind Anthony Croft sitting in the kitchen doorway had seemingly
missed the heights of life he might have trod, and had walked his close
on fifty years through level meadows of mediocrity, a witch in every
finger-tip waiting to be set to work, head among the clouds, feet
stumbling, eyes and ears open to hear God's secret thought; seeing and
hearing it, too, but lacking force to speak it forth again; for while
imperious genius surmounts all obstacles, brushes laws and formulas from
its horizon, and with its own free soul sees its "path and the outlets
of the sky," potential genius forever needs an angel of deliverance to
set it free.

Poor Anthony Croft, or blessed Anthony Croft, I know not which,--God
knows! Poor he certainly was, yet blessed after all. "One thing I do,"
said Paul. "One thing I do," said Anthony. He was not able to realize
his ideals, but he had the "angel aim" by which he idealized his reals.

O waiting heart of God! how soon would thy kingdom come if we all did
our allotted tasks, humble or splendid, in this consecrated fashion!


III.


     "Therein I hear the Parcae reel
     The threads of man at their humming wheel,
     The threads of life and power and pain,
     So sweet and mournful falls the strain."

     Emerson's _Harp._


Old Mrs. Butterfield had had her third stroke of paralysis, and died
of a Sunday night. She was all alone in her little cottage on the river
bank, with no neighbor nearer than Croft's, and nobody there but a blind
man and a small boy. Everybody had told her it was foolish to live alone
in a house on the river road, and everybody was pleased in a discreet
and chastened fashion of course, that it had turned out exactly as they
had predicted.

Aunt Mehitable Tarbox was walking up to Milliken's Mills, with her
little black reticule hanging over her arm, and noticing that there
was no smoke coming out of the chimney, and that the hens were gathered
about the kitchen door clamoring for their breakfast, she thought it
best to stop and knock. No response followed the repeated blows from
her hard knuckles. She then tapped smartly on Mrs. Butterfield's bedroom
window with her thimble finger. This proving of no avail, she was
obliged to pry open the kitchen shutter, split open a mosquito netting
with her shears, and crawl into the house over the sink. This was a
considerable feat for a somewhat rheumatic elderly lady, but this one
never grudged trouble when she wanted to find out anything.

When she discovered that her premonitions were correct, and that
old Mrs. Butterfield was indeed dead, her grief at losing a pleasant
acquaintance was largely mitigated by her sense of importance at being
first on the spot, and chosen by Providence to take command of the
situation. There were no relations in the village; there was no woman
neighbor within a mile: it was therefore her obvious Christian duty not
only to take charge of the remains, but to conduct such a funeral as the
remains would have wished for herself.

The fortunate Vice-President suddenly called upon by destiny to guide
the ship of state, the general who sees a possible Victoria Cross in
a hazardous engagement, can have a faint conception of aunt Hitty's
feeling on this momentous occasion. Funerals were the very breath of her
life. There was no ceremony, either of public or private import, that,
to her mind, approached a funeral in real satisfying interest. Yet,
with distinct talent in this direction, she had always been "cabined,
cribbed, confined" within hopeless limitations. She had assisted in a
secondary capacity at funerals in the families of other people, but she
would have reveled in personally conducted ones. The members of her own
family stubbornly refused to die, however, even the distant connections
living on and on to a ridiculous old age; and if they ever did die, by
reason of a falling roof, shipwreck, or conflagration, they generally
died in Texas or Iowa, or some remote State where aunt Hitty could not
follow the hearse in the first carriage. This blighted ambition was a
heart sorrow of so deep and sacred a character that she did not even
confess it to "Si," as her appendage of a husband was called.

Now at last her chance for planning a funeral had come. Mrs. Butterfield
had no kith or kin save her niece, Lyddy Ann, who lived in Andover,
or Lawrence, or Haverhill Massachusetts,--aunt Hitty couldn't remember
which, and hoped nobody else could. The niece would be sent for when
they found out where she lived; meanwhile the funeral could not be put
off.

She glanced round the house preparatory to locking it up and starting
to notify Anthony Croft. She would just run over and talk to him about
ordering the coffin; then she could attend to all other necessary
preliminaries herself. The remains had been well-to-do, and there was no
occasion for sordid economy, so aunt Hitty determined in her own mind to
have the latest fashion in everything, including a silver coffin plate.
The Butterfield coffin plates were a thing to be proud of. They had
been sacredly preserved for years and years, and the entire
collection--numbering nineteen in all had been framed, and adorned the
walls of the deceased lady's best room. They were not of solid silver,
it is true, but even so it was a matter of distinction to have belonged
to a family that could afford to have nineteen coffin plates of any
sort.

Aunt Hitty planned certain dramatic details as she walked town the road
to Croft's. It came to her in a burst of inspiration that she would have
two ministers: one for the long prayer, and one for the short prayer and
the remarks. She hoped that Elder Weeks would be adequate in the latter
direction. She knew she couldn't for the life of her think of anything
interesting about Mrs. Butterfield, save that she possessed nineteen
coffin plates, and brought her hens to Edgewood every summer for their
health; but she had heard Elder Weeks make a moving discourse out of
less than that. To be sure, he needed priming, but she was equal to
that. There was Ivory Brown's funeral: how would that have gone on if it
hadn't been for her? Wasn't the elder ten minutes late, and what would
his remarks have amounted to without her suggestions? You might almost
say she was the author of the discourse, for she gave him all the
appropriate ideas. As she had helped him out of the wagon she had said:
"Are you prepared? I thought not; but there's no time to lose. Remember
there are aged parents; two brothers living, one railroading in Spokane
Falls, the other clerking in Washington, D. C. Don't mention the
Universalists,--there's ben two in the fam'ly; nor insanity,--there 's
ben one o' them. The girl in the corner by the clock is the one that
the remains has been keeping comp'ny with. If you can make some genteel
allusions to her, it'll be much appreciated by his folks."

As to the long prayer, she knew that the Rev. Mr. Ford could be relied
on to pray until aunt Becky Burnham should twitch him by the coat tails.
She had done it more than once. She had also, on one occasion, got up
and straightened his ministerial neckerchief, which he had gradually
"prayed" around his saintly neck until it was behind the right ear.

These plans proved so fascinating to aunt Hitty that she walked quite
half a mile beyond Croft's, and was obliged to retrace her steps.
She conceived bands of black alpaca for the sleeves and hats of the
pallbearers, and a festoon of the same over the front gate, if there
should be any left over. She planned the singing by the choir. There
had been no real choir-singing at any funeral in Edgewood since the Rev.
Joshua Beckwith had died. She would ask them to open with--

     Rebel mourner, cease your weepin'.
     You too must die.

This was a favorite funeral hymn. The only difficulty would be in
keeping aunt Becky Burnham from pitching it in a key where nobody but a
soprano skylark, accustomed to warble at a great height, could
possibly sing it. It was generally given at the grave, when Elder Weeks
officiated; but it never satisfied aunt Hitty, because the good elder
always looked so unpicturesque when he threw a red bandanna handkerchief
over his head before beginning the twenty-seven verses. After the long
prayer, she would have Almira Berry give for a solo--

     This gro-o-oanin' world 's too dark and
     dre-e-ar for the saints' e - ter - nal rest,

This hymn, if it did not wholly reconcile one to death, enabled one to
look upon life with sufficient solemnity. It was a thousand pities, she
thought, that the old hearse was so shabby and rickety, and that Gooly
Eldridge, who drove it, would insist on wearing a faded peach-blow
overcoat. It was exasperating to think of the public spirit at Egypt,
and contrast it with the state of things at Pleasant River. In Egypt
they had sold the old hearse house for a sausage shop, and now they were
having hearse sociables every month to raise money for a new one.

All these details flew through aunt Hitty's mind in fascinating
procession. There shouldn't be "a hitch" anywhere. There had been a
hitch at her last funeral, but she had been only an assistant there.
Matt Henderson had been struck by lightning at the foot of Squire Bean's
old nooning tree, and certain circumstances combined to make the funeral
one of unusual interest, so much so that fat old Mrs. Potter from
Deerwander created a sensation at the cemetery. She was so anxious
to get where she could see everything to the best advantage that she
crowded too near the bier, stepped on the sliding earth, and pitched
into the grave. As she weighed over two hundred pounds, and was in a
position of some disadvantage, it took five men to extricate her from
the dilemma, and the operation made a long and somewhat awkward break in
the religious services. Aunt Hitty always said of this catastrophe,
"If I'd 'a' ben Mis' Potter, I'd 'a' ben so mortified I believe I'd 'a'
said, 'I wa'n't plannin' to be buried, but now I'm in here I declare
I'll stop!'"

Old Mrs. Butterfield's funeral was not only voted an entire success by
the villagers, but the seal of professional approval was set upon it
by an undertaker from Saco, who declared that Mrs. Tarbox could make
a handsome living in the funeral line anywhere. Providence, who always
assists those who assist themselves, decreed that the niece Lyddy Ann
should not arrive until the aunt was safely buried; so, there being
none to resist her right or grudge her the privilege aunt Hitty, for the
first time in her life, rode in the next buggy to the hearse. Si, in his
best suit, a broad weed and weepers, drove Cyse Higgins's black colt,
and aunt Hitty was dressed in deep mourning, with the Widow Buzzell's
crape veil over her face, and in her hand a palmleaf fan tied with a
black ribbon. Her comment to Si, as she went to her virtuous couch that
night, was: "It was an awful dry funeral, but that was the only flaw in
it. It would 'a' ben perfect if there' ben anybody to shed tears. I
come pretty nigh it myself, though I ain't no relation, when Elder Weeks
said, 'You'll go round the house, my sisters, and Mis' Butterfield won't
be there; you'll go int' the orchard, and Mis' Butterfield won't be
there; you'll go int' the barn and Mis' Butterfield won't be there;
you'll go int' the shed, and Mis' Butterfield won't be there; you'll go
int' the hencoop, and Mis' Butterfield won't be there!' That would 'a'
drawed tears from a stone most, 'specially sence Mis' Butterfield set
such store by her hens."

And this is the way that Lyddy Butterfield came into her kingdom, a
little lone brown house on the river's brim. She had seen it only once
before when she had driven out from Portland, years ago, with her aunt.
Mrs. Butterfield lived in Portland, but spent her summers in Edgewood
on account of her chickens. She always explained that the country was
dreadful dull for her, but good for the hens; they always laid so much
better in the winter time.

Lyddy liked the place all the better for its loneliness. She had never
had enough of solitude, and this quiet home, with the song of the
river for company, if one needed more company than chickens and a cat,
satisfied all her desires, particularly as it was accompanied by a snug
little income of two hundred dollars a year, a meagre sum that seemed to
open up mysterious avenues of joy to her starved, impatient heart.

When she was a mere infant, her brother was holding her on his knee
before the great old-fashioned fireplace heaped with burning logs.
A sudden noise startled him, and the crowing, restless baby gave an
unexpected lurch, and slipped, face downward, into the glowing embers.
It was a full minute before the horror-stricken boy could extricate the
little creature from the cruel flame that had already done its fatal
work. The baby escaped with her life, but was disfigured forever. As
she grew older, the gentle hand of time could not entirely efface the
terrible scars. One cheek was wrinkled and crimson, while one eye and
the mouth were drawn down pathetically. The accident might have changed
the disposition of any child, but Lyddy chanced to be a sensitive,
introspective bit of feminine humanity, in whose memory the burning
flame was never quenched. Her mother, partly to conceal her own wounded
vanity, and partly to shield the timid, morbid child, kept her out of
sight as much as possible; so that at sixteen, when she was left an
orphan, she had lived almost entirely in solitude.

She became, in course of time, a kind of general nursery governess in a
large family of motherless children. The father was almost always away
from home; his sister kept the house, and Lyddy stayed in the nursery,
bathing the brood and putting them to bed, dressing them in the morning,
and playing with them in the safe privacy of the back garden or the open
attic. They loved her, disfigured as she was, for the child despises
mere externals, and explores the heart of things to see whether it be
good or evil,--but they could never induce her to see strangers, nor to
join any gathering of people.

The children were grown and married now, and Lyddy was nearly forty when
she came into possession of house and lands and fortune; forty, with
twenty years of unexpended feeling pent within her. Forty, that is
rather old to be interesting, but age is a relative matter. Haven't you
seen girls of four-and-twenty who have nibbled and been nibbled at ever
since they were sixteen, but who have neither caught anything nor been
caught? They are old, if you like, but Lyddy was forty and still young,
with her susceptibilities cherished, not dulled, and with all the
"language of passion fresh and rooted as the lovely leafage about a
spring."


IV.


     "He shall daily joy dispense
     Hid in song's sweet influence."

     Emerson's _Merlin._


Lyddy had very few callers during her first month as a property owner
in Edgewood. Her appearance would have been against her winning friends
easily in any case, even if she had not acquired the habits of a
recluse. It took a certain amount of time, too, for the community to get
used to the fact that old Mrs. Butterfield was dead, and her niece
Lyddy Ann living in the cottage on the river road. There were numbers
of people who had not yet heard that old Mrs. Butterfield had bought the
house from the Thatcher boys, and that was fifteen years ago; but this
was not strange, for, notwithstanding aunt Hitty's valuable services in
disseminating general information, there was a man living on the Bonny
Eagle road who was surprised to hear that Daniel Webster was dead, and
complained that folks were not so long-lived as they used to be.

Aunt Hitty thought Lyddy a Goth and a Vandal because she took down
the twenty silver coffin plates and laid them reverently away. "Mis'
Butterfield would turn in her grave," she said, "if she knew it. She
ain't much of a housekeeper, I guess," she went on, as she cut over
Dr. Berry's old trousers into briefer ones for Tommy Berry. "She gives
considerable stuff to her hens that she'd a sight better heat over and
eat herself, in these hard times when the missionary societies can't
hardly keep the heathen fed and clothed and warmed--no, I don't mean
warmed, for most o' the heathens live in hot climates, somehow or
'nother. My back door's jest opposite hers; it's across the river, to
be sure, but it's the narrer part, and I can see everything she does as
plain as daylight. She washed a Monday, and she ain't taken her clothes
in yet, and it's Thursday. She may be bleachin' of 'em out, but it
looks slack. I said to Si last night I should stand it till 'bout
Friday,--seein' 'em lay on the grass there, but if she didn't take 'em
in then, I should go over and offer to help her. She has a fire in the
settin'-room 'most every night, though we ain't had a frost yet; and
as near's I can make out, she's got full red curtains hangin' up to her
windows. I ain't sure, for she don't open the blinds in that room till
I get away in the morning, and she shuts 'em before I get back at night.
Si don't know red from green, so he's useless in such matters. I'm going
home late to-night, and walk down on that side o' the river, so't I can
call in after dark and see what makes her house light up as if the sun
was settin' inside of it."

As a matter of fact, Lyddy was reveling in house-furnishing of a humble
sort. She had a passion for color. There was a red-and-white straw
matting on the sitting-room floor. Reckless in the certain possession
of twenty dollars a month, she purchased yards upon yards of turkey red
cotton; enough to cover a mattress for the high-backed settle, for long
curtains at the windows, and for cushions to the rockers. She knotted
white fringes for the table covers and curtains, painted the inside
of the fireplace red, put some pots, of scarlet geraniums on the
window-sills, filled newspaper rack with ferns and tacked it over an
ugly spot in the wall, edged her work-basket with a tufted trimming of
scarlet worsted, and made an elaborate photograph case of white crash
and red cotton that stretched the entire length of the old-fashioned
mantelshelf, and held pictures of Mr. Reynolds, Miss Elvira Reynolds,
George, Susy, Anna, John, Hazel, Ella, and Rufus Reynolds, her former
charges. When all this was done, she lighted a little blaze on the
hearth, took the red curtains from their hands, let them fall gracefully
to the floor, and sat down in her rocking-chair, reconciled to her
existence for absolutely the first time in her forty years.

I hope Mrs. Butterfield was happy enough in Paradise to appreciate and
feel Lyddy's joy. I can even believe she was glad to have died, since
her dying could bring such content to any wretched living human soul.
As Lydia sat in the firelight, the left side of her poor face in shadow,
you saw that she was distinctly harmonious. Her figure, clad in plain
black-and-white calico dress, was a graceful, womanly one. She had
beautifully sloping shoulders and a sweet wrist. Her hair was soft
and plentiful, and her hands were fine, strong, and sensitive. This
possibility of rare beauty made her scars and burns more pitiful, for
if a cheap chrome has smirch across its face, we think it a matter of no
moment, but we deplore the smallest scratch or blur on any work of real
art.

Lydia felt a little less bitter and hopeless about life when she sat in
front of her own open fire, after her usual twilight walk. It was her
habit to wander down the wooded road after her simple five-o'clock
supper, gatherings ferns or goldenrod or frost flowers for her vases;
and one night she heard, above the rippling of the river, the strange,
sweet, piercing sound of Anthony Croft's violin.

She drew nearer, and saw a middle-aged man sitting in the kitchen
doorway, with a lad of ten or twelve years leaning against his knees.
She could tell little of his appearance, save that he had a high
forehead, and hair that waved well back from it in rather an unusual
fashion. He was in his shirt-sleeves, but the gingham was scrupulously
clean, and he had the uncommon refinement of a collar and necktie. Out
of sight herself, Lyddy drew near enough to hear; and this she did every
night without recognizing that the musician was blind. The music had
a curious effect upon her. It was a hitherto unknown influence in her
life, and it interpreted her, so to speak, to herself. As she sat on
the bed of brown pine needles, under a friendly tree, her head resting
against its trunk, her eyes half closed, the tone of Anthony's violin
came like a heavenly message to a tired, despairing soul. Remember that
in her secluded life she had heard only such harmony as Elvira Reynolds
evoked from her piano or George Reynolds from his flute, and the
Reynolds temperament was distinctly inartistic.

Lyddy lived through a lifetime of emotion in these twilight concerts.
Sometimes she was filled with an exquisite melancholy from which there
was no escape; at others, the ethereal purity of the strain stirred her
heart with a strange, sweet vision of mysterious joy; joy that she had
never possessed, would never possess; joy whose bare existence she never
before realized. When the low notes sank lower and lower with their soft
wail of delicious woe, she bent forward into the dark, dreading that
something would be lost in the very struggle of listening; then, after
a, pause, a pure human tone would break the stillness, and soaring,
bird-like, higher and higher, seem to mount to heaven itself, and,
"piercing its starry floors," lift poor scarred Lydia's soul to the very
grates of infinite bliss. In the gentle moods that stole upon her in
those summer twilights she became a different woman, softer in her
prosperity than she had ever been in her adversity; for some plants only
blossom in sunshine. What wonder if to her the music and the musician
became one? It is sometimes a dangerous thing to fuse the man and his
talents in this way; but it did no harm here, for Anthony Croft was his
music, and the music was Anthony Croft. When he played on his violin,
it was as if the miracle of its fashioning were again enacted; as if the
bird on the quivering bough, the mellow sunshine streaming through the
lattice of green leaves, the tinkle of the woodland stream, spoke in
every tone; and more than this, the hearth-glow in whose light the
patient hands had worked, the breath of the soul bending itself in
passionate prayer for perfection, these, too, seemed to have wrought
their blessed influence on the willing strings until the tone was laden
with spiritual harmony. One might indeed have sung of this little red
violin--that looked to Lyddy, in the sunset glow, as if it were veneered
with rubies--all that Shelley sang of another perfect instrument:--


     "The artist who this viol wrought
     To echo all harmonious thought,
     Fell'd a tree, while on the steep
     The woods were in their winter sleep,
     Rock'd in that repose divine
     Of the wind-swept Apennine;
     And dreaming, some of Autumn past,
     And some of Spring approaching fast,
     And some of April buds and showers,
     And some of songs in July bowers,
     And all of love; and so this tree--
     O that such our death may be!--
     Died in sleep, and felt no pain,
     To live in happier form again."

The viol "whispers in enamoured tone:"--


     "Sweet oracles of woods and dells,
     And summer windy ill sylvan cells;..
     The clearest echoes of the hills,
     The softest notes of falling rills,
     The melodies of birds and bees,
     The murmuring of summer seas,
     And pattering rain, and breathing dew,
     And airs of evening; all it knew....
     --All this it knows, but will not tell
      To those who cannot question well
     The spirit that inhabits it;...
     But, sweetly as its answers will
     Flatter hands of perfect skill,
     It keeps its highest, holiest tone
     For one beloved Friend alone."

Lyddy heard the violin and the man's voice as he talked to the
child,--heard them night after night; and when she went home to the
little brown house to light the fire on the hearth and let down the warm
red curtains, she fell into sweet, sad reveries; and when she blew out
her candle for the night, she fell asleep and dreamed new dreams, and
her heart was stirred with the rustling of new-born hopes that rose and
took wing like birds startled from their nests.


V.


     "Nor scour the seas, nor sift mankind,
     A poet or a friend to find:
     Behold, he watches at the door!
     Behold his shadow on the floor!"

     Emerson's _Saadi._

Lyddy Butterfield's hen turkey was of a roving disposition. She had
never appreciated her luxurious country quarters in Edgewood, and was
seemingly anxious to return to the modest back yard in her native city.
At any rate, she was in the habit of straying far from home, and the
habit was growing upon her to such an extent that she would even lead
her docile little gobblers down to visit Anthony Croft's hens and share
their corn.

Lyddy had caught her at it once, and was now pursuing her to that end
for the second time. She paused in front of the house, but there were
no turkeys to be seen. Could they have wandered up the hill road,--the
discontented, "traipsing," exasperating things? She started in that
direction, when she heard a crash in the Croft kitchen, and then the
sound of a boy's voice coming from an inner room,--a weak and querulous
voice, as if the child were ill.

She drew nearer, in spite of her dread of meeting people, or above all
of intruding, and saw Anthony Croft standing over the stove, with an
expression of utter helplessness on his usually placid face. She had
never really seen him before in the daylight, and there was something
about his appearance that startled her. The teakettle was on the floor,
and a sea of water was flooding the man's feet, yet he seemed to be
gazing into vacancy. Presently he stooped, and fumbled gropingly for the
kettle. It was too hot to be touched with impunity, and he finally left
it in a despairing sort of way, and walked in the direction of a shelf,
from under which a row of coats was hanging. The boy called again in a
louder and more insistent tone, ending in a whimper of restless pain.
This seemed to make the man more nervous than ever. His hands went
patiently over and over the shelf, then paused at each separate nail.

"Bless the poor dear!" thought Lyddy. "Is he trying to find his hat,
or what is he trying to do? I wonder if he is music mad?" and she drew
still nearer the steps.

At this moment he turned and came rapidly toward the door. She looked
straight in his face. There was no mistaking it: he was blind. The
magician who had told her through his violin secrets that she had
scarcely dreamed of, the wizard who had set her heart to throbbing and
aching and longing as it had never throbbed and ached and longed before,
the being who had worn a halo of romance and genius to her simple mind,
was stone-blind! A wave of impetuous anguish, as sharp and passionate
as any she had ever felt for her own misfortunes, swept over her soul at
the spectacle of the man's helplessness. His sightless eyes struck her
like a blow. But there was no time to lose. She was directly in his
path: if she stood still he would certainly walk over her, and if she
moved he would hear her, so, on the spur of the moment, she gave a
nervous cough and said, "Good-morning, Mr. Croft."

He stopped short. "Who is it?" he asked.

"I am--it is--I am--your new neighbor," said Lyddy, with a trembling
attempt at cheerfulness.

"Oh, Miss Butterfield! I should have called up to see you before this
if it hadn't been for the boy's sickness. But I am a good-for-nothing
neighbor, as you have doubtless heard. Nobody expects anything of me."

("Nobody expects anything of me." Her own plaint, uttered in her own
tone!)

"I don't know about that," she answered swiftly. "You've given me, for
one, a great deal of pleasure with your wonderful music. I often hear
you as you play after supper, and it has kept me from being lonesome.
That isn't very much, to be sure."

"You are fond of music, then?"

"I didn't know I was; I never heard any before," said Lyddy simply; "but
it seems to help people to say things they couldn't say for themselves,
don't you think so? It comforts me even to hear it, and I think it must
be still more beautiful to make it."

Now, Lyddy Ann Butterfield had no sooner uttered this commonplace speech
than the reflection darted through her mind like a lightning flash that
she had never spoken a bit of her heart out like this in all her life
before. The reason came to her in the same flash: she was not being
looked at; her disfigured face was hidden. This man, at least, could
not shrink, turn away, shiver, affect indifference, fix his eyes on
hers with a fascinated horror, as others had done. Her heart was divided
between a great throb of pity and sympathy for him and an irresistible
sense of gratitude for herself. Sure of protection and comprehension,
her lovely soul came out of her poor eyes and sat in the sunshine. She
spoke her mind at ease, as we utter sacred things sometimes under cover
of darkness.

"You seem to have had an accident; what can I do to help you?" she
asked.

"Nothing, thank you. The boy has been sick for some days, but he seems
worse since last night. Nothing is in its right place in the house, so I
have given up trying to find anything, and am just going to Edgewood to
see if somebody will help me for a few days."

"Uncle Tony! Uncle To-ny! where are you? Do give me another drink, I'm
so hot!" came the boy's voice from within.

"Coming, laddie! I don't believe he ought to drink so much water, but
what can I do? He is burning up with fever."

"Now look here, Mr. Croft," and Lydia's tone was cheerfully decisive.
"You sit down in that rocker, please, and let me command the ship for
a while. This is one of the cases where a woman is necessary. First and
foremost, what were you hunting for?"

"My hat and the butter," said Anthony meekly, and at this unique
combination they both laughed. Lyddy's laugh was particularly fresh,
childlike, and pleased; one that would have astonished the Reynolds
children. She had seldom laughed heartily since little Rufus had cried
and told her she frightened him when she twisted her face so.

"Your hat is in the wood-box, and I'll find the butter in the twinkling
of an eye, though why you want it now is more than--My patience, Mr.
Croft, your hand is burned to a blister!"

"Don't mind me. Be good enough to look at the boy and tell me what ails
him; nothing else matters much."

"I will with pleasure, but let me ease you a little first. Here's a rag
that will be just the thing," and Lyddy, suiting the pretty action to
the mendacious worn, took a good handkerchief from her pocket and tore
it in three strips, after spreading it with tallow from a candle heated
over the stove. This done, she hound up the burned hand skillfully, and,
crossing the dining-room, disappeared within the little chamber door
beyond. She came out presently, and said half hesitatingly, "Would
you--mind going out in the orchard for an hour or so? You seem to be
rather in the way here, and I should like the place to myself, if you'll
excuse me for saying so. I'm ever so much more capable than Mrs. Buck;
won't you give me a trial, sir? Here's your violin and your hat. I'll
call you if you can help or advise me."

"But I can't let a stranger come in and do my housework," he objected.
"I can't, you know, though I appreciate your kindness all the same."

"I am your nearest neighbor, and your only one, for that matter," said
Lyddy firmly; "its nothing more than right that I should look after
that sick child, and I must do it. I haven't got a thing to do in my
own house. I am nothing but a poor lonely old maid, who's been used to
children all her life, and likes nothing better than to work over them."

A calm settled upon Anthony's perturbed spirit, as he sat under the
apple-trees and heard Lyddy going to and fro in the cottage. "She isn't
any old maid," he thought; "she doesn't step like one; she has soft
shoes and a springy walk. She must be a very handsome woman, with a hand
like that; and such a voice! I knew the moment she spoke that she didn't
belong in this village."

As a matter of fact, his keen ear had caught the melody in Lyddy's
voice, a voice full of dignity, sweetness, and reserve power. His sense
of touch, too, had captured the beauty of her hand, and held it in
remembrance,--the soft palm, the fine skin, supple fingers, smooth
nails, and firm round wrist. These charms would never have been noted
by any seeing man in Edgewood, but they were revealed to Anthony Croft
while Lyddy, like the good Samaritan, bound up his wounds. It is these
saving stars that light the eternal darkness of the blind.

Lyddy thought she had met her Waterloo when, with arms akimbo, she gazed
about the Croft establishment, which was a scene of desolation for the
moment. Anthony's cousin from Bridgton was in the habit of visiting
him every two months for a solemn house-cleaning, and Mrs. Buck from
Pleasant River came every Saturday and Monday for baking and washing.
Between times Davy and his uncle did the housework together; and
although it was respectably done, there was no pink-and-white daintiness
about it, you may be sure.

Lyddy came out to the apple-trees in about an hour, laughing a little
nervously as she said, "I'm sorry to have taken a mean advantage of you,
Mr. Croft, but I know everything you've got in your house, and exactly
where it is. I couldn't help it, you see, when I was making things tidy.
It would do you good to see the boy. His room was too light, and the
flies were devouring him. I swept him and dusted him, put on clean
sheets and pillow slips, sponged him with bay rum, brushed his hair,
drove out the flies, and tacked a green curtain up to the window.
Fifteen minutes after he was sleeping like a kitten. He has a sore
throat and considerable fever. Could you--can you--at least, will you,
go up to my house on an errand?"

"Certainly I can. I know it inside and out as well as my own."

"Very good. On the clock shelf in the sitting-room there is a bottle of
sweet spirits of nitre; it's the only bottle there, so you can't make
any mistake. It will help until the doctor comes. I wonder you didn't
send for him yesterday?"

"Davy wouldn't have him," apologized his uncle.

"Wouldn't he?" said Lyddy with cheerful scorn. "He has you under pretty
good control, hasn't he? But children are unmerciful tyrants."

"Couldn't you coax him into it before you go home?" asked Anthony in a
wheedling voice.

"I can try; but it isn't likely I can influence him, if you can't.
Still, if we both fail, I really don't see what 's to prevent our
sending for the doctor in spite of him. He is as weak as a baby,
you know, and can't sit up in bed: what could he do? I will risk the
consequences, if you will!"

There was a note of such amiable and winning sarcasm in all this, such
a cheery, invincible courage, such a friendly neighborliness and
cooperation, above all such a different tone from any he was accustomed
to hear in Edgewood, that Anthony Croft felt warmed through to the core.

As he walked quickly along the road, he conjured up a vision of autumn
beauty from the few hints nature gave even to her sightless ones on this
glorious morning,--the rustle of a few fallen leaves under his feet, the
clear wine of the air, the full rush of the swollen river, the whisking
of the squirrels in the boughs, the crunch of their teeth on the nuts,
the spicy odor of the apples lying under the trees. He missed his mother
that morning more than he had missed her for years. How neat she was,
how thrifty, how comfortable, and how comforting! His life was so dreary
and aimless; and was it the best or the right one for Davy, with his
talent and dawning ambition? Would it not be better to have Mrs.
Buck live with them altogether, instead of coming twice a week, as
heretofore? No; he shrank from that with a hopeless aversion born of
Saturday and Monday dinners in her company. He could hear her pour her
coffee into the saucer; hear the scraping of the cup on the rim, and
know that she was setting it sloppily down on the cloth. He could
remember her noisy drinking, the weight of her elbow on the table, the
creaking of her calico dress under the pressure of superabundant flesh.
Besides, she had tried to scrub his favorite violin with sapolio. No,
anything was better than Mrs. Buck as a constancy.

He took off his hat unconsciously as he entered Lyddy's sitting-room.
A gentle breeze blew one of the full red curtains towards him till it
fluttered about his shoulders like a frolicsome, teasing hand. There was
a sweet, pungent odor of pine boughs, a canary sang in the window, the
clock was trimmed with a blackberry vine; he knew the prickles, and
they called up to his mind the glowing tints he had loved so well. His
sensitive hand, that carried a divining rod in every finger-tip, met a
vase on the shelf, and, traveling upward, touched a full branch of alder
berries tied about with a ribbon. The ribbon would be red; the woman
who arranged this room would make no mistake; for in one morning Anthony
Croft had penetrated the secret of Lyddy's true personality, and in a
measure had sounded the shallows that led to the depths of her nature.

Lyddy went home at seven o'clock that night rather reluctantly. The
doctor had said Mr. Croft could sit up with the boy unless he grew much
worse, and there was no propriety in her staying longer unless there was
danger.

"You have been very good to me," Anthony said gravely, as he shook her
hand at parting,--"very good."

They stood together on the doorstep. A distant bell, called to evening
prayer-meeting; the restless murmur of the river and the whisper of
the wind in the pines broke the twilight stillness. The long, quiet day
together, part of it spent by the sick child's bedside, had brought the
two strangers curiously near to each other.

"The house hasn't seemed so sweet and fresh since my mother died," he
went on, as he dropped her hand, "and I haven't had so many flowers and
green things in it since I lost my eyesight."

"Was it long ago?"

"Ten years. Is that long?"

"Long to bear a burden."

"I hope you know little of burden-bearing?"

"I know little else."

"I might have guessed it from the alacrity with which you took up
Davy's and mine. You must be very happy to have the power to make
things straight and sunny and wholesome; to breathe your strength into
helplessness such as mine. I thank you, and I envy you. Good-night."

Lyddy turned on her heel without a word; her mind was beyond and above
words. The sky seemed to have descended upon, enveloped her, caught her
up into its heaven, as she rose into unaccustomed heights of feeling,
like Elijah in his chariot of fire. She very happy! She with power,
power to make things straight and sunny and wholesome! She able to
breathe strength into helplessness, even a consecrated, Godsmitten
helplessness like his! She not only to be thanked, but envied!

Her house seemed strange to her that night. She went to bed in the dark,
dreading even the light of a candle; and before she turned down her
counterpane she flung herself on her knees, and poured out her soul in
a prayer that had been growing, waiting, and waited for, perhaps, for
years:--

"O Lord, I thank Thee for health and strength and life. I never could do
it before, but I thank Thee to-night for life on any terms. I thank
Thee for this home; for the chance of helping another human creature,
stricken like myself; for the privilege of ministering to a motherless
child. Make me to long only for the beauty of holiness, and to be
satisfied if I attain to it. Wash my soul pure and clean, and let that
be the only mirror in which I see my face. I have tried to be useful.
Forgive me if it always seemed so hard and dreary a life. Forgive me
if I am too happy because for one short day I have really helped in a
beautiful way, and found a friend who saw, because he was blind, the
real me underneath; the me that never was burned by the fire; the me
that isn't disfigured, unless my wicked discontent has done it; the me
that has lived on and on and on, starving to death for the friendship
and sympathy and love that come to other women. I have spent my forty
years in the wilderness, feeding on wrath and bitterness and tears.
Forgive me, Lord, and give me one more vision of the blessed land of
Canaan, even if I never dwell there."


VI.


     "Nor less the eternal poles
     Of tendency distribute souls.
     There need no vows to bind
     Whom not each other seek, but find."

     Emerson's _Celestial Love._


Davy's sickness was a lingering one. Mrs. Buck came for two or three
hours a day, but Lyddy was the self-installed angel of the house; and
before a week had passed the boy's thin arms were around her neck, his
head on her loving shoulder, and his cheek pressed against hers. Anthony
could hear them talk, as he sat in the kitchen busy at his work. Musical
instruments were still brought him to repair, though less frequently
than of yore, and he could still make many parts of violins far better
than his seeing competitors. A friend and pupil sat by his side in the
winter evenings and supplemented his weakness, helping and learning
alternately, while his blind master's skill filled him with wonder and
despair. The years of struggle for perfection had not been wasted; and
though the eye that once detected the deviation of a hair's breadth
could no longer tell the true from the false, yet nature had been busy
with her divine work of compensation. The one sense stricken with death,
she poured floods of new life and vigor into the others. Touch became
something more than the stupid, empty grasp of things we seeing mortals
know, and in place of the two eyes he had lost he now had ten in every
finger-tip. As for odors, let other folks be proud of smelling musk and
lavender, but let him tell you by a quiver of the nostrils the various
kinds of so-called scentless flowers, and let him bend his ear and
interpret secrets that the universe is ever whispering to us who are
pent in partial deafness because, forsooth, we see.

He often paused to hear Lydia's low, soothing tones and the boy's
weak treble. Anthony had said to him once, "Miss Butterfield is very
beautiful, isn't she, Davy? You haven't painted me a picture of her yet.
How does she look?"

Davy was stricken at first with silent embarrassment. He was a truthful
child, but in this he could no more have told the whole truth than
he could have cut off his hand. He was knit to Lyddy by every tie of
gratitude and affection. He would sit for hours with his expectant face
pressed against the window-pane, and when he saw her coming down the
shady road he was filled with a sense of impending comfort and joy.

"NO," he said hesitatingly, "she isn't pretty, nunky, but she's sweet
and nice and dear, Everything on her shines, it's so clean; and when
she comes through the trees, with her white apron and her purple calico
dress, your heart jumps, because you know she's going to make everything
pleasant. Her hair has a pretty wave in it, and her hand is soft on your
forehead; and it's most worth while being sick just to have her in the
house."

Meanwhile, so truly is "praise our fructifying sun," Lydia bloomed into
a hundred hitherto unsuspected graces of mind and heart and speech.
A sly sense of humor woke into life, and a positive talent for
conversation, latent hitherto because she had never known any one who
cared to drop a plummet into the crystal springs of her consciousness.
When the violin was laid away, she would sit in the twilight, by Davy's
sofa, his thin hand in hers, and talk with Anthony about books and
flowers and music, and about the meaning of life, too,--its burdens and
mistakes, and joys and sorrows; groping with him in the darkness to find
a clue to God's purposes.

Davy had long afternoons at Lyddy's house as the autumn grew into
winter. He read to her while she sewed rags for a new sitting-room
carpet, and they played dominoes and checkers together in the twilight
before supper time,--suppers that were a feast to the boy, after Mrs.
Buck's cookery. Anthony brought his violin sometimes of an evening, and
Almira Berry, the next neighbor on the road to the Mills, would drop
in and join the little party. Almira used to sing Auld Robin Gray, What
Will You Do, Love, and Robin Adair, to the great enjoyment of everybody;
and she persuaded Lyddy to buy the old church melodeon, and learn to
sing alto in Oh, Wert Thou in the Cauld Blast, Gently, Gently Sighs the
Breeze, and I know a Bank. Nobody sighed for the gayeties and advantages
of a great city when, these concerts being over, Lyddy would pass crisp
seedcakes and raspberry shrub, doughnuts and cider, or hot popped corn
and molasses candy.

"But there, she can afford to," said aunt Hitty Tarbox; "she's pretty
middlin' wealthy for Edgewood. And it's lucky she is, for she 'bout
feeds that boy o' Croft's. No wonder he wants her to fill him up, after
six years of the Widder Buck's victuals. Aurelia Buck can take good
flour and sugar, sweet butter and fresh eggs, and in ten strokes of her
hand she can make 'em into something the very hogs 'll turn away from. I
declare, it brings the tears to my eyes sometimes when I see her coming
out of Croft's Saturday afternoons, and think of the stone crocks full
of nasty messes she's left behind her for that innocent man and boy to
eat up.... Anthony goes to see Miss Butterfield consid'able often.
Of course it's awstensibly to walk home with Davy, or do an errand or
something, but everybody knows better. She went down to Croft's pretty
nearly every day when his cousin from Bridgton come to house-clean.
She suspicioned something, I guess. Anyhow, she asked me if Miss
Butterfield's two hundred a year was in gov'ment bonds. Anthony's
eyesight ain't good, but I guess he could make out to cut cowpons
off.... It would be strange if them two left-overs should take an'
marry each other; though, come to think of it, I don't know's 't would
neither. He's blind, to be sure, and can't see her scarred face. It's a
pity she ain't deef, so't she can't hear his everlastin' fiddle. She's
lucky to get any kind of a husband; she's too humbly to choose. I
declare, she reminds me of a Jack-o'-lantern, though if you look at the
back of her, or see her in meetin' with a thick veil on, she's about the
best appearin' woman in Edgewood.... I never see anybody stiffen up as
Anthony has. He had me make him three white shirts and three gingham
ones, with collars and cuffs on all of 'em. It seems as if six shirts at
one time must mean something out o' the common!"

Aunt Hitty was right; it did mean something out of the common. It meant
the growth of an all-engrossing, grateful, divinely tender passion
between two love-starved souls. On the one hand, Lyddy, who though she
had scarcely known the meaning of love in all her dreary life, yet was
as full to the brim of all sweet, womanly possibilities of loving and
giving as any pretty woman; on the other, the blind violin-maker, who
had never loved any woman but his mother, and who was in the direst need
of womanly sympathy and affection.

Anthony Croft, being ministered unto by Lyddy's kind hands, hearing
her sweet voice and her soft footstep, saw her as God sees, knowing the
best; forgiving the worst, like God, and forgetting it, still more like
God, I think.

And Lyddy? There is no pen worthy to write of Lyddy. Her joy lay deep
in her heart like a jewel at the bottom of a clear pool, so deep that
no ripple or ruffle on the surface could disturb the hidden treasure.
If God had smitten these two with one hand, he had held out the other in
tender benediction.

There had been a pitiful scene of unspeakable solemnity when Anthony
first told Lyddy that he loved her, and asked her to be his wife. He had
heard all her sad history by this time, though not from her own lips,
and his heart went out to her all the more for the heavy cross that
had been laid upon her. He had the wit and wisdom to put her affliction
quite out of the question, and allude only to her sacrifice in marrying
a blind man, hopelessly and helplessly dependent on her sweet offices
for the rest of his life, if she, in her womanly mercy, would love him
and help him bear his burdens.

When his tender words fell upon Lyddy's dazed brain she sank beside
his chair, and, clasping his knees, sobbed: "I love you, I cannot help
loving you, I cannot help telling you I love you! But you must hear the
truth; you have heard it from others, but perhaps they softened it. If I
marry you, people will always blame me and pity you. You would never ask
me to be your wife if you could see my face; you could not love me an
instant if you were not blind."

"Then I thank God unceasingly for my infirmity," said Anthony Croft, as
he raised her to her feet.


*****


Anthony and Lyddy Croft sat in the apple orchard, one warm day in late
spring.

Anthony's work would have puzzled a casual on-looker. Ten stout wires
were stretched between two trees, fifteen or twenty feet apart, and each
group of five represented the lines of the musical staff. Wooden
bars crossed the wires at regular intervals, dividing the staff into
measures. A box with many compartments sat on a stool beside him, and
this held bits of wood that looked like pegs, but were in reality whole,
half, quarter, and eighth notes, rests, flats, sharps, and the like.
These were cleft in such a way that he could fit them on the wires
almost as rapidly as his musical theme came to him, and Lyddy had
learned to transcribe with pen and ink the music she found in wood and
wire, He could write only simple airs in this way, but when he played
them on the violin they were transported into a loftier region, such
genius lay in the harmony, the arabesque, the delicate lacework of
embroidery with which the tune was inwrought; now high, now low, now
major, now minor, now sad, now gay, with the one thrilling, haunting
cadence recurring again and again, to be watched for, longed for, and
greeted with a throb of delight.

Davy was reading at the window, his curly head buried in a well-worn
Shakespeare opened at Midsummer Night's Dream. Lyddy was sitting under
her favorite pink apple-tree, a mass of fragrant bloom, more beautiful
than Aurora's morning gown. She was sewing; lining with snowy lawn
innumerable pockets in a square basket that she held in her lap. The
pockets were small, the needles were fine, the thread was a length of
cobweb. Everything about the basket was small except the hopes that she
was stitching into it; they were so great that her heart could scarcely
hold them. Nature was stirring everywhere. The seeds were springing in
the warm earth. The hens were clucking to their downy chicks just out of
the egg. The birds were flying hither and thither in the apple boughs,
and there was one little home of straw so hung that Lyddy could look
into it and see the patient mother brooding her nestlings. The sight of
her bright eyes, alert for every sign of danger, sent a rush of feeling
through Lyddy's veins that made her long to clasp the little feathered
mother to her own breast.

A sweet gravity and consecration of thought possessed her, and the
pink blossoms falling into her basket were not more delicate than the
rose-colored dreams that flushed her soul.

Anthony put in the last wooden peg, and taking up his violin called,
"Davy, lad, come out and tell me what this means!"

Davy was used to this; from a wee boy he had been asked to paint the
changing landscape of each day, and to put into words his uncle's music.

Lyddy dropped her needle, the birds stopped to listen, and Anthony
played.

"It is this apple orchard in May time," said Davy; "it is the song of
the green things growing, isn't it?"

"What do you say, dear?" asked Anthony, turning to his wife.

Love and hope had made a poet of Lyddy. "I think Davy is right," she
said. "It is a dream of the future, the story of all new and beautiful
things growing out of the old. It is full of the sweetness of present
joy, but there is promise and hope in it besides. It is like the Spring
sitting in the lap of Winter, and holding a baby Summer in her bosom."

Davy did not quite understand this, though he thought it pretty; but
Lyddy's husband did, and when the boy went back to his books, he took
his wife in his arms and kissed her twice,--once for herself, and then
once again.




THE EVENTFUL TRIP OF THE MIDNIGHT CRY.


In the little villages along the Saco River, in the year 1850 or
thereabouts, the arrival and departure of the stage-coach was the one
exciting incident of the day. It did not run on schedule time in those
days, but started from Limington or Saco, as the case might be, at about
or somewhere near a certain hour, and arrived at the other end of the
route whenever it got there. There were no trains to meet (the railway
popularly known as the "York and Yank'em" was not built till 1862); the
roads were occasionally good and generally bad; and thus it was often
dusk, and sometimes late in the evening, when the lumbering vehicle
neared its final destination and drew up to the little post-offices
along the way. However late it might be, the village postmaster had to
be on hand to receive and open the mailbags; after which he distributed
the newspapers and letters in a primitive set of pine pigeon-holes on
the wall, turned out the loafers, "banked up" the fire, and went home to
bed.

"Life" Lane was a jolly good fellow,--just the man to sit on the box
seat and drive the three horses through ruts and "thank-you-ma'ams,"
slush and mud and snow. There was a perennial twinkle in his eye,
his ruddy cheeks were wrinkled with laughter, and he had a good story
forever on the tip of his tongue. He stood six feet two in his stockings
(his mother used to say she had the longest Life of any woman in the
State o' Maine); his shoulders were broad in proportion, and his lungs
just the sort to fill amply his noble chest. Therefore, when he had what
was called in the vernacular "turrible bad goin'," and when any other
stage-driver in York County would have shrunk into his muffler and
snapped and snarled on the slightest provocation, Life Lane opened his
great throat when he passed over the bridges at Moderation or Bonny
Eagle, and sent forth a golden, sonorous "Yo ho! halloo!" into the still
air. The later it was and the stormier it was, the more vigor he put
into the note, and it was a drowsy postmaster indeed who did not start
from his bench by the fire at the sound of that ringing halloo. Thus the
old stage-coach, in Life Lane's time, was generally called "The Midnight
Cry," and not such a bad name either, whether the term was derisively
applied because the stage was always late; or whether Life's "Yo ho!"
had caught the popular fancy.

There was a pretty girl in Pleasant River (and, alas! another in Bonny
Eagle) who went to bed every night with the chickens, but stayed awake
till she heard first the rumble of heavy wheels on a bridge, then a
faint, bell-like tone that might have come out of the mouth of a silver
horn; whereupon she blushed as if it were an offer of marriage, and
turned over and went to sleep.

If the stage arrived in good season, Life would have a few minutes to
sit on the loafers' beach beside the big open fire; and what a feature
he was, with his tales culled from all sorts of passengers, who were
never so fluent as when sitting beside him "up in front!" There was a
tallow dip or two, and no other light save that of the fire. Who that
ever told a story could wish a more inspiring auditor than Jacob Bean,
a literal, honest old fellow who took the most vital interest in every
detail of the stories told, looking upon their heroes and their
villains as personal friends or foes. He always sat in one corner of the
fireplace, poker in hand, and the crowd tacitly allowed him the role of
Greek chorus. Indeed, nobody could have told a story properly without
Jake Bean's parentheses and punctuation marks poked in at exciting
junctures.

"That 's so every time!" he would say, with a lunge at the forestick.
"I'll bate he was glad then!" with another stick flung on in just the
right spot. "Golly! but that served 'em right!" with a thrust at the
backlog.

The New England story seemed to flourish under these conditions: a
couple of good hard benches in a store or tavern, where you could not
only smoke and chew but could keep on your hat (there was not a man in
York County in those days who could say anything worth hearing with his
hat off); the blazing logs to poke; and a cavernous fireplace into which
tobacco juice could be neatly and judiciously directed. Those were good
old times, and the stage-coach was a mighty thing when school children
were taught to take off their hats and make a bow as the United States
mail passed the old stage tavern.

Life Lane's coaching days were over long before this story begins, but
the Midnight Cry was still in pretty fair condition, and was driven
ostensibly by Jeremiah Todd, who lived on the "back-nippin'" road from
Bonny Eagle to Limington.

When I say ostensibly driven, I but follow the lead of the villagers,
who declared that, though Jerry held the reins, Mrs. Todd drove the
stage, as she drove everything else. As a proof of this lady's strong
individuality, she was still generally spoken of as "the Widder Bixby,"
though she had been six years wedded to Jeremiah Todd. The Widder Bixby,
then, was strong, self-reliant, valiant, indomitable. Jerry Todd was,
to use his wife's own characterization, so soft you could stick a cat's
tail into him without ruffling the fur. He was always alluded to as "the
Widder Bixby's husband;" but that was no new or special mortification,
for he had been known successively as Mrs. Todd's youngest baby, the
Widder Todd's only son, Susan Todd's brother, and, when Susan Todd's
oldest boy fought at Chapultepec, William Peck's uncle.

The Widder Bixby's record was far different. She was the mildest of the
four Stover sisters of Scarboro, and the quartette was supposed to
have furnished more kinds of temper than had ever before come from one
household. When Peace, the eldest, was mad, she frequently kicked the
churn out of the kitchen door, cream and all,--and that lost her a
husband.

Love, the second, married, and according to local tradition once kicked
her husband all the way up Foolscap Hill with a dried cod-fish. Charity,
the third, married too,--for the Stovers of Scarboro were handsome
girls, but she got a fit mate in her spouse. She failed to intimidate
him, for he was a foeman worthy of her steel; but she left his bed and
board, and left in a manner that kept up the credit of the Stover family
of Scarboro.

They had had a stormy breakfast one morning before he started to
Portland with a load of hay. "Good-by," she called, as she stood in the
door, "you've seen the last of me!" "No such luck!" he said, and whipped
up his horse. Charity baked a great pile of biscuits, and left them on
the kitchen table with a pitcher of skimmed milk. (She wouldn't give
him anything to complain of, not she!) She then put a few clothes in a
bundle, and, tying on her shaker, prepared to walk to Pleasant River,
twelve miles distant. As she locked the door and put the key in its
accustomed place under the mat, a pleasant young man drove up and
explained that he was the advance agent of the Sypher's Two-in-One
Menagerie and Circus, soon to appear in that vicinity. He added that
he should be glad to give her five tickets to the entertainment if she
would allow him to paste a few handsome posters on that side of her barn
next the road; that their removal was attended with trifling difficulty,
owing to the nature of a very superior paste invented by himself; that
any small boy, in fact, could tear them off in an hour, and be well paid
by the gift of a ticket.

The devil entered into Charity (not by any means for the first time),
and she told the man composedly that if he would give her ten tickets he
might paper over the cottage as well as the barn, for they were going
to tear it down shortly and build a larger one. The advance agent was
delighted, and they passed a pleasant hour together; Charity holding the
paste-pot, while the talkative gentleman glued six lions and an elephant
on the roof, a fat lady on the front door, a tattooed man between the
windows, living skeletons on the blinds, and ladies insufficiently
clothed in all the vacant spaces and on the chimneys. Nobody went by
during the operation, and the agent remarked, as he unhitched his horse,
that he had never done a neater job. "Why, they'll come as far to see
your house as they will to the circus!" he exclaimed.

"I calculate they will," said Charity, as she latched the gate and
started for Pleasant River.

I am not telling Charity Stover's story, so I will only add that
the bill-poster was mistaken in the nature of his paste, and greatly
undervalued its adhesive properties.

The temper of Prudence, the youngest sister, now Mrs. Todd, paled into
insignificance beside that of the others, but it was a very pretty thing
in tempers nevertheless, and would have been thought remarkable in any
other family in Scarboro.

You may have noted the fact that it is a person's virtues as often
as his vices that make him difficult to live with. Mrs. Todd's
masterfulness and even her jealousy might have been endured, by the
aid of fasting and prayer, but her neatness, her economy, and her
forehandedness made a combination that only the grace of God could have
abided with comfortably, so that Jerry Todd's comparative success is a
matter of local tradition. Punctuality is a praiseworthy virtue enough,
but as the years went on, Mrs. Todd blew her breakfast horn at so early
an hour that the neighbors were in some doubt as to whether it might not
herald the supper of the day before. They also predicted that she would
have her funeral before she was fairly dead, and related with great
gusto that when she heard there was to be an eclipse of the sun on
Monday, the 26th of July, she wished they could have it the 25th, as
Sunday would be so much more convenient than wash-day.

She had oilcloth on her kitchen to save the floor, and oilcloth mats to
save the oilcloth; yet Jerry's boots had to be taken off in the shed,
and he was required to walk through in his stocking feet. She blackened
her stove three times a day, washed her dishes in the woodhouse, in
order to keep her sink clean, and kept one pair of blinds open in the
sitting-room, but spread newspapers over the carpet wherever the sun
shone in.

It was the desire of Jerry's heart to give up the fatigues and exposures
of stage-driving, and "keep store," but Mrs. Todd deemed it much better
for him to be in the open air than dealing out rum and molasses to a
roystering crew. This being her view of the case, it is unnecessary to
state that he went on driving the stage.

"Do you wear a flannel shirt, Jerry?" asked Pel Frost once. "I don'
know," he replied, "ask Mis' Todd; she keeps the books."

"Women-folks" (he used to say to a casual passenger), "like all other
animiles, has to be trained up before they're real good comp'ny. You
have to begin with 'em early, and begin as you mean to hold out. When
they once git in the habit of takin' the bit in their teeth and runnin',
it's too late for you to hold 'em in."

It was only to strangers that he aired his convictions on the training
of "womenfolks," though for that matter he might safely have done it
even at home; for everybody in Limington knew that it would always
have been too late to begin with the Widder Bixby, since, like all the
Stovers of Scarboro, she had been born with the bit in her teeth. Jerry
had never done anything he wanted to since he had married her, and he
hadn't really wanted to do that. He had been rather candid with her on
this point (as candid as a tender-hearted and obliging man can be with
a woman who is determined to marry him, and has two good reasons why she
should to every one of his why he shouldn't), and this may have been
the reason for her jealousy. Although by her superior force she had
overborne his visible reluctance, she, being a woman, or at all events
of the female gender, could never quite forget that she had done the
wooing.

Certainly his charms were not of the sort to tempt women from the
strict and narrow path, yet the fact remained that the Widder Bixby was
jealous, and more than one person in Limington was aware of it.

Pelatiah, otherwise "Pel" Frost, knew more about the matter than most
other folks, because he had unlimited time to devote to general culture.
Though not yet thirty years old, he was the laziest man in York County.
(Jabe Slocum had not then established his record; and Jot Bascom had
ruined his by cutting his hay before it was dead in the summer of '49,
always alluded to afterwards in Pleasant River as the year when gold was
discovered and Jot Bascom cut his hay.)

Pel was a general favorite in half a dozen villages, where he was the
life of the loafers' bench. An energetic loafer can attend properly to
one bench, but it takes genius as well as assiduity to do justice to six
of them. His habits were decidedly convivial, and he spent a good deal
of time at the general musters, drinking and carousing with the other
ne'er-do-weels. You may be sure he was no favorite of Mrs. Todd's; and
she represented to him all that is most undesirable in womankind, his
taste running decidedly to rosy, smiling, easy-going ones who had no
regular hours for meals, but could have a dinner on the table any time
in fifteen minutes after you got there.

Now, a certain lady with a noticeable green frock and a white "drawn-in"
cape bonnet had graced the Midnight Cry on its journey from Limington to
Saco on three occasions during the month of July. Report said that she
was a stranger who had appeared at the post-office in a wagon driven by
a small, freckled boy.

The first trip passed without comment; the second provoked some
discussion; on the occasion of the third, Mrs. Todd said nothing,
because there seemed nothing to say, but she felt so out-of-sorts that
she cut Jerry's hair close to his head, though he particularly fancied
the thin fringe of curls at the nape of his neck.

Pel Frost went over to Todd's one morning to borrow an axe, and seized
a favorable opportunity to ask casually, "Oh, Mis' Todd, did Jerry find
out the name o' that woman in a green dress and white bunnit that rid to
Saco with him last week?"

"Mr. Todd's got something better to do than get acquainted with his lady
passengers," snapped Mrs. Todd, "'specially as they always ride inside."

"I know they gen'ally do," said Pel, shouldering the axe (it was for
his mother's use), "but this one rides up in front part o' the way, so I
thought mebbe Jerry 'd find out something 'bout her. She's han'some as a
picture, but she must have a good strong back to make the trip down 'n'
up in one day."

Nothing could have been more effective or more effectual than this
blow dealt with consummate skill. Having thus driven the iron into Mrs.
Todd's soul, Pel entertained his mother with an account of the interview
while she chopped the kindling-wood. He had no special end in view when,
Iago-like, he dropped his first poisoned seed in Mrs. Todd's fertile
mind, or, at most, nothing worse than the hope that matters might reach
an unendurable point, and Jerry might strike for his altars and his
fires. Jerry was a man and a brother, and petticoat government must
be discouraged whenever and wherever possible, or the world would soon
cease to be a safe place to live in. Pel's idea grew upon him in the
night watches, and the next morning he searched his mother's garret till
he found a green dress and a white bonnet. Putting them in a basket, he
walked out on the road a little distance till he met the stage, when,
finding no passengers inside, he asked Jerry to let him jump in and
"ride a piece." Once within, he hastily donned the green wrapper and
tell-tale headgear, and, when the Midnight Cry rattled down the stony
hill past the Todd house, Pel took good care to expose a large green
sleeve and the side of a white bonnet at the stage window. It was easy
enough to cram the things back into the basket, jump out, and call a
cordial thank you to the unsuspecting Jerry. He was rewarded for his
ingenuity and enterprise at night, when he returned Mrs. Todd's axe, for
just as he reached the back door he distinctly heard her say that if she
saw that green woman on the stage again, she would knock her off with a
broomstick as sure as she was a Stover of Scarboro. As a matter of fact
she was equal to it. Her great-grandmother had been born on a soil where
the broomstick is a prominent factor in settling connubial differences;
and if it occurred to her at this juncture, it is a satisfactory proof
of the theory of atavism.

Pel intended to see this domestic tragedy through to the end, and
accordingly took another brief trip in costume the very next week,
hoping to be the witness of a scene of blood and carnage. But Mrs. Todd
did not stir from her house, although he was confident she had seen "my
lady green-sleeves" from her post at the window. Puzzled by her apathy,
and much disappointed in her temper, he took off the dress, and,
climbing up in front, rode to Moderation, where he received an urgent
invitation to go over to the county fair at Gorham. The last idea was
always the most captivating to Pel, and he departed serenely for a stay
of several days without so much luggage as a hairbrush. His mother's
best clothespin basket, to say nothing of its contents, appeared at this
juncture to be an unexpected incumbrance; so on the spur of the moment
he handed it up to Jerry just as the stage was starting, saying, "If
Mis' Todd has a brash to-night, you can clear yourself by showing her
this basket, but for massy sakes don't lay it on to me! You can stan' it
better'n I can,--you 're more used to it!"

Jerry took the basket, and when he was well out on the road he looked
inside and saw a bright green calico wrapper, a white cape bonnet, a
white "fall veil," and a pair of white cotton gloves. He had ample time
for reflection, for it was a hot day, and though he drove slowly, the
horses were sweating at every pore. Pel Frost, then, must have overheard
his wife's storm of reproaches, perhaps even her threats of violence.
It had come to this, that he was the village laughing-stock, a butt of
ridicule at the store and tavern.

Now, two years before this, Jerry Todd had for the first and only time
in his married life "put his foot down." Mrs. Todd had insisted on
making him a suit of clothes much against his wishes. When finished she
put them on him almost by main force, though his plaintive appeals would
have melted any but a Stover-of-Scarboro heart. The stuff was a large
plaid, the elbows and knees came in the wrong places, the seat was lined
with enameled cloth, and the sleeves cut him in the armholes.

Mr. Todd said nothing for a moment, but the pent-up slavery of years
stirred in him, and, mounting to his brain, gave him a momentary courage
that resembled intoxication. He retired, took off the suit, hung it over
his arm, and, stalking into the sitting-room in his undergarments,
laid it on the table before his astonished spouse, and, thumping it
dramatically, said firmly, "I--will--not--wear--them--clo'es!" whereupon
he fell into silence again and went to bed.

The joke of the matter was, that, all unknown to himself, he had
absolutely frightened Mrs. Todd. If only he could have realized the
impressiveness and the thorough success of his first rebellion! But
if he had realized it he could not have repeated it often, for so much
virtue went out of him on that occasion that he felt hardly able to
drive the stage for days afterward.

"I shall have to put down my foot agin," he said to himself on the
eventful morning when Pel presented him with the basket. "Dern my luck,
I've got to do it agin, when I ain't hardly got over the other time."
So, after an hour's plotting and planning, he made some purchases in
Biddeford and started on his return trip. He was very low in his mind,
thinking, if his wife really meditated upon warfare, she was likely to
inspect the stage that night, but giving her credit in his inmost heart
for too much common sense to use a broomstick,--a woman with her tongue!

The Midnight Cry rattled on lumberingly. Its route had been shortened,
and Mrs. Todd wanted its name changed to something less outlandish, such
as the Rising Sun, or the Breaking Dawn, or the High Noon, but her idea
met with no votaries; it had been, was, and ever should be, the Midnight
Cry, no matter what time it set out or got back. It had seen its best
days, Jerry thought, and so had he, for that matter. Yet he had been
called "a likely feller" when he married the Widder Bixby, or rather
when she married him. Well, the mischief was done; all that remained was
to save a remnant of his self-respect, and make an occasional dash for
liberty.

He did all his errands with his usual care, dropping a blue ribbon for
Doxy Morton's Sunday hat, four cents' worth of gum-camphor for Almira
Berry, a spool of cotton for Mrs. Wentworth, and a pair of "galluses"
for Living Bean. He finally turned into the "back-nippin'" road from
Bonny Eagle to Limington, and when he was within forty rods of his own
house he stopped to water his horses. If he feared a scene he had good
reason, for as the horses climbed the crest of the long hill the lady in
green was by his side on the box. He looked anxiously ahead, and there,
in a hedge of young alder bushes, he saw something stirring, and, unless
he was greatly mistaken, a birch broom lay on the ground near the hedge.

Notwithstanding these danger signals, Jerry's arm encircled the plump
waist of the lady in green, and, emboldened by the shades of twilight,
his lips sought the identical spot under the white "fall veil" where
her incendiary mouth might be supposed to lurk, quite "fit for treasons,
stratagems, and spoils." This done, he put on the brake and headed his
horses toward the fence. He was none too soon, for the Widder Bixby,
broom in hand, darted out from the alders and approached the stage with
objurgations which, had she rated them at their proper value, needed
no supplement in the way of blows. Jerry gave one terror-stricken
look, wound his reins round the whipstock, and, leaping from his seat,
disappeared behind a convenient tree.

At this moment of blind rage Mrs. Todd would have preferred to chastise
both her victims at once; but, being robbed of one by Jerry's cowardly
flight, her weapon descended upon the other with double force. There was
no lack of courage here at least. Whether the lady in green was borne up
by the consciousness of virtue, whether she was too proud to retreat,
or whatever may have been her animating reason, the blow fell, yet she
stood her ground and gave no answering shriek. Enraged as much by her
rival's cool resistance as by her own sense of injury, the Widder
Bixby aimed full at the bonnet beneath which were the charms that
had befuddled Jerry Todd's brain. To blast the fatal beauty that had
captivated her wedded husband was the Widder Bixby's idea, and the broom
descended. A shower of seeds and pulp, a copious spattering of pumpkin
juice, and the lady in green fell resistlessly into her assailant's
arms; her straw body, her wooden arms and pumpkin head, decorating the
earth at her feet! Mrs. Todd stared helplessly at the wreck she
had made, not altogether comprehending the ruse that had led to her
discomfiture, but fully conscious that her empire was shaken to its
foundations. She glanced in every direction, and then hurling the
hateful green-and-white livery into the stage, she gathered up all
traces of the shameful fray, and sweeping them into her gingham apron
ran into the house in a storm of tears and baffled rage.

Jerry stayed behind the tree for some minutes, and when the coast was
clear he mounted the seat and drove to the store and the stable. When
he had put up his horses he went into the shed, took off his boots
as usual, but, despite all his philosophy, broke into a cold sweat of
terror as he crossed the kitchen threshold. "I can't stand many more
of these times when I put my foot down," he thought, "they're too
weakening!"

But he need not have feared. There was a good supper under the mosquito
netting on the table, and, most unusual luxury, a pot of hot tea. Mrs.
Todd had gone to bed and left him a pot of tea!

Which was the more eloquent apology!

Jerry never referred to the lady in green, then or afterwards; he was
willing to let well enough alone; but whenever his spouse passed a
certain line, which, being a Stover of Scarboro, she was likely to do
about once in six months, he had only to summon his recreant courage and
glance meaningly behind the kitchen door, where the birch broom hung
on a nail. It was a simple remedy to outward appearances, but made his
declining years more comfortable. I can hardly believe that he ever
took Pel Frost into his confidence, but Pel certainly was never more
interesting to the loafers' bench than when he told the story of the
eventful trip of the Midnight Cry and "the breaking in of the Widder
Bixby."


NOTES:

1. On page 20, reentered is spelled with diaeresis over the second "e".

2. On pages 153 & 154 the verses beginning respectively "Rebel mourner"
and "This gro-o-oanin' world" are accompanied with staves of music in
the treble clef.

========================================
========================================

THE FLAG-RAISING


by

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN




CONTENTS

   I. A DIFFERENCE IN HEARTS
  II. REBECCA'S POINT OF VIEW
 III. WISDOM'S WAYS
  IV. THE SAVING OF THE COLORS
   V. THE STATE O' MAINE




I

A DIFFERENCE IN HEARTS

"I DON' know as I cal'lated to be the makin' of any child," Miranda had
said as she folded Aurelia's letter and laid it in the light-stand
drawer.  "I s'posed of course Aurelia would send us the one we asked
for, but it's just like her to palm off that wild young one on somebody
else."

"You remember we said that Rebecca, or even Jenny might come, in case
Hannah could n't," interposed Jane.

"I know we did, but we hadn't any notion it would turn out that way,"
grumbled Miranda.

"She was a mite of a thing when we saw her three years ago," ventured
Jane; "she's had time to improve."

"And time to grow worse!"

"Won't it be kind of a privilege to put her on the right track?" asked
Jane timidly.

"I don' know about the privilege part; it'll be considerable work, I
guess. If her mother hasn't got her on the right track by now, she
won't take to it herself all of a sudden."

This depressed and depressing frame of mind had lasted until the
eventful day dawned on which Rebecca was to arrive.

"If she makes as much work after she comes as she has before, we might
as well give up hope of ever gettin' any rest," sighed Miranda as she
hung the dish towels on the barberry bushes at the side door.

"But we should have had to clean house, Rebecca or no Rebecca," urged
Jane; "and I can't see why you've scrubbed and washed and baked as you
have for that one child, nor why you've about bought out Watson's stock
of dry goods."

"I know Aurelia if you don't," responded Miranda. "I've seen her house,
and I've seen that batch o' children, wearin' one another's clothes and
never carin' whether they had 'em on right side out or not; I know what
they've had to live and dress on, and so do you. That child will like
as not come here with a bundle o' things borrowed from the rest o' the
family. She'll have Hannah's shoes and John's undershirts and Mark's
socks most likely. I suppose she never had a thimble on her finger in
her life, but she'll know the feelin' o' one before she's been here
many days. I've bought a piece of unbleached muslin and a piece o'
brown gingham for her to make up; that'll keep her busy. Of course she
won't pick up anything after herself; she probably never saw a duster,
and she'll be as hard to train into our ways as if she was a heathen."

"She'll make a dif'rence," acknowledged Jane, "but she may turn out
more biddable than we think."

"She'll mind when she's spoken to, biddable or not," remarked Miranda
with a shake of the last towel.

Miranda Sawyer had a heart, of course, but she had never used it for
any other purpose than the pumping and circulating of blood. She was
just, conscientious, economical, industrious; a regular attendant at
church and Sunday-school, and a member of the State Missionary and
Bible societies, but in the presence of all these chilly virtues you
longed for one warm little fault, or lacking that, one likable failing,
something to make you sure that she was thoroughly alive. She had never
had any education other than that of the neighborhood district school,
for her desires and ambitions had all pointed to the management of the
house, the farm, and the dairy. Jane, on the other hand, had gone to an
academy, and also to a boarding-school for young ladies; so had
Aurelia; and after all the years that had elapsed there was still a
slight difference in language and in manner between the elder and the
two younger sisters.

Jane, too, had had the inestimable advantage of a sorrow; not the
natural grief at the loss of her aged father and mother, for she had
been resigned to let them go; but something far deeper. She was engaged
to marry young, Tom Carter, who had nothing to marry on, it is true,
but who was sure to have, some time or other. Then the war broke out.
Tom enlisted at the first call. Up to that time Jane had loved him with
a  quiet, friendly sort of affection, and had given her country a mild
emotion of the same sort. But the strife, the danger, the anxiety of
the time, set new currents of feeling in motion. Life became something
other than the three meals a day, the round of cooking, washing,
sewing, and churchgoing. Personal gossip vanished from the village
conversation. Big things took the place of trifling ones,--sacred
sorrows of wives and mothers, pangs of fathers and husbands,
self-denials, sympathies, new desire to bear one another's burdens. Men
and women grew fast in those days of the nation's trouble and danger,
and Jane awoke from the vague dull dream she had hitherto called life
to new hopes, new fears, new purposes. Then after a year's anxiety, a
year when one never looked in the newspaper without dread and sickness
of suspense, came the telegram saying that Tom was wounded; and without
so much as asking Miranda's leave, she packed her trunk and started for
the South. She was in time to hold Tom's hand through hours of pain; to
show him for once the heart of a prim New England girl when it is
ablaze with love and grief; to put her arms about him so that he could
have a home to die in, and that was all;--all, but it served.

It carried her through weary months of nursing--nursing of other
soldiers for Tom's dear sake; it sent her home a better woman; and
though she had never left Riverboro in all the years that lay between,
and had grown into the counterfeit presentment of her sister and of all
other thin, spare, New England spinsters, it was something of a
counterfeit, and underneath was still the faint echo of that wild
heartbeat of her girlhood. Having learned the trick of beating and
loving and suffering, the poor faithful heart persisted, although it
lived on memories and carried on its sentimental operations mostly in
secret.

"You're soft, Jane," said Miranda once; "you allers was soft, and you
allers will be. If't wa'n't for me keeping you stiffened up, I b'lieve
you'd leak out o' the house into the dooryard."

It was already past the appointed hour for Mr. Cobb and his coach to be
lumbering down the street.

"The stage ought to be here," said Miranda, glancing nervously at the
tall clock for the twentieth time. "I guess everything's done. I've
tacked up two thick towels back of her washstand and put a mat under
her slop-jar; but children are awful hard on furniture. I expect we
sha'n't know this house a year from now." Jane's frame of mind was
naturally depressed and timorous, having been affected by Miranda's
gloomy presages of evil to come. The only difference between the
sisters in this matter was that while Miranda only wondered how they
could endure Rebecca, Jane had flashes of inspiration in which she
wondered how Rebecca would endure them. It was in one of these flashes
that she ran up the back stairs to put a vase of apple blossoms and a
red tomato-pincushion on Rebecca's bureau.

The stage rumbled to the side door of the brick house, and Mr. Cobb
handed Rebecca out like a real lady passenger. She alighted with great
circumspection, put a bunch of flowers in her aunt Miranda's hand, and
received her salute; it could hardly be called a kiss without injuring
the fair name of that commodity. "You need n't 'a'bothered to bring
flowers," remarked that gracious and tactful lady; "the garden's always
full of 'em here when it comes time."

Jane then kissed Rebecca, giving a somewhat better imitation of the
real thing than her sister.

"Put the trunk in the entry, Jeremiah, and we'll get it carried
upstairs this afternoon," she said.

"I'll take it up for ye now, if ye say the word, girls."

"No, no; don't leave the horses; somebody'll be comin' past, and we can
call 'em in."

"Well, good-by, Rebecca; good-day, Mirandy 'n' Jane.  You've got a
lively little girl there. I guess she'll be a first-rate company
keeper."

Miss Sawyer shuddered openly at the adjective "lively" as applied to a
child; her belief being that though children might be seen, if
absolutely necessary, they certainly should never be heard if she could
help it. "We're not much used to noise, Jane and me," she remarked
acidly.

Mr. Cobb saw that he had spoken indiscreetly, but he was too unused to
argument to explain himself readily, so he drove away, trying to think
by what safer word than "lively" he might have described his
interesting little passenger.

"I'll take you up and show you your room, Rebecca," Miss Miranda said.
"Shut the mosquito nettin' door tight behind you, so's to keep the
flies out; it ain't fly time yet, but I want you to start right; take
your parcel along with you and then you won't have to come down for it;
always make your head save your heels. Rub your feet on that braided
rug; hang your hat and cape in the entry as you go past."

"It's my best hat," said Rebecca.

"Take it upstairs then and put it in the clothes-press; but I shouldn't
'a' thought you'd 'a' worn your best hat on the stage."

"It's my only hat," explained Rebecca. "My every-day hat was n't good
enough to bring. Sister Fanny's going to finish it."

"Lay your parasol in the entry closet."

"Do you mind if I keep it in my room, please? It always seems safer."

"There ain't any thieves hereabouts, and if there was, I guess they
wouldn't make for your sunshade; but come along. Remember to always go
up the back way; we don't use the front stairs on account o' the
carpet; take care o' the turn and don't ketch your foot; look to your
right and go in. When you've washed your face and hands and brushed
your hair you can come down, and by and by we'll unpack your trunk and
get you settled before supper. Ain't you got your dress on hind side
foremost?"

Rebecca drew her chin down and looked at the row of smoked pearl
buttons running up and down the middle of her flat little chest. "Hind
side foremost?  Oh, I see! No, that's all right. If you have seven
children you can't keep buttonin' and unbuttonin' 'em all the
time--they have to do themselves. We're always buttoned up in front at
our house. Mira's only three, but she's buttoned up in front, too."

Miranda said nothing as she closed the door, but her looks were more
eloquent than words.

Rebecca stood perfectly still in the centre of the floor and looked
about her. There was a square of oilcloth in front of each article of
furniture and a drawn-in rug beside the single four poster, which was
covered with a fringed white dimity counterpane.

Everything was as neat as wax, but the ceilings were much higher than
Rebecca was accustomed to. It was a north room, and the window, which
was long and narrow, looked out on the back buildings and the barn.

It was not the room, which was far more comfortable than Rebecca's own
at Sunnybrook Farm, nor the lack of view, nor yet the long journey, for
she was not conscious of weariness; it was not the fear of a strange
place, for she adored new places and new sensations; it was because of
some curious blending of uncomprehended emotions that Rebecca stood her
beloved pink sunshade in the corner, tore off her best hat, flung it on
the bureau with the porcupine quills on the under side, and stripping
down the dimity spread, precipitated herself into the middle of the bed
and pulled the counterpane over her head.

In a moment the door opened with a clatter of the latch.

Knocking was a refinement quite unknown in Riverboro, and if it had
been heard of, it would never have been wasted on a child. Miss Miranda
entered, and as her eye wandered about the vacant room, it fell upon a
white and tempestuous ocean of counterpane, an ocean breaking into
strange movements of wave and crest and billow.

"Rebecca!"

The tone in which the word was voiced gave it all the effect of having
been shouted from the housetops.

A dark ruffled head and two frightened eyes appeared above the dimity
spread.

"What are you layin' on your good bed in the daytime for, messin' up
the feathers, and dirtyin' the comforter with your dusty boots?"

Rebecca rose guiltily. There seemed no excuse to make. Her offense was
beyond explanation or apology.

"I'm sorry, Aunt Mirandy-something came over me; I don't know what."

"Well, if it comes over you very soon again we'll have to find out what
't is. Spread your bed up smooth this minute, for 'Bijah Flagg's
bringin' your trunk upstairs, and I wouldn't let him see such a
cluttered-up room for anything; he'd tell it all over town."

When Mr. Cobb had put up his horses that night he carried a kitchen
chair to the side of his wife, who was sitting on the back porch.

"I brought a little Randall girl down on the stage from Maplewood
to-day, mother. She's related to the Sawyer girls an' is goin' to live
with 'em," he said, as he sat down and began to whittle. "She's
Aurelia's child, the sister that ran away with Susan Randall's son just
before we come here to live."

"How old a child?"

"Bout ten, or somewhere along there, an' small for her age; but land!
she might be a hundred to hear her talk! She kept me jumpin' tryin' to
answer her! Of all the queer children I ever come across she's the
queerest. She ain't no beauty--her face is all eyes; but if she ever
grows up to them eyes an' fills out a little she'll make folks stare.
Land, mother! I wish 't you could 'a' heard her talk."

"I don't see what she had to talk about, a child like that, to a
stranger," replied Mrs. Cobb.

"Stranger or no stranger, 't would n't make no difference to her. She'd
talk to a pump or a grindstone; she'd talk to herself ruther 'n keep
still."

"What did she talk about?

"Blamed if I can repeat any of it. She kept me so surprised I didn't
have my wits about me. She had a little pink sunshade--it kind o'
looked like a doll's umberella, 'n' she clung to it like a burr to a
woolen stockin'. I advised her to open it up--the sun was so hot; but
she said no, 't would fade, an' she tucked it under her dress.  'It's
the dearest thing in life to me,' says she, 'but it's a dreadful care.'
Them's the very words, an' it's all the words I remember.  'It's the
dearest thing in life to me, but it's an awful care!'"--here Mr. Cobb
laughed aloud as he tipped his chair back against the side of the
house. "There was another thing, but I can't get it right exactly. She
was talkin' 'bout the circus parade an' the snake charmer in a gold
chariot, an' says she, 'She was so beautiful beyond compare, Mr. Cobb,
that it made you have lumps in your throat to look at her.' She'll be
comin' over to see you, mother, an' you can size her up for yourself, I
don' know how she'll git on with Mirandy Sawyer--poor little soul!"

This doubt was more or less openly expressed in Riverboro, which,
however, had two opinions on the subject; one that it was a most
generous thing in the Sawyer girls to take one of Aurelia's children to
educate, the other that the education would be bought at a price wholly
out of proportion to its real value.

Rebecca's first letters to her mother would seem to indicate that she
cordially coincided with the latter view of the situation.



II

REBECCA'S POINT OF VIEW

DEAR MOTHER,--I am safely here. My dress was not much tumbled and Aunt
Jane helped me press it out. I like Mr. Cobb very much. He chews
tobacco but throws newspapers straight up to the doors of the houses. I
rode outside with him a little while, but got inside before I got to
Aunt Miranda's house. I did not want to, but thought you would like it
better. Miranda is such a long word that I think I will say Aunt M. and
Aunt J. in my Sunday letters. Aunt J. has given me a dictionary to look
up all the hard words in. It takes a good deal of time and I am glad
people can talk without stoping to spell. It is much eesier to talk
than write and much more fun. The brick house looks just the same as
you have told us. The parler is splendid and gives YOU creeps and
chills when you look in the door. The furnature is ellergant too, and
all the rooms but there are no good sitting-down places exsept in the
kitchen. The same cat is here but they never save the kittens and the
cat is too old to play with. Hannah told me once you ran away to be
married to father and I can see it would be nice. If Aunt M. would run
away I think I should like to live with Aunt J. She does not hate me as
bad as Aunt M. does.  Tell Mark he can have my paint box, but I should
like him to keep the red cake in case I come home again. I hope Hannah
and John do mot get tired doing my work.

Your afectionate friend

REBECCA.

P. S. Please give the piece of poetry to John because he likes my
poetry even when it is not very good. This piece is not very good but
it is true but I hope you won't mind what is in it as you ran away.

  This house is dark and dull and dreer
  No light doth shine from far or near
  Its like the tomb.

  And those of us who live herein
  Are almost as dead as serrafim
  Though not as good.

  My guardian angel is asleep
  At leest he doth not virgil keep
  Ah! Woe is me!

  Then give me back my lonely farm
  Where none alive did wish me harm
  Dear home of youth!

P.S. again. I made the poetry like a piece in a book but could not get
it right at first. You see "tomb" and "good" do not sound well together
but I wanted to say "tomb" dreadfully and as serrafim are always good I
could n't take that out. I have made it over now. It does not say my
thoughts as well but think it is more right. Give the best one to John
as he keeps them in a box with his bird's eggs. This is the best one.

SUNDAY THOUGHTS

BY

REBECCA ROWENA RANDALL

  This house is dark and dull and drear
  No light doth shine from far or near
  Nor ever could.

  And those of us who live herein
  Are most as dead as seraphim
  Though not as good.

  My guardian angel is asleep
  At least he doth no vigil keep
  But far doth roam.

  Then give me back my lonely farm
  Where none alive did wish me harm,
  Dear childhood home!

DEAR MOTHER,--I am thrilling with unhappyness this morning. I got that
out of a book called Cora The Doctor's Wife. Cora's husband's mother
was very cross and unfeeling to her like Aunt M. to me. I wish Hannah
had come instead of me for it was Hannah that Aunt M. wanted and she is
better than I am and does not answer back so quick. Are there any
peaces of my buff calico. Aunt J. wants enough to make a new waste,
button behind, so I wont look so outlandish. The stiles are quite
pretty in Riverboro and those at Meeting quite ellergant, more so than
in Temperance.

  This town is stilish, gay and fair,
  And full of wellthy riches rare,
  But I would pillow on my arm
  The thought of my sweet Brookside Farm.

School is pretty good. The Teacher can answer more questions than the
Temperance one but not so many as I can ask. I am smarter than all the
girls but one but not so smart as two boys. Emma Jane can add and
subtract in her head like a streek of lightning and knows the speling
book right through but has no thoughts of any kind. She is in the Third
Reader but does not like stories in books. I am in the Sixth Reader but
just because I cannot say the seven multiplication Table Miss Dearborn
threttens to put me in the baby primer class with Elijah and Elisha
Simpson little twins.

  Sore is my heart and bent my stubborn pride,
  With Lijah and with Lisha am I tied,
  My soul recoyles like Cora Doctor's Wife,
  Like her I feer I cannot bare this life.

I am going to try for the speling prize but fear I cannot get it. I
would not care but wrong speling looks dreadful in poetry. Last Sunday
when I found seraphim in the dictionary I was ashamed I had made it
serrafim but seraphim is not a word you can guess at like another long
one, outlandish, in this letter which spells itself. Miss Dearborn says
use the words you can spell and if you cant spell seraphim make angel
do but angels are not just the same as seraphims.  Seraphims are
brighter whiter and have bigger wings and I think are older and longer
dead than angels which are just freshly dead and after a long time in
heaven around the great white throne grow to be seraphims.

I sew on brown gingham dresses every afternoon when Emma Jane and the
Simpsons are playing house or running on the Logs when their mothers do
not know it. Their mothers are afraid they will drown and aunt M. is
afraid I will wet my clothes so will not let me either. I can play from
half past four to supper and after supper a little bit and Saturday
afternoons. I am glad our cow has a calf and it is spotted. It is going
to be a good year for apples and hay so you and John will be glad and
we can pay a little more morgage. Miss Dearborn asked us what is the
object of edducation and I said the object of mine was to help pay off
the morgage. She told Aunt M. and I had to sew extra for punishment
because she says a morgage is disgrace like stealing or smallpox and it
will be all over town that we have one on our farm. Emma Jane is not
morgaged nor Richard Carter nor Dr. Winship but the Simpsons are.

  Rise my soul, strain every nerve,
  Thy morgage to remove,
  Gain thy mother's heartfelt thanks
  Thy family's grateful love.

Pronounce family quick or it won't sound right.

Your loving little friend
  REBECCA.


DEAR JOHN,--YOU remember when we tide the new dog in the barn how he
bit the rope and howled. I am just like him only the brick house is the
barn and I can not bite Aunt M. because I must be grateful and
edducation is going to be the making of me and help you pay off the
mortgage when we grow up.

Your loving
  BECKY.



III.

WISDOM'S WAYS

THE day of Rebecca's arrival had been Friday, and on the Monday
following she began her education at the school which was in Riverboro
Centre, about a mile distant. Miss Sawyer borrowed a neighbor's horse
and wagon and drove her to the schoolhouse, interviewing the teacher,
Miss Dearborn, arranging for books, and generally starting the child on
the path that was to lead to boundless knowledge.

Rebecca walked to school after the first morning. She loved this part
of the day's programme. When the dew was not too heavy and the weather
was fair there was a short cut through the woods. She turned off the
main road, crept through Joshua Woodman's bars, waved away Mrs.
Carter's cows, trod the short grass of the pasture, with its well-worn
path running through gardens of buttercups and whiteweed, and groves of
boxberry leaves and sweet fern. She descended a little hill, jumped
from stone to stone across a woodland brook, startling the drowsy
frogs, who were always winking and blinking in the morning sun. Then
came the "woodsy bit," with her feet pressing the slippery carpet of
brown pine needles; the woodsy bit so full of dewy morning
surprises,--fungous growths of brilliant orange and crimson springing
up around the stumps of dead trees, beautiful things born in a single
night; and now and then the miracle of a little clump of waxen Indian
pipes, seen just quickly enough to be saved from her careless tread.
Then she climbed a stile, went through a grassy meadow, slid under
another pair of bars, and came out into the road again, having gained
nearly half a mile.

How delicious it all was! Rebecca clasped her Quackenbos's Grammar and
Greenleaf's Arithmetic with a joyful sense of knowing her lessons. Her
dinner pail swung from her right hand, and she had a blissful
consciousness of the two soda biscuits spread with butter and syrup,
the baked cup-custard, the doughnut, and the square of hard
gingerbread. Sometimes she said whatever "piece" she was going to speak
on the next Friday afternoon.

"A soldier of the Legion lay dying in Algiers, There was lack of
woman's nursing, there was dearth of woman's tears."

How she loved the swing and the sentiment of it! How her young voice
quivered whenever she came to the refrain:--

"But we'll meet no more at Bingen, dear Bingen on the Rhine."

It always sounded beautiful in her ears, as she sent her tearful little
treble into the clear morning air.

Another early favorite (for we must remember that Rebecca's only
knowledge of the great world of poetry consisted of the selections in
vogue in the old school Readers) was:--

  "Woodman, spare that tree!
  Touch not a single bough!
  In youth it sheltered me,
  And I'll protect it now."

When Emma Jane Perkins walked through the "short cut" with her, the two
children used to render this with appropriate dramatic action. Emma
Jane always chose to be the woodman because she had nothing to do but
raise on high an imaginary axe. On the one occasion when she essayed
the part of the tree's romantic protector, she represented herself as
feeling "so awful foolish" that she refused to undertake it again, much
to the secret delight of Rebecca, who found the woodman's role much too
tame for her vaulting ambition. She reveled in the impassioned appeal
of the poet, and implored the ruthless woodman to be as brutal as
possible with the axe, so that she might properly put greater spirit
into her lines. One morning, feeling more frisky than usual, she fell
upon her knees and wept in the woodman's petticoat. Curiously enough,
her sense of proportion rejected this as soon as it was done.

"That wasn't right, it was silly, Emma Jane; but I'll tell you where it
might come in--in 'Give me Three Grains of Corn.' You be the mother,
and I'll be the famishing Irish child. For pity's sake put the axe
down; you are not the woodman any longer!"

"What'll I do with my hands, then?" asked Emma Jane.

"Whatever you like," Rebecca answered wearily; "you're just a
mother--that's all. What does your mother do with her hands? Nowhere
goes!

  "'Give me three grains of corn, mother,
  Only three grains of corn,
  It will keep the little life I have
  Till the coming of the morn.'"

This sort of thing made Emma Jane nervous and fidgety, but she was
Rebecca's slave and obeyed her lightest commands. At the last pair of
bars the two girls were sometimes met by a detachment of the Simpson
children, who lived in a black house with a red door and a red barn
behind, on the Blueberry Plains road. Rebecca felt an interest in the
Simpsons from the first, because there were so many of them and they
were so patched and darned, just like her own brood at the home farm.

The little schoolhouse with its flagpole on top and its two doors in
front, one for boys and the other for girls, stood on the crest of a
hill, with rolling fields and meadows on one side, a stretch of pine
woods on the other, and the river glinting and sparkling in the
distance. It boasted no attractions within. All was as bare and ugly
and uncomfortable as it well could be, for the villages along the river
expended so much money in repairing and rebuilding bridges that they
were obliged to be very economical in school privileges. The teacher's
desk and chair stood on a platform in one corner; there was an uncouth
stove, never blackened oftener than once a year, a map of the United
States, two blackboards, a ten-quart tin pail of water and long-handled
dipper on a corner shelf, and wooden desks and benches for the
scholars, who only numbered twenty in Rebecca's time. The seats were
higher in the back of the room, and the more advanced and longer-legged
pupils sat there, the position being greatly to be envied, as they were
at once nearer to the windows and farther from the teacher.

There were classes of a sort, although nobody, broadly speaking,
studied the same book with anybody else, or had arrived at the same
degree of proficiency in any one branch of learning. Rebecca in
particular was so difficult to classify that Miss Dearborn at the end
of a fortnight gave up the attempt altogether. She read with Dick
Carter and Living Perkins, who were fitting for the academy; recited
arithmetic with lisping little "Thuthan Thimpthon;" geography with Emma
Jane Perkins, and grammar after school hours to Miss Dearborn alone.
Full to the brim as she was of clever thoughts and quaint fancies, she
made at first but a poor hand at composition. The labor of writing and
spelling, with the added difficulties of punctuation and capitals,
interfered sadly with the free expression of ideas. She took history
with Alice Robinson's class, which was attacking the subject of the
Revolution, while Rebecca was bidden to begin with the discovery of
America. In a week she had mastered the course of events up to the
Revolution, and in ten days had arrived at Yorktown, where the class
had apparently established summer quarters. Then finding that extra
effort would only result in her reciting with the oldest Simpson boy,
she deliberately held herself back, for wisdom's ways were not those of
pleasantness nor her paths those of peace if one were compelled to
tread them in the company of Seesaw Simpson. Samuel Simpson was
generally called Seesaw, because of his difficulty in making up his
mind. Whether it were a question of fact, of spelling, or of date, of
going swimming or fishing, of choosing a book in the Sunday-school
library or a stick of candy at the village store, he had no sooner
determined on one plan of action than his wish fondly reverted to the
opposite one. Seesaw was pale, flaxen haired, blue eyed, round
shouldered, and given to stammering when nervous. Perhaps because of
his very weakness, Rebecca's decision of character had a fascination
for him, and although she snubbed him to the verge of madness, he could
never keep his eyes away from her. The force with which she tied her
shoe when the lacing came undone, the flirt over shoulder she gave her
black braid when she was excited or warm, her manner of studying,--book
on desk, arms folded, eyes fixed on the opposite wall,--all had an
abiding charm for Seesaw Simpson. When, having obtained permission, she
walked to the water pail in the corner and drank from the dipper,
unseen forces dragged Seesaw from his seat to go and drink after her.
It was not only that there was something akin to association and
intimacy in drinking next, but there was the fearful joy of meeting her
in transit and receiving a cold and disdainful look from her wonderful
eyes.

On a certain warm day in summer Rebecca's thirst exceeded the bounds of
propriety. When she asked a third time for permission to quench it at
the common fountain Miss Dearborn nodded "yes," but lifted her eyebrows
unpleasantly as Rebecca neared the desk. As she replaced the dipper
Seesaw promptly raised his hand, and Miss Dearborn indicated a weary
affirmative.

"What is the matter with you, Rebecca?" she asked.

"It is a very thirsty morning," answered Rebecca.

There seemed nothing humorous about this reply, which was merely the
statement of a fact, but an irrepressible titter ran through the
school.  Miss Dearborn did not enjoy jokes neither made nor understood
by herself, and her face flushed.

"I think you had better stand by the pail for five minutes, Rebecca; it
may help you to control your thirst."

Rebecca's heart fluttered. She to stand in the corner by the water pail
and be stared at by all the scholars! She unconsciously made a gesture
of angry dissent and moved a step nearer her seat, but was arrested by
Miss Dearborn's command in a still firmer voice.

"Stand by the pail, Rebecca!--Samuel Simpson how many times have you
asked for water already?"

"This is the f-f-fourth."

"Don't touch the dipper, please. The school has done nothing but drink
all day; it has had no time whatever to study. What is the matter with
you, Samuel?"

"It is a v-very thirsty m-morning," remarked Samuel, looking at Rebecca
while the school tittered.

"I judged so. Stand by the other side of the pail, with Rebecca."
Rebecca's head was bowed with shame and wrath. Life looked too black a
thing to be endured. The punishment was bad enough, but to be coupled
in correction with Seesaw Simpson was beyond human endurance.

Singing was the last exercise in the afternoon, and Minnie Smellie
chose "Shall we Gather at the River?" It was a curious choice and
seemed to hold some secret association with the situation and general
progress of events; or at any rate there was apparently some obscure
reason for the energy and vim with which the scholars looked at the
empty water pail as they shouted the choral invitation again and
again:--

  "Shall we gather at the river,
  The beautiful, the beautiful river?"

Miss Dearborn stole a look at Rebecca's bent head, and was frightened.
The child's face was pale save for two red spots glowing on her checks.
Tears hung on her lashes; her breath came and went quickly, and the
hand that held her pocket handkerchief trembled like a leaf.

"You may go to your seat, Rebecca," said Miss Dearborn at the end of
the first song. "Samuel, stay where you are till the close of school.
And let me tell you, scholars, that I asked Rebecca to stand by the
pail only to break up this habit of incessant drinking, which is
nothing but empty-mindedness and desire to walk to and fro over the
floor. Every time Rebecca has asked for a drink to-day the whole school
has gone to the pail like a regiment. She is really thirsty, and I dare
say I ought to have punished you for following her example, not her for
setting it. What shall we sing now, Alice?"

"'The Old Oaken Bucket,' please."

"Think of something dry, Alice, and change the subject. Yes, 'The Star
Spangled Banner' if you like, or anything else." Rebecca sank into her
seat and pulled the singing book from her desk. Miss Dearborn's public
explanation had shifted some of the weight from her heart, and she felt
a trifle raised in her self-esteem.

Under cover of the general relaxation of singing, offerings of
respectful sympathy began to make their appearance at her shrine.
Living Perkins, who could not sing, dropped a piece of maple sugar in
her lap as he passed her on his way to the blackboard to draw the map
of Maine, while Alice Robinson rolled a perfectly new slate pencil over
the floor with her foot until it reached Rebecca's place.

Altogether existence grew brighter, and when she was left alone with
the teacher for her grammar lesson she had nearly recovered her
equanimity, which was more than Miss Dearborn had. The last clattering
foot had echoed through the hall, Seesaw's backward glance of penitence
had been met and answered defiantly by one of cold disdain.

"Rebecca, I am afraid I punished you more than I meant," said Miss
Dearborn, who was only eighteen herself, and in her year of teaching
country schools had never encountered a child like Rebecca.

"I had n't missed a question this whole day, nor whispered either,"
quavered the culprit; "and I don't think I ought to be shamed just for
drinking."

"You started all the others, or it seemed as if you did. Whatever you
do they all do, whether you laugh, or write notes, or ask to leave the
room, or drink; and it must be stopped."

"Sam Simpson is a copycoat!" stormed Rebecca. "I would n't have minded
standing in the corner alone--that is, not so very much; but I couldn't
bear standing with him."

"I saw that you could n't, and that's the reason I told you to take
your seat, and left him in the corner. Remember that you are a stranger
in the place, and they take more notice of what you do, so you must be
careful. Now let's have our conjugations. Give me the verb 'to be,'
potential mood, past perfect tense."

  "I might have been
  Thou mightst have been
  He might have been
  We might  have been
  You might have been
  They might have been"

"Give me an example, please."

  "I might have been glad
  Thou mightst have been glad
  He, she, or it might have been glad"

"'He' or 'she' might have been glad because they are masculine and
feminine, but could 'it' have been glad?" asked Miss Dearborn, who was
very fond of splitting hairs.

"Why not?" asked Rebecca.

"Because 'it' is neuter gender."

"Could n't we say, 'The kitten might have been glad if it had known it
was not going to be drowned'?"

"Ye-es," Miss Dearborn answered hesitatingly, never very sure of
herself under Rebecca's fire; "but though we often speak of a baby, a
chicken, or a kitten as 'it,' they are really masculine or feminine
gender, not neuter."

Rebecca reflected a long moment and then asked, "Is a hollyhock neuter?"

"Oh yes, of course it is, Rebecca."

"Well, could n't we say, 'The hollyhock might have been glad to see it
rain, but there was a weak little baby bud growing out of its stalk and
it was afraid it might be hurt by the storm; so the big hollyhock was
kind of afraid, instead of being real glad'?"

Miss Dearborn looked puzzled as she answered, "Of course, Rebecca,
hollyhocks could not be sorry, or glad, or afraid, really."

"We can't tell, I s'pose," replied the child; "but I think they are,
anyway. Now what shall I say?"

"The subjunctive mood, past perfect tense of the verb 'to know.'"

  "If I had known
  If thou hadst known
  If he had known
  If we had known
  If you had known
  If they had known"

"Oh, it is the saddest tense," sighed Rebecca with a little a little
break in her voice; "nothing but ifs, ifs, ifs! And it makes you feel
that if they only had known, things might have been better!"

Miss Dearborn had not thought of it before, but on reflection she
believed the subjective mood was a "sad" one and "if" rather a sorry
"part of speech."

"Give me some examples of the subjective, Rebecca, and that will do for
this afternoon," she said.

"If I had not eaten salt mackerel for breakfast I should not have been
thirsty," said Rebecca with an April smile, as she closed her grammar.
"If thou hadst love me truly thou wouldst not have stood me up in the
corner. If Samuel had not loved wickedness he would not have followed
me to the water pail."

"And if Rebecca had loved the rules of the school she would have
controlled her thirst," finished Miss Dearborn with a kiss, and the two
parted friends.



IV

THE SAVING OF THE COLORS

EVEN when Rebecca had left school, having attained the great age of
seventeen and therefore able to look back over a past incredibly long
and full, she still reckoned time not by years, but by certain
important occurrences. Between these epoch-making events certain other
happenings stood out in bold relief against the gray of dull daily
life. There was the coming of the new minister, for though many were
tried only one was chosen; and finally there was the flag-raising, a
festivity that thrilled Riverboro and Edgewood society from centre to
circumference, a festivity that took place just before she entered the
Female Seminary at Wareham and said good-by to kind Miss Dearborn and
the village school.

There must have been other flag-raisings in history,--even the persons
most interested in this particular one would grudgingly have allowed
that much,--but it would have seemed to them improbable that any such
flag-raising, as theirs could twice glorify the same century. Of some
pageants it is tacitly admitted that there can be no duplicates, and
the flag-raising at Riverboro Centre was one of these; so that it is
small wonder if Rebecca chose it as one of the important dates in her
personal almanac. Mrs. Baxter, the new minister's wife, was the being,
under Providence, who had conceived the first idea of the flag. Mrs.
Baxter communicated her patriotic idea of a new flag to the Dorcas
Society, proposing that the women should cut and make it themselves.

"It may not be quite as good as those manufactured in the large
cities," she said, "but we shall be proud to see our home-made flag
flying in the breeze, and it will mean all the more to the young voters
growing up, to remember that their mothers made it with their own
hands."

"How would it do to let some of the girls help?" modestly asked Miss
Dearborn, the Riverboro teacher. "We might chose the best sewers and
let them put in at least a few stitches, so that they can feel they
have a share in it."

"Just the thing!" exclaimed Mrs. Baxter. "We can cut the stripes and
sew them together, and after we have basted on the white stars the
girls can apply them to the blue ground. We must have it ready for the
campaign rally, and we could n't christen it at a better time than in
this presidential year."

In this way the great enterprise was started, and day by day the
preparations went forward in the two villages.

The boys, as future voters and soldiers, demanded an active share in
the proceedings, and were organized by Squire Bean into a fife and drum
corps, so that by day and night martial but most inharmonious music
woke the echoes, and deafened mothers felt their patriotism oozing out
at the soles of their shoes. Dick Carter was made captain, for his
grandfather had a gold medal given him by Queen Victoria for rescuing
three hundred and twenty-six passengers from a sinking British vessel.
Riverboro thought it high time to pay some graceful tribute to Great
Britain in return for her handsome, conduct to Captain Nahum Carter,
and human imagination could contrive nothing more impressive than a
vicarious share in the flag-raising.

Miss Dearborn was to be Columbia and the older girls of the two schools
were to be the States. Such trade in muslins and red, white, and blue
ribbons had never been known since "Watson kep' store," and the number
of brief white petticoats hanging out to bleach would leave caused the
passing stranger to imagine Riverboro a continual dancing-school.

Juvenile virtue, both male and female, reached an almost impossible
height, for parents had only to lift a finger and say, "You shan't go
to the flag-raising!" and the refractory spirit at once armed itself
for new struggles toward the perfect life. Mr. Jeremiah Cobb had
consented to impersonate Uncle Sam, and was to drive Columbia and the
States to the "raising" on the top of his own stage. Meantime the boys
were drilling, the ladies were cutting and basting and stitching, and
the girls were sewing on stars; for the starry part of the spangled
banner was to remain with each of them in turn until she had performed
her share of the work.

It was felt by one and all a fine and splendid service indeed to help
in the making of the flag, and if Rebecca was proud to be of the chosen
ones, so was her Aunt Jane Sawyer, who had taught her all her delicate
stitches.

On a long-looked-for afternoon in August the minister's wife drove up
to the brick-house door, and handed out the great piece of bunting to
Rebecca, who received it in her arms with as much solemnity as if it
had been a child awaiting baptismal rites.

"I'm so glad!" she sighed happily. "I thought it would never come my
turn!"

"You should have had it a week ago, but Huldah Meserve upset the ink
bottle over her star, and we had to baste on another one. You are the
last, though, and then we shall sew the stars and stripes together, and
Seth Strout will get the top ready for hanging. Just think, it won't be
many days before you children will be pulling the rope with all your
strength, the band will be playing, the men will be cheering, and the
new flag will go higher and higher, till the red, white, and blue shows
against the sky!"

Rebecca's eyes fairly blazed. "Shall I 'hem on' my star, or buttonhole
it?" she asked.

"Look at all the others and make the most beautiful stitches you can,
that's all. It is your star, you know, and you can even imagine it is
your state, and try and have it the best of all. If everybody else is
trying to do the same thing with her state, that will make a great
country, won't it?"

Rebecca's eyes spoke glad confirmation of the idea. "My star, my
state!" she repeated joyously. "Oh, Mrs. Baxter, I'll make such fine
stitches you'll, think the white grew out of the blue!"

The new minister's wife looked pleased to see her spark kindle a flame
in the young heart. "You can sew so much of yourself into your star,"
she went on in the glad voice that made her so winsome, "that when you
are an old lady you can put on your specs and find it among all the
others. Good-by! Come up to the parsonage Saturday afternoon; Mr.
Baxter wants to see you."

"Judson, help that dear little genius of a Rebecca all you can!" she
said that night. "I don't know what she may, or may not, come to, some
day; I only wish she were ours! If you could have seen her clasp the
flag tight in her arms and put her cheek against it, and watched the
tears of feeling start in her eyes when I told her that her star was
her state! I kept whispering to myself, "'Covet not thy neighbor's
child!

Daily at four o'clock Rebecca scrubbed her hands almost to the bone,
brushed her hair, and otherwise prepared herself in body, mind, and
spirit for the consecrated labor of sewing on her star. All the time
that her needle cautiously, conscientiously formed the tiny stitches
she was making rhymes "in her head," her favorite achievement being
this:--

  "Your star, my star, all our stars together,
  They make the dear old banner proud
  To float in the bright fall weather."

There was much discussion as to which of the girls should impersonate
the State of Maine, for that was felt to be the highest honor in the
gift of the committee.

Alice Robinson was the prettiest child in the village, but she was very
shy and by no means a general favorite.

Minnie Smellie possessed the handsomest dress and a pair of white
slippers and open-work stockings that nearly carried the day, but she
was not at all the person to select for the central figure on the
platform.

Huldah Meserve was next voted upon, and the fact that if she were not
chosen her father might withdraw his subscription to the brass band
fund was a matter for grave consideration.

"I kind of hate to have such a giggler for the State of Maine; let
Huldah be the Goddess of Liberty," proposed Mrs. Burbank, whose
patriotism was more local than national.

"How would Rebecca Randall do for Maine, and let her speak some of her
verses?" suggested the new minister's wife, who, could she have had her
way, would have given all the prominent parts to Rebecca, from Uncle
Sam down.

So, beauty, fashion, and wealth having been tried and found wanting,
the committee discussed the claims of talent, and it transpired that to
the awestricken Rebecca fell the chief plum in the pudding. It was a
tribute to her gifts that there was no jealousy or envy among the other
girls; they readily conceded her special fitness for the role.

Her life had not been pressed down full to the brim of pleasures, and
she had a sort of distrust of joy in the bud.  Not until she saw it in
full radiance of bloom did she dare embrace it. She had never read any
verse but Byron, Felicia Hemans, bits of "Paradise Lost," and the
selections in the school readers, but she would have agreed heartily
with the poet who said:--

  "Not by appointment do we meet delight
  And joy; they heed not our expectancy;
  But round some corner in the streets of life
  They on a sudden clasp us with a smile."

For many nights before the raising, when she went to her bed, she said
to herself after she had finished her prayers: "It can't be true that
I'm chosen for the State of Maine! It just can't be true! Nobody could
be good enough, but oh, I'll try to be as good as I can! To be going to
Wareham Seminary next week and to be the State of Maine too! Oh! I must
pray hard to God to keep me meek and humble!"

The flag was to be raised on a Tuesday, and on the previous Sunday it
became known to the children that Clara Belle Simpson was coming back
from Acreville, coming to live with Mrs. Fogg and take care of the
baby. Clara Belle was one of Miss Dearborn's original flock, and if she
were left wholly out of the festivities she would be the only girl of
suitable age to be thus slighted; it seemed clear to the juvenile mind,
therefore, that neither she nor her descendants would ever recover from
such a blow. But, under all the circumstances, would she be allowed to
join in the procession? Even Rebecca, the optimistic, feared not, and
the committee confirmed her fears by saying that Abner Simpson's
daughter certainly could not take any prominent part in the ceremony,
but that they hoped Mrs. Fogg would allow her to witness it.

When Abner Simpson, urged by the town authorities, took his wife and
seven children away from Riverboro to Acreville, just over the border
in the next county, Riverboro went to bed leaving its barn and shed
doors unfastened, and drew long breaths of gratitude to Providence.

Of most winning disposition and genial manners, Mr. Simpson had not
that instinctive comprehension of property rights which renders a man a
valuable citizen.

Abner was a most unusual thief, and conducted his operations with a
tact and neighborly consideration none too common in the profession. He
would never steal a man's scythe in haying-time, nor his fur lap-robe
in the coldest of the winter. The picking of a lock offered no
attractions to him; "he wa'n't no burglar," he would have scornfully
asserted. A strange horse and wagon hitched by the roadside was the
most flagrant of his thefts; but it was the small things--the hatchet
or axe on the chopping-block, the tin pans sunning at the side door, a
stray garment bleaching on the grass, a hoe, rake, shovel, or a bag of
early potatoes--that tempted him most sorely; and these appealed to him
not so much for their intrinsic value as because they were so
excellently adapted to "swapping." The swapping was really the
enjoyable part of the procedure, the theft was only a sad but necessary
preliminary; for if Abner himself had been a man of sufficient property
to carry on his business operations independently, it is doubtful if he
would have helped himself so freely to his neighbor's goods.

Riverboro regretted the loss of Mrs. Simpson, who was useful in
scrubbing, cleaning, and washing, and was thought to exercise some
influence over her predatory spouse. There was a story of their early
life together, when they had a farm; a story to the effect that Mrs.
Simpson always rode on every load of hay that her husband took to
Milltown, with the view of keeping him sober through the day. After he
turned out of the country road and approached the metropolis, it was
said that he used to bury the docile lady in the load. He would then
drive on to the scales, have the weight of hay entered in the buyer's
book, take his horses to the stable for feed and water, and when a
favorable opportunity offered he would assist the hot and panting Mrs.
Simpson out of the side or back of the rack, and gallantly brush the
straw from her person.  For this reason it was always asserted that
Abner Simpson sold his wife every time he went to Milltown, but the
story was never fully substantiated, and at all events it was the only
suspected blot on meek Mrs. Simpson's personal reputation.

As for the Simpson children, they were missed chiefly as familiar
figures by the roadside; but Rebecca honestly loved Clara Belle,
notwithstanding her Aunt Miranda's opposition to the intimacy.
Rebecca's curious taste in friends was a source of continual anxiety to
her aunt.

"Anything that's human flesh is good enough for her!" Miranda groaned
to Jane. "She'll ride with the rag-sack-and-bottle peddler just as
quick as she would with the minister; she always sets beside the
barefooted young ones at Sabbath school; and she's forever riggin' and
onriggin' that dirty Simpson baby! She reminds me of a puppy that'll
always go to everybody that'll have him!"

It was thought very creditable to Mrs. Fogg that she sent for Clara
Belle to live with her and go to school part of the year. "She'll be
useful," said Mrs. Fogg, "and she'll be out of her father's way, and so
keep honest; though she's so awful homely I've no fears for her. A girl
with her red hair, freckles, and cross-eyes can't fall into no kind of
sin, I don't believe."

Mrs. Fogg requested that Clara Belle should be started on her journey
from Acreville by train and come the rest of the way by stage, and she
was disturbed to receive word on Sunday that Mr. Simpson had borrowed a
horse from a new acquaintance, and would himself drive the girl from
Acreville to Riverboro, a distance of thirty-five miles. That he would
arrive in their vicinity on the very night before the flag-raising was
thought by Riverboro to be a public misfortune, and several residents
hastily determined to deny themselves a sight of the festivities and
remain watchfully on their own premises.

On Monday afternoon the children were rehearsing their songs at the
meeting-house. As Rebecca came out on the broad wooden steps she
watched Mrs. Peter Meserve's buggy out of sight, for in front, wrapped
in a cotton sheet, lay the precious flag. After a few chattering
good-byes and weather prophecies with the other girls, she started on
her homeward walk, dropping in at the parsonage to read her verses to
the minister.

He welcomed her gladly as she removed her white cotton gloves (hastily
slipped on outside the door, for ceremony) and pushed back the funny
hat with the yellow and black porcupine quills--the hat with which she
made her first appearance in Riverboro society.

"You've heard the beginning, Mr. Baxter; now will you please tell me if
you like the last verse?" she asked, taking out her paper. "I've only
read it to Alice Robinson, and I think perhaps she can never be a poet,
though she's a splendid writer. Last year when she was twelve she wrote
a birthday poem to herself, and she made 'natal' rhyme with 'Milton,'
which, of course, it wouldn't. I remember every verse ended:--

  'This is my day so natal
  And I will follow Milton.'

Another one of hers was written just because she couldn't help it she
said.  This was it:--

  'Let me to the hills away,
  Give me pen and paper;
  I'll write until the earth will sway
  The story of my Maker.'"

The minister could scarcely refrain from smiling, but he controlled
himself that he might lose none of Rebecca's quaint observations. When
she was perfectly at ease, unwatched and uncriticised, she was a
marvelous companion.

"The name of the poem is going to be 'My Star,'" she continued, "and
Mrs. Baxter gave me all the ideas, but somehow there's a kind of
magicness when they get into poetry, don't you think so?" (Rebecca
always talked to grown people as if she were their age, or, a more
subtle and truer distinction, as if they were hers.)

"It has often been so remarked, in different words," agreed the
minister.

"Mrs. Baxter said that each star was a state, and if each state did its
best we should have a splendid country. Then once she said that we
ought to be glad the war is over and the States are all at peace
together; and I thought Columbia must be glad, too, for Miss Dearborn
says she's the mother of all the States. So I'm going to have it end
like this: I did n't write it, I just sewed it while I was working on
my star:--

  "For it's your star, my star, all the stars together,
  That make our country's flag so proud
  To float in the bright fall weather.
  Northern stars, Southern stars, stars of the East and West,
  Side by side they lie at peace
  On the dear flag's mother-breast."

"'Oh! many are the poets that are sown by Nature,'" thought the
minister, quoting Wordsworth to himself. "And I wonder what becomes of
them! That's a pretty idea, little Rebecca, and I don't know whether
you or my wife ought to have the more praise. What made you think of
the stars lying on the flag's 'mother-breast'? Were did you get that
word?"

"Why" (and the young poet looked rather puzzled), "that's the way it
is; the flag is the whole country--the mother--and the stars are the
states. The stars had to lie somewhere: 'lap' nor 'arms' wouldn't sound
well with 'West,' so, of course, I said 'breast,'" Rebecca answered,
with some surprise at the question; and the minister put his hand under
her chin and kissed her softly on the forehead when he said good-by at
the door.

Rebecca walked rapidly along in the gathering twilight, thinking of the
eventful morrow.

As she approached the turning on the left, called the old Milltown
road, she saw a white horse and wagon, driven by a man with a rakish,
flapping, Panama hat, come rapidly around the turn and disappear over
the long hills leading down to the falls. There was no mistaking him;
there never was another Abner Simpson, with his lean height, his bushy
reddish hair, the gay cock of his hat, and the long, piratical,
upturned mustaches, which the boys used to say were used as hat-racks
by the Simpson children at night. The old Milltown road ran past Mrs.
Fogg's house, so he must have left Clara Belle there, and Rebecca's
heart glowed to think that her poor little friend need not miss the
raising.

She began to run now, fearful of being late for supper, and covered the
ground to the falls in a brief time. As she crossed the bridge she
again saw Abner Simpson's team, drawn up at the watering-trough.

Coming a little nearer with the view of inquiring for the family, her
quick eye caught sight of something unexpected. A gust of wind blew up
a corner of a linen lap-robe in the back of the wagon, and underneath
it she distinctly saw the white-sheeted bundle that held the flag; the
bundle with a tiny, tiny spot of red bunting peeping out at one corner.
It is true she had eaten, slept, dreamed red, white, and blue for
weeks, but there was no mistaking the evidence of her senses; the
idolized flag, longed for, worked for, sewed for, that flag was in the
back of Abner Simpson's wagon, and if so, what would become of the
raising?

Acting on blind impulse, she ran toward the watering-trough, calling
out in her clear treble "Mr. Simpson! Oh, Mr. Simpson, will you let me
ride a little way with you and hear all about Clara Belle? I'm going
over to the Centre on an errand." (So she was; a most important
errand,--to recover the flag of her country at present in the hands of
the foe!)

Mr. Simpson turned round in his seat and cried heartily, "Certain sure
I will!" for he liked the fair sex, young and old, and Rebecca had
always been a prime favorite with him. "Climb right in! How's
everybody? Glad to see you! The folks talk 'bout you from sun-up to
sun-down, and Clara Belle can't hardly wait for a sight of you!"

Rebecca scrambled up, trembling and pale with excitement. She did not
in the least know what was going to happen, but she was sure that the
flag, when in the enemy's country, must be at least a little safer with
the State of Maine sitting on top of it! Mr. Simpson began a long
monologue about Acreville, the house he lived in, the pond in front of
it, Mrs. Simpson's health and various items of news about the children,
varied by reports of his personal misfortunes. He put no questions, and
asked no replies, so this gave the inexperienced soldier a few seconds
to plan a campaign. There were three houses to pass; the Browns' at the
corner, the Millikens', and the Robinsons' on the brow of the hill. If
Mr. Robinson were in the front yard she might tell Mr. Simpson she
wanted to call there and ask Mr. Robinson to hold the horse's head
while she got out of the wagon. Then she might fly to the back before
Mr. Simpson could realize the situation, and dragging out the precious
bundle, sit on it hard, while Mr. Robinson settled the matter of
ownership with Mr. Simpson.

This was feasible, but it meant a quarrel between the two men, who held
an ancient grudge against each other, and Mr. Simpson was a valiant
fighter, as the various sheriffs who had attempted to arrest him could
cordially testify. It also meant that everybody in the village would
hear of the incident and poor Clara Belle be branded again as the child
of a thief.

Another idea danced into her excited brain; such a clever one she could
hardly believe it hers. She might call Mr. Robinson to the wagon, and
when he came close to the wheels she might say, suddenly: "Please take
the flag out of the back of the wagon, Mr. Robinson. We have brought it
here for you to keep overnight." Then Mr. Simpson might be so surprised
that he would give up his prize rather than be suspected of stealing.

But as they neared the Robinsons' house there was not a sign of life to
be seen; so the last plan, ingenious though it was, was perforce
abandoned.

The road now lay between thick pine woods with no dwelling in sight. It
was growing dusk and Rebecca was driving along the lonely way with a
person who was generally called Slippery Simpson.

Not a thought of fear crossed her mind, save the fear of bungling in
her diplomacy, and so losing the flag. She knew Mr. Simpson well, and a
pleasanter man was seldom to be met. She recalled an afternoon when he
came home and surprised the whole school playing the Revolutionary War
in his helter-skelter dooryard, and the way in which he had joined the
British forces and impersonated General Burgoyne had greatly endeared
him to her. The only difficulty was to find proper words for her
delicate mission, for, of course, if Mr. Simpson's anger were aroused,
he would politely push her out of the wagon and drive away with the
flag. Perhaps if she led the conversation in the right direction an
opportunity would present itself. Clearing her throat nervously, she
began:--

"Is it likely to be fair to-morrow?"

"Guess so; clear as a bell. What's on foot; a picnic?"

"No; we're to have a grand flag-raising!" ("That is," she thought, "if
we have any flag to raise!")

"That so?  Where?"

"The three villages are to club together and have a rally, and raise
the flag at the Centre. There'll be a brass band, and speakers, and the
Mayor of Portland, and the man that will be governor if he's elected,
and a dinner in the Grange Hall, and we girls are chosen to raise the
flag."

"I want to know! That'll be grand, won't it?" (Still not a sign of
consciousness on the part of Abner.)

"I hope Mrs. Fogg will take Clara Belle, for it will be splendid to
look at! Mr. Cobb is going to be Uncle Sam and drive us on the stage.
Miss Dearborn--Clara Belle's old teacher, you know is going to be
Columbia; the girls will be the States of the Union, and oh, Mr.
Simpson, I am the one to be the State of Maine!" Mr. Simpson flourished
the whipstock and gave a loud, hearty laugh. Then he turned in his seat
and regarded Rebecca curiously.

"You're kind o' small, ain't ye, for so big a state as this one?" he
asked.

"Any of us would be too small," replied Rebecca with dignity, "but the
committee asked me, and I am going to try hard to do well."

The tragic thought that there might be no occasion for anybody to do
anything, well or ill, suddenly overcame her here, and putting her hand
on Mr. Simpson's sleeve, she attacked the subject practically and
courageously.

"Oh, Mr. Simpson, dear Mr. Simpson, it's such a mortifying subject I
can't bear to say anything about it, but please give us back our flag!
Don't, don't take it over to Acreville, Mr. Simpson! We've worked so
long to make it, and it was so hard getting the money for the bunting!
Wait a minute, please; don't be angry, and don't say no just yet, till
I explain more. It'll be so dreadful for everybody to get there
to-morrow morning and find no flag to raise, and the band and the mayor
all disappointed, and the children crying, with their muslin dresses
all bought for nothing! Oh, dear Mr. Simpson, please don't take our
flag away from us!"

The apparently astonished Abner pulled his mustaches and exclaimed:
"But I don't know what you're drivin' at! Who's got yer flag? I hain't!"

Could duplicity, deceit, and infamy go any further, Rebecca wondered,
and her soul filling with righteous wrath, she cast discretion to the
winds and spoke a little more plainly, bending her great swimming eyes
on the now embarrassed Abner, who looked like an angle-worm wriggling
on a pin.

"Mr. Simpson, how can you say that, when I saw the flag in the back of
your wagon myself, when you stopped to water the horse? It's wicked of
you to take it, and I cannot bear it!" Her voice broke now, for a doubt
of Mr. Simpson's yielding suddenly darkened her mind. "If you keep it,
you'll have to keep me, for I won't be parted from it! I can't fight
like the boys, but I can pinch and scratch, and I will scratch, just
like a panther--I'll lie right down on my star and not move, if I
starve to death!" "Look here, hold your hosses 'n' don't cry till you
git something to cry for!" grumbled the outraged Abner, to whom a clue
had just come; and leaning over the wagon-back he caught hold of a
corner of white sheet and dragged up the bundle, scooping off Rebecca's
hat in the process, and almost burying her in bunting.

She caught the treasure passionately to her heart and stifled her sobs
in it, while Abner exclaimed "I declare to man, if that hain't a flag!
Well, in that case you're good 'n' welcome to it! Land! I seen that
bundle lyin' in the middle o' the road and I says to myself, that's
somebody's washin' and I'd better pick it up and leave it at the
post-office to be claimed; 'n' all the time it was a flag!"

This was a Simpsonian version of the matter, the fact being that a
white-covered bundle lying on the Meserves' front steps had attracted
his practiced eye, and slipping in at the open gate he had swiftly and
deftly removed it to his wagon on general principles; thinking if it
were clean clothes it would be extremely useful, and in any event there
was no good in passing by something flung into one's very arms, so to
speak. He had had no leisure to examine the bundle, and indeed took
little interest in it. Probably he stole it simply from force of habit,
and because there was nothing else in sight to steal, everybody's
premises being preternaturally tidy and empty, almost as if his visit
had been expected! Rebecca was a practical child, and it seemed to her
almost impossible that so heavy a bundle should fall out of Mrs.
Meserve's buggy and not be noticed; but she hoped that Mr. Simpson was
telling the truth, and she was too glad and grateful to doubt any one
at the moment.

"Thank you, thank you ever so much, Mr. Simpson. You're the nicest,
kindest, politest man I ever knew, and the girls will be so pleased you
gave us back the flag, and so will the Dorcas Society; they'll be sure
to write you a letter of thanks; they always do."

"Tell 'em not to bother 'bout any thanks," said Simpson, beaming
virtuously. "But land! I'm glad 't was me that happened to see that
bundle in the road and take the trouble to pick it up."

("Jest to think of it's bein' a flag!" he thought; "if ever there was a
pesky, wuthless thing to trade off, 't would be a great, gormin' flag
like that!")

"Can I get out now, please?" asked Rebecca. "I want to go back, for
Mrs. Meserve will be dreadfully nervous when she finds out she dropped
the flag, and it hurts her health to be nervous."

"No, you don't," objected Mr. Simpson gallantly, turning the horse. "Do
you think I'd let a little creeter like you lug that great heavy
bundle? I hain't got time to go back to Meserve's, but I'll take you to
the corner and dump you there, flag'n' all, and you can get some o' the
men-folks to carry it the rest o' the way. You'll wear it out, huggin'
it so!"

"I helped make it and I adore it!" said Rebecca, who was in a
grandiloquent mood. "Why don't you like it? It's your country's flag."

Simpson smiled an indulgent smile and looked a trifle bored at these
appeals to his extremely rusty better feelings. "I don' know's I've got
any particular int'rest in the country," he remarked languidly. "I know
I don't owe nothin' to it, nor own nothin' in it!"

"You own a star on the flag, same as everybody," argued Rebecca, who
had been feeding on patriotism for a month; "and you own a state, too,
like all the rest of us!"

"Land! I wish't I did! or even a quarter section of one!" sighed Mr.
Simpson, feeling somehow a little more poverty-stricken and discouraged
than usual.

As they approached the corner and the watering-trough where four
cross-roads met, the whole neighborhood seemed to be in evidence, and
Mr. Simpson suddenly regretted his chivalrous escort of Rebecca;
especially when, as he neared the group, an excited lady, wringing her
hands, turned out to be Mrs. Peter Meserve, accompanied by Huldah, the
Browns, Mrs. Milliken, Abijah Flagg, and Miss Dearborn. "Do you know
anything about the new flag, Rebecca?" shrieked Mrs. Meserve, too
agitated, for a moment, to notice the child's companion.

"It's right here in my lap, all safe," responded Rebecca joyously.

"You careless, meddlesome young one, to take it off my steps where I
left it just long enough to go round to the back and hunt up my
door-key! You've given me a fit of sickness with my weak heart, and
what business was it of yours? I believe you think you own the flag!
Hand it over to me this minute!"

Rebecca was climbing down during this torrent of language, but as she
turned she flashed one look of knowledge at the false Simpson, a look
that went through him from head to foot, as if it were carried by
electricity.

He saw that he had not deceived her after all, owing to the angry
chatter of Mrs. Meserve. He had been handcuffed twice in his life, but
no sheriff had ever discomfited him so thoroughly as this child. Fury
mounted to his brain, and as soon as she was safely out from between
the wheels he stood up in the wagon and flung the flag out in the road
in the midst of the excited group.

"Take it, you pious, stingy, scandal-talkin', flag-raisin' crew!" he
roared. "Rebecca never took the flag; I found it in the road, I say!"

"You never, no such a thing!" exclaimed Mrs. Meserve. "You found it on
the doorsteps in my garden!"

"Mebbe 't was your garden, but it was so chock full o' weeds I thought
't was the road," retorted Abner. "I vow I wouldn't 'a' given the old
rag back to one o' you, not if you begged me on your knees! But
Rebecca's a friend o' my folks and can do with her flag's she's a mind
to, and the rest o' ye can do what ye like an' go where ye like, for
all I care!"

So saying, he made a sharp turn, gave the gaunt white horse a lash and
disappeared in a cloud of dust, before the astonished Mr. Brown, the
only man in the party, had a thought of detaining him.

"I'm sorry I spoke so quick, Rebecca," said Mrs. Meserve, greatly
mortified at the situation. "But don't you believe a word that lyin'
critter said! He did steal it off my doorstep, and how did you come to
be ridin' and consortin' with him? I believe it would kill your Aunt
Miranda if she should hear about it!"

The little school-teacher put a sheltering arm round Rebecca as Mr.
Brown picked up the flag and dusted and folded it.

"I'm willing she should hear about it," Rebecca answered. "I didn't do
anything to be ashamed of! I saw the flag in the back of Mr. Simpson's
wagon and I just followed it. There weren't any men or any Dorcas
ladies to take care of it so it fell to me! You would n't have had me
let it out of my sight, would you, and we going to raise it to-morrow
morning?"

"Rebecca's perfectly right, Mrs. Meserve!" said Miss Dearborn proudly.
"And it's lucky there was somebody quick-witted enough to 'ride and
consort' with Mr. Simpson! I don't know what the village will think,
but seems to me the town clerk might write down in his book, 'This day
the State of Maine saved the flag!'"



V.

THE STATE O' MAINE GIRL

THE foregoing episode, if narrated in a romance, would undoubtedly have
been called "The Saving of the Colors," but at the nightly chats in
Watson's store it was alluded to as the way little Becky Randall got
the flag away from Slippery Simpson. Dramatic as it was, it passed into
the crowd of half-forgotten things in Rebecca's mind, its brief
importance submerged in the glories of the next day.

There was a painful prelude to these glories. Alice Robinson came to
spend the night with Rebecca, and when the bedroom door closed upon the
two girls, Alice announced her intention of "doing up" Rebecca's front
hair in leads and rags, and braiding the back in six tight, wetted
braids.

Rebecca demurred. Alice persisted.

"Your hair is so long and thick and dark and straight," she said, "that
you'll look like an Injun!"

"I am the State of Maine; it all belonged to the Indians once," Rebecca
remarked gloomily, for she was curiously shy about discussing her
personal appearance.

"And your wreath of little pine-cones won't set decent without crimps,"
continued Alice.

Rebecca glanced in the cracked looking-glass and met what she
considered an accusing lack of beauty, a sight that always either
saddened or enraged her according to circumstances; then she sat down
resignedly and began to help Alice in the philanthropic work of making
the State of Maine fit to be seen at the raising.

Neither of the girls was an expert hairdresser, and at the end of an
hour, when the sixth braid was tied, and Rebecca had given one last
shuddering look in the mirror, both were ready to weep with fatigue.

The candle was blown out and Alice soon went to sleep, but Rebecca
tossed on her pillow, its goose-feathered softness all dented by the
cruel lead knobs and the knots of twisted rags. She slipped out of bed
and walked to and fro, holding her aching head with both hands. Finally
she leaned on the window-sill, watching the still weather-vane on
Alice's barn and breathing in the fragrance of the ripening apples,
until her restlessness subsided under the clear starry beauty of the
night.

At six in the morning the girls were out of bed, for Alice could hardly
wait until Rebecca's hair was taken down, she was so eager to see the
result of her labors.

The leads and rags were painfully removed, together with much hair, the
operation being punctuated by a series of squeaks, squeals, and shrieks
on the part of Rebecca and a series of warnings from Alice, who wished
the preliminaries to be kept secret from the aunts, that they might the
more fully appreciate the radiant result.

Then came the unbraiding, and then--dramatic moment--the "combing out;"
a difficult, not to say impossible process, in which the hairs that had
resisted the earlier stages almost gave up the ghost.

The long front strands had been wound up from various angles and by
various methods, so that, when released, they assumed the strangest,
most obstinate, most unexpected attitudes. When the comb was dragged
through the last braid, the wild, tortured, electric hairs following,
and then rebounding from it in a bristling, snarling tangle,
Massachusetts gave one encompassing glance at the State o' Maine's
head, and announced her intention of going home to breakfast! Alice was
deeply grieved at the result of her attempted beautifying, but she felt
that meeting Miss Miranda Sawyer at the morning meal would not mend
matters in the least, so slipping out of the side door, she ran up
Guide-Board hill as fast as her feet could carry her.

The State o' Maine, deserted and somewhat unnerved, sat down before the
glass and attacked her hair doggedly and with set lips, working over it
until Miss Jane called her to breakfast; then, with a boldness born of
despair, she entered the dining-room, where her aunts were already
seated at table. There was a moment of silence after the grotesque
figure was fully taken in; then came a moan from Jane and a groan from
Miranda.

"What have you done to yourself?" asked Miranda sternly.

"Made an effort to be beautiful and failed!" jauntily replied Rebecca,
but she was too miserable to keep up the fiction. "Oh, Aunt Miranda,
don't scold, I'm so unhappy! Alice and I rolled up my hair to curl it
for the raising. She said it was so straight I looked like an Indian!"

"Mebbe you did," vigorously agreed Miranda, "but 't any rate you looked
like a Christian Injun, 'n' now you look like a heathen Injun; that's
all the difference I can see. What can we do with her, Jane, between
this and nine o'clock?"

"We'll all go out to the pump just as soon as we're through breakfast,"
answered Jane soothingly. "We can accomplish considerable with water
and force."

Rebecca nibbled her corn-cake, her tearful eyes cast on her plate and
her chin quivering.

"Don't you cry and red your eyes up," chided Miranda quite kindly; "the
minute you've eaten enough run up and get your brush and meet us at the
back door."

"I would n't care myself how bad I looked," said Rebecca, "but I can't
bear to be so homely that I shame the State of Maine!"

Oh, what an hour followed this plaint! Did any aspirant for literary or
dramatic honors ever pass to fame through such an antechamber of
horrors? Did poet of the day ever have his head so maltreated?  To be
dipped in the rain-water tub, soused again and again; to be held under
the spout and pumped on; to be rubbed furiously with rough roller
towels; to be dried with hot flannels!  And is it not well-nigh
incredible that at the close of such an hour the ends of the long hair
should still stand out straight, the braids having been turned up two
inches by Alice, and tied hard in that position with linen thread?

"Get out the skirt-board, Jane," cried Miranda, to whom opposition
served as a tonic, "and move that flat-iron on to the front o' the
stove. Rebecca, set down in that low chair beside the board, and, Jane,
you spread out her hair on it and cover it up with brown paper. Don't
cringe, Rebecca; the worst's over, and you've borne up real good! I'll
be careful not to pull your hair nor scorch you, and oh, how I'd like
to have Alice Robinson acrost my knee and a good slipper in my right
hand! There, you're all ironed out and your Aunt Jane can put on your
white dress and braid your hair up again good and tight. Perhaps you
won't be the homeliest of the States, after all; but when I see you
comin' in to breakfast I said to myself: 'I guess if Maine looked like
that, it would n't never 'a' been admitted into the Union!'"

When Uncle Sam and the stagecoach drew up to the brick house with a
grand swing and a flourish, the Goddess of Liberty and most of the
States were already in their places on the "harricane deck." Words fail
to describe the gallant bearing of the horses, their headstalls gayly
trimmed and their harnesses dotted with little flags. The stage windows
were hung in bunting, and from within beamed Columbia, looking out from
the bright frame as if proud of her freight of loyal children.
Patriotic streamers floated from whip, from dash-board and from rumble,
and the effect of the whole was something to stimulate the most
phlegmatic voter. Rebecca came out on the steps and Aunt Jane brought a
chair to assist in the ascent.  Miss Dearborn peeped from the window,
and gave a despairing look at her favorite.

What had happened to her? Who had dressed her? Had her head been put
through a wringing-machine? Why were her eyes red and swollen?  Miss
Dearborn determined to take her behind the trees in the pine grove and
give her some finishing touches; touches that her skillful fingers
fairly itched to bestow.

The stage started, and as the roadside pageant grew gayer and gayer,
Rebecca began to brighten and look prettier, for most of her
beautifying came from within. The people, walking, driving, or standing
on their doorsteps, cheered Uncle Sam's coach with its freight of
gossamer-muslined, fluttering-ribboned girls, and just behind, the
gorgeously decorated haycart, driven by Abijah Flagg, bearing the jolly
but inharmonious fife and drum corps. Was ever such a golden day; such
crystal air; such mellow sunshine; such a merry Uncle Sam!

The stage drew up at an appointed spot near a pine grove, and while the
crowd was gathering, the children waited for the hour to arrive when
they should march to the platform; the hour toward which they seemed to
have been moving since the dawn of creation. As soon as possible Miss
Dearborn whispered to Rebecca: "Come behind the trees with me; I want
to make you prettier!"

Rebecca thought she had suffered enough from that process already
during the last twelve hours, but she put out an obedient hand and the
two withdrew.

Now Miss Dearborn was, I fear, a very indifferent teacher. Her stock in
trade was small, her principal virtues being devotion to children and
ability to gain their love, and a power of evolving a schoolroom order
so natural, cheery, serene, and peaceful that it gave the beholder a
certain sense of being in a district heaven.  She was poor in
arithmetic and weak in geometry, but if you gave her a rose, a bit of
ribbon, and a seven-by-nine looking-glass she could make herself as
pretty as a pink in two minutes.

Safely sheltered behind the pines, Miss Dearborn began to practice
mysterious feminine arts.  She flew at Rebecca's tight braids, opened
the strands and rebraided them loosely; bit and tore the red, white,
and blue ribbon in two and tied the braids separately.  Then with
nimble fingers she pulled out little tendrils of hair behind the ears
and around the nape of the neck. After a glance of acute disapproval
directed at the stiff balloon skirt she knelt on the ground and gave a
strenuous embrace to Rebecca's knees, murmuring, between her hugs,
"Starch must be cheap at the brick house!"

This particular line of beauty attained, there ensued great pinchings
of ruffles; the fingers that could never hold a ferule nor snap
children's ears being incomparable fluting-irons. Next the sash was
scornfully untied, and tightened to suggest something resembling a
waist.  The chastened bows that had been squat, dowdy, spiritless, were
given tweaks, flirts, bracing little pokes and dabs, till,
acknowledging a master hand, they stood up, piquant, pert, smart, alert!

Pride of bearing was now infused into the flattened lace at the neck,
and a pin (removed at some sacrifice from her own toilette) was darned
in at the back to prevent any cowardly lapsing. The short white cotton
gloves that called attention to the tanned wrists and arms were
stripped off and put in her own pocket. Then the wreath of pine-cones
was adjusted at a heretofore unimagined angle, the hair was pulled
softly into a fluffy frame, and finally, as she met Rebecca's grateful
eyes, she gave her two approving, triumphant kisses. In a second the
sensitive face lighted into happiness; pleased dimples appeared in the
cheeks, the kissed mouth was as red as a rose, and the little fright
that had walked behind the pine-tree stepped out on the other side
Rebecca, the lovely.

As to the relative value of Miss Dearborn's accomplishments, the
decision must be left to the gentle reader; but though it is certain
that children should be properly grounded in mathematics, no heart of
flesh could bear to hear Miss Dearborn's methods vilified who had seen
her patting, pulling, squeezing Rebecca from ugliness into beauty.

Now all was ready; the moment of fate was absolutely at hand; the fife
and drum corps led the way and the States followed; but what actually
happened Rebecca never knew; she lived through the hours in a waking
dream. Every little detail was a facet of light that reflected
sparkles, and among them all she was fairly dazzled. The brass band
played inspiring strains; the mayor spoke eloquently on great themes;
the people cheered; then the rope on which so much depended was put
into the children's hands, they applied superhuman strength to their
task, and the flag mounted, mounted, smoothly and slowly, and slowly
unwound and stretched itself until its splendid size and beauty were
revealed against the maples and pines and blue New England sky.

Then after cheers upon cheers and after a patriotic chorus by the
church choirs, the State of Maine mounted the platform, vaguely
conscious that she was to recite a poem, though for the life of her she
could not remember a single word.

"Speak up loud and clear, Rebecky," whispered Uncle Sam in the front
row, but she could scarcely hear her own voice when, tremblingly, she
began her first line.  After that she gathered strength, and the poem
"said itself," while the dream went on. She saw her friend Adam Ladd
leaning against a tree; Aunt Jane and Aunt Miranda palpitating with
nervousness; Clara Belle Simpson gazing cross-eyed but adoring from a
seat on the side; and in the far, far distance, on the very outskirts
of the crowd, a tall man standing in a wagon--a tall, loose-jointed man
with red upturned mustaches, and a gaunt white horse whose head was
turned toward the Acreville road.

Loud applause greeted the State of Maine, the slender little white-clad
figure standing on the mossy boulder that had been used as the centre
of the platform. The sun came up from behind a great maple and shone
full on the star-spangled banner, making it more dazzling than ever, so
that its beauty drew all eyes upward.

Abner Simpson lifted his vagrant shifting gaze to its softly fluttering
folds and its splendid massing of colors, thinking:--

"I don't know's anybody'd ought to steal a flag, the thunderin' idjuts
seem to set such store by it, and what is it, anyway? Nothin' but a
sheet o' buntin'!'"

Nothing but a sheet of bunting? He looked curiously at the rapt faces
of the mothers, their babies asleep in their arms; the parted lips and
shining eyes of the white-clad girls; at Cap'n Lord, who had been in
Libby Prison, and Nat Strout, who had left an arm at Bull Run; at the
friendly, jostling crowd of farmers, happy, eager, absorbed, their
throats ready to burst with cheers. Then the breeze served, and he
heard Rebecca's clear voice saying:--

  "For it's your star, my star, all the stars together,
  That make our country's flag so proud
  To float in the bright fall weather!"

"Talk about stars! She's got a couple of 'em right in her head,"
thought Simpson. "If I ever seen a young one like that layin' on
anybody's doorstep I'd hook her quicker'n a wink, though I've got
plenty to home, the Lord knows! And I wouldn't swap her off
neither.--Spunky little creeter, too; settin' up in the wagon lookin'
'bout's big as a pint o' cider, but keepin' right after the flag!--I
vow I'm 'bout sick o' my job! Never with the crowd, allers jest on the
outside, 's if I wa'n't as good's they be! If it paid well, mebbe would
n't mind, but they're so thunderin' stingy round here, they don't leave
out anything decent for you to take from 'em, yet you're reskin' your
liberty 'n' reputation jest the same!--Countin' the poor pickin's 'n'
the time I lose in jail I might most's well be done with it 'n' work
out by the day, as the folks want me to; I'd make 'bout's much, n' I
don' know's it would be any harder!"

He could see Rebecca stepping down from the platform, while his own
red-headed little girl stood up on her bench, waving her hat with one
hand, her handkerchief with the other, and stamping with both feet.

Now a man sitting beside the mayor rose from his chair and Abner heard
him call:--

"Three cheers for the women who made the flag!"

"Hip, hip, hurrah!"

"Three cheers for the State of Maine!"

"Hip, hip, hurrah!"

"Three cheers for the girl who saved the flag from the hands of the
enemy!"

"Hip, hip, hurrah!"

It was the Edgewood minister, whose full, vibrant voice was of the sort
to move a crowd. His words rang out into the clear air and were carried
from lip to lip. Hands clapped, feet stamped, hats swung, while the
loud huzzahs might almost have wakened the echoes on old Mount Ossipee.

The tall, loose-jointed man sat down in the wagon suddenly and took up
the reins.

"They're gettin' a little mite personal, and I guess it's 'bout time
for you to be goin', Simpson!"

The tone was jocular, but the red mustaches drooped, and the
half-hearted cut he gave to start the white mare on her homeward
journey showed that he was not in his usual reckless mood.

"It's a lie!" he burst out in a vindictive undertone, as the mare swung
into her long gait. "It's a lie! I thought 't was somebody's wash!  I
ain't an enemy!"

While the crowd at the raising dispersed in happy family groups to
their picnics in the woods; while the Goddess of Liberty, Uncle Sam,
Columbia, and the proud States lunched grandly in the Grange Hall with
distinguished guests and scarred veterans of two wars, the lonely man
drove, and drove, and drove through silent woods and dull, sleepy
villages, never alighting to replenish his wardrobe or his stock of
swapping material.

At dusk he reached a miserable tumble-down house on the edge of a pond.

The faithful wife with the sad mouth and the habitual look of anxiety
in her faded eyes came to the door at the sound of wheels and went
doggedly to the horse-shed to help him unharness. "You did n't expect
to see me back to-night, did you?" he asked satirically; "leastwise not
with this same horse? Well, I'm here! You need n't be scairt to look
under the wagon-seat, there ain't nothin' there, not even my supper, so
I hope you're suited for once! No, I guess I ain't goin' to be an angel
right away, neither. There wa'n't nothin' but flags layin' roun' loose
down Riverboro way, 'n' whatever they say, I ain't sech a hound as to
steal a flag!"

It was natural that young Riverboro should have red, white, and blue
dreams on the night after the new flag was raised.  A stranger thing,
perhaps, is the fact that Abner Simpson should lie down on his hard bed
with the flutter of bunting before his eyes, and a whirl of
unaccustomed words in his mind.

"For it is your star, my star, all our stars together."

"I'm sick of goin' it alone," he thought; "I guess I'll try the other
road for a spell;" and with that he fell asleep.

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1907 Archibald Constable & Co. edition by David
Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





The Old Peabody Pew: A Christmas Romance of a Country Church


Dedication


To a certain handful of dear New England women of names unknown to the
world, dwelling in a certain quiet village, alike unknown:--

We have worked together to make our little corner of the great universe a
pleasanter place in which to live, and so we know, not only one another's
names, but something of one another's joys and sorrows, cares and
burdens, economies, hopes, and anxieties.

We all remember the dusty uphill road that leads to the green church
common.  We remember the white spire pointing upward against a background
of blue sky and feathery elms.  We remember the sound of the bell that
falls on the Sabbath morning stillness, calling us across the
daisy-sprinkled meadows of June, the golden hayfields of July, or the
dazzling whiteness and deep snowdrifts of December days.  The little
cabinet-organ that plays the doxology, the hymn-books from which we sing
"Praise God from whom all blessings flow," the sweet freshness of the old
meeting-house, within and without--how we have toiled to secure and
preserve these humble mercies for ourselves and our children!

There really _is_ a Dorcas Society, as you and I well know, and one not
unlike that in these pages; and you and I have lived through many
discouraging, laughable, and beautiful experiences while we emulated the
Bible Dorcas, that woman "full of good works and alms deeds."

There never was a Peabody Pew in the Tory Hill Meeting-House, and Nancy's
love story and Justin's never happened within its century-old walls; but
I have imagined only one of the many romances that have had their birth
under the shadow of that steeple, did we but realize it.

As you have sat there on open-windowed Sundays, looking across purple
clover-fields to blue distant mountains, watching the palm-leaf fans
swaying to and fro in the warm stillness before sermon time, did not the
place seem full of memories, for has not the life of two villages ebbed
and flowed beneath that ancient roof?  You heard the hum of droning bees
and followed the airy wings of butterflies fluttering over the
gravestones in the old churchyard, and underneath almost every moss-grown
tablet some humble romance lies buried and all but forgotten.

If it had not been for you, I should never have written this story, so I
give it back to you tied with a sprig from Ophelia's nosegay; a spring of
"rosemary, that's for remembrance."

K. D. W.

August, 1907




CHAPTER I


Edgewood, like all the other villages along the banks of the Saco, is
full of sunny slopes and leafy hollows.  There are little, rounded, green-
clad hillocks that might, like their scriptural sisters, "skip with joy,"
and there are grand, rocky hills tufted with gaunt pine trees--these
leading the eye to the splendid heights of a neighbour State, where snow-
crowned peaks tower in the blue distance, sweeping the horizon in a long
line of majesty.

Tory Hill holds its own among the others for peaceful beauty and fair
prospect, and on its broad, level summit sits the white-painted Orthodox
Meeting-House.  This faces a grassy common where six roads meet, as if
the early settlers had determined that no one should lack salvation
because of a difficulty in reaching its visible source.

The old church has had a dignified and fruitful past, dating from that
day in 1761 when young Paul Coffin received his call to preach at a
stipend of fifty pounds sterling a year; answering "that never having
heard of any Uneasiness among the people about his Doctrine or manner of
life, he declared himself pleased to Settle as Soon as might be Judged
Convenient."

But that was a hundred and fifty years ago, and much has happened since
those simple, strenuous old days.  The chastening hand of time has been
laid somewhat heavily on the town as well as on the church.  Some of her
sons have marched to the wars and died on the field of honour; some,
seeking better fortunes, have gone westward; others, wearying of village
life, the rocky soil, and rigours of farm-work, have become entangled in
the noise and competition, the rush and strife, of cities.  When the
sexton rings the bell nowadays, on a Sunday morning, it seems to have
lost some of its old-time militant strength, something of its hope and
courage; but it still rings, and although the Davids and Solomons, the
Matthews, Marks, and Pauls of former congregations have left few
descendants to perpetuate their labours, it will go on ringing as long as
there is a Tabitha, a Dorcas, a Lois, or a Eunice left in the community.

This sentiment had been maintained for a quarter of a century, but it was
now especially strong, as the old Tory Hill Meeting-House had been
undergoing for several years more or less extensive repairs.  In point of
fact, the still stronger word, "improvements," might be used with
impunity; though whenever the Dorcas Society, being female, and therefore
possessed of notions regarding comfort and beauty, suggested any serious
changes, the finance committees, which were inevitably male in their
composition, generally disapproved of making any impious alterations in a
tabernacle, chapel, temple, or any other building used for purposes of
worship.  The majority in these august bodies asserted that their
ancestors had prayed and sung there for a century and a quarter, and what
was good enough for their ancestors was entirely suitable for them.
Besides, the community was becoming less and less prosperous, and church-
going was growing more and more lamentably uncommon, so that even from a
business standpoint, any sums expended upon decoration by a poor and
struggling parish would be worse than wasted.

In the particular year under discussion in this story, the valiant and
progressive Mrs. Jeremiah Burbank was the president of the Dorcas
Society, and she remarked privately and publicly that if her ancestors
liked a smoky church, they had a perfect right to the enjoyment of it,
but that she didn't intend to sit through meeting on winter Sundays, with
her white ostrich feather turning grey and her eyes smarting and
watering, for the rest of her natural life.

Whereupon, this being in a business session, she then and there proposed
to her already hypnotized constituents ways of earning enough money to
build a new chimney on the other side of the church.

An awe-stricken community witnessed this beneficent act of vandalism,
and, finding that no thunderbolts of retribution descended from the
skies, greatly relished the change.  If one or two aged persons
complained that they could not sleep as sweetly during sermon-time in the
now clear atmosphere of the church, and that the parson's eye was keener
than before, why, that was a mere detail, and could not be avoided; what
was the loss of a little sleep compared with the discoloration of Mrs.
Jere Burbank's white ostrich feather and the smarting of Mrs. Jere
Burbank's eyes?

A new furnace followed the new chimney, in due course, and as a sense of
comfort grew, there was opportunity to notice the lack of beauty.  Twice
in sixty years had some well-to-do summer parishioner painted the
interior of the church at his own expense; but although the roof had been
many times reshingled, it had always persisted in leaking, so that the
ceiling and walls were disfigured by unsightly spots and stains and
streaks.  The question of shingling was tacitly felt to be outside the
feminine domain, but as there were five women to one man in the church
membership, the feminine domain was frequently obliged to extend its
limits into the hitherto unknown.  Matters of tarring and water-proofing
were discussed in and out of season, and the very school-children imbibed
knowledge concerning lapping, overlapping, and cross-lapping, and first
and second quality of cedar shingles.  Miss Lobelia Brewster, who had a
rooted distrust of anything done by mere man, created strife by remarking
that she could have stopped the leak in the belfry tower with her red
flannel petticoat better than the Milltown man with his new-fangled
rubber sheeting, and that the last shingling could have been more
thoroughly done by a "female infant babe"; whereupon the person
criticized retorted that he wished Miss Lobelia Brewster had a few infant
babes to "put on the job--he'd like to see 'em try."  Meantime several
male members of the congregation, who at one time or another had sat on
the roof during the hottest of the dog days to see that shingling
operations we're conscientiously and skilfully performed, were very
pessimistic as to any satisfactory result ever being achieved.

"The angle of the roof--what they call the 'pitch'--they say that that's
always been wrong," announced the secretary of the Dorcas in a business
session.

"Is it that kind of pitch that the Bible says you can't touch without
being defiled?  If not, I vote that we unshingle the roof and alter the
pitch!"  This proposal came from a sister named Maria Sharp, who had
valiantly offered the year before to move the smoky chimney with her own
hands, if the "men-folks" wouldn't.

But though the incendiary suggestion of altering the pitch was received
with applause at the moment, subsequent study of the situation proved
that such a proceeding was entirely beyond the modest means of the
society.  Then there arose an ingenious and militant carpenter in a
neighbouring village, who asserted that he would shingle the
meeting-house roof for such and such a sum, and agree to drink every drop
of water that would leak in afterward.  This was felt by all parties to
be a promise attended by extraordinary risks, but it was accepted
nevertheless, Miss Lobelia Brewster remarking that the rash carpenter,
being already married, could not marry a Dorcas anyway, and even if he
died, he was not a resident of Edgewood, and therefore could be more
easily spared, and that it would be rather exciting, just for a change,
to see a man drink himself to death with rain-water.  The expected
tragedy never occurred, however, and the inspired shingler fulfilled his
promise to the letter, so that before many months the Dorcas Society
proceeded, with incredible exertion, to earn more money, and the interior
of the church was neatly painted and made as fresh as a rose.  With no
smoke, no rain, no snow nor melting ice to defile it, the good old
landmark that had been pointing its finger Heavenward for over a century
would now be clean and fragrant for years to come, and the weary sisters
leaned back in their respective rocking-chairs and drew deep breaths of
satisfaction.

These breaths continued to be drawn throughout an unusually arduous
haying season; until, in fact, a visitor from a neighbouring city was
heard to remark that the Tory Hill Meeting-House would be one of the best
preserved and pleasantest churches in the whole State of Maine, if only
it were suitably carpeted.

This thought had secretly occurred to many a Dorcas in her hours of pie-
making, preserving, or cradle-rocking, but had been promptly extinguished
as flagrantly extravagant and altogether impossible.  Now that it had
been openly mentioned, the contagion of the idea spread, and in a month
every sort of honest machinery for the increase of funds had been set in
motion: harvest suppers, pie sociables, old folk's concerts, apron sales,
and, as a last resort, a subscription paper, for the church floor
measured hundreds of square yards, and the carpet committee announce that
a good ingrain could not be purchased, even with the church discount, for
less than ninety-seven cents a yard.

The Dorcases took out their pencils, and when they multiplied the surface
of the floor by the price of the carpet per yard, each Dorcas attaining a
result entirely different from all the others, there was a shriek of
dismay, especially from the secretary, who had included in her
mathematical operation certain figures in her possession representing the
cubical contents of the church and the offending pitch of the roof,
thereby obtaining a product that would have dismayed a Croesus.  Time
sped and efforts increased, but the Dorcases were at length obliged to
clip the wings of their desire and content themselves with carpeting the
pulpit and pulpit steps, the choir, and the two aisles, leaving the floor
in the pews until some future year.

How the women cut and contrived and matched that hardly-bought red
ingrain carpet, in the short December afternoons that ensued after its
purchase; so that, having failed to be ready for Thanksgiving, it could
be finished for the Christmas festivities!

They were sewing in the church, and as the last stitches were being
taken, Maria Sharp suddenly ejaculated in her impulsive fashion:--

"Wouldn't it have been just perfect if we could have had the pews
repainted before we laid the new carpet!"

"It would, indeed," the president answered; "but it will take us all
winter to pay for the present improvements, without any thought of fresh
paint.  If only we had a few more men-folks to help along!"

"Or else none at all!" was Lobelia Brewster's suggestion.  "It's havin'
so few that keeps us all stirred up.  If there wa'n't any anywheres, we'd
have women deacons and carpenters and painters, and get along first rate;
for somehow the supply o' women always holds out, same as it does with
caterpillars an' flies an' grasshoppers!"

Everybody laughed, although Maria Sharp asserted that she for one was not
willing to be called a caterpillar simply because there were too many
women in the universe.

"I never noticed before how shabby and scarred and dirty the pews are,"
said the minister's wife as she looked at them reflectively.

"I've been thinking all the afternoon of the story about the poor old
woman and the lily," and Nancy Wentworth's clear voice broke into the
discussion.  "Do you remember some one gave her a stalk of Easter lilies
and she set them in a glass pitcher on the kitchen table?  After looking
at them for a few minutes, she got up from her chair and washed the
pitcher until the glass shone.  Sitting down again, she glanced at the
little window.  It would never do; she had forgotten how dusty and
blurred it was, and she took her cloth and burnished the panes.  Then she
scoured the table, then the floor, then blackened the stove before she
sat down to her knitting.  And of course the lily had done it all, just
by showing, in its whiteness, how grimy everything else was."

The minister's wife who had been in Edgewood only a few months, looked
admiringly at Nancy's bright face, wondering that five-and-thirty years
of life, including ten of school-teaching, had done so little to mar its
serenity.  "The lily story is as true as the gospel!" she exclaimed, "and
I can see how one thing has led you to another in making the church
comfortable.  But my husband says that two coats of paint on the pews
would cost a considerable sum."

"How about cleaning them?  I don't believe they've had a good hard
washing since the flood."  The suggestion came from Deacon Miller's wife
to the president.

"They can't even be scrubbed for less than fifteen or twenty dollars, for
I thought of that and asked Mrs. Simpson yesterday, and she said twenty
cents a pew was the cheapest she could do it for."

"We've done everything else," said Nancy Wentworth, with a twitch of her
thread; "why don't we scrub the pews?  There's nothing in the orthodox
creed to forbid, is there?"

"Speakin' o' creeds," and here old Mrs. Sargent paused in her work,
"Elder Ransom from Acreville stopped with us last night, an' he tells me
they recite the Euthanasian Creed every few Sundays in the Episcopal
Church.  I didn't want him to know how ignorant I was, but I looked up
the word in the dictionary.  It means easy death, and I can't see any
sense in that, though it's a terrible long creed, the Elder says, an' if
it's any longer 'n ourn, I should think anybody _might_ easy die learnin'
it!"

"I think the word is Athanasian," ventured the minister's wife.

"Elder Ransom's always plumb full o' doctrine," asserted Miss Brewster,
pursuing the subject.  "For my part, I'm glad he preferred Acreville to
our place.  He was so busy bein' a minister, he never got round to bein'
a human creeter.  When he used to come to sociables and picnics, always
lookin' kind o' like the potato blight, I used to think how complete he'd
be if he had a foldin' pulpit under his coat tails; they make foldin'
beds nowadays, an' I s'pose they could make foldin' pulpits, if there was
a call."

"Land sakes, I hope there won't be!" exclaimed Mrs. Sargent.  "An' the
Elder never said much of anything either, though he was always preachin'!
Now your husband, Mis' Baxter, always has plenty to say after you think
he's all through.  There's water in his well when the others is all dry!"

"But how about the pews?" interrupted Mrs. Burbank.  "I think Nancy's
idea is splendid, and I want to see it carried out.  We might make it a
picnic, bring our luncheons, and work all together; let every woman in
the congregation come and scrub her own pew."

"Some are too old, others live at too great a distance," and the
minister's wife sighed a little; "indeed, most of those who once owned
the pews or sat in them seemed to be dead, or gone away to live in busier
places."

"I've no patience with 'em, gallivantin' over the earth," and here
Lobelia rose and shook the carpet threads from her lap.  "I shouldn't
want to live in a livelier place than Edgewood, seem's though!  We wash
and hang out Mondays, iron Tuesdays, cook Wednesdays, clean house and
mend Thursdays and Fridays, bake Saturdays, and go to meetin' Sundays.  I
don't hardly see how they can do any more 'n that in Chicago!"

"Never mind if we have lost members!" said the indomitable Mrs. Burbank.
"The members we still have left must work all the harder.  We'll each
clean our own pew, then take a few of our neighbours', and then hire Mrs.
Simpson to do the wainscoting and floor.  Can we scrub Friday and lay the
carpet Saturday?  My husband and Deacon Miller can help us at the end of
the week.  All in favour manifest it by the usual sign.  Contrary minded?
It is a vote."

There never were any contrary minded when Mrs. Jere Burbank was in the
chair.  Public sentiment in Edgewood was swayed by the Dorcas Society,
but Mrs. Burbank swayed the Dorcases themselves as the wind sways the
wheat.




CHAPTER II


The old Meeting House wore an animated aspect when the eventful Friday
came, a cold, brilliant, sparkling December day, with good sleighing, and
with energy in every breath that swept over the dazzling snowfields.  The
sexton had built a fire in the furnace on the way to his morning work--a
fire so economically contrived that it would last exactly the four or
five necessary hours, and not a second more.  At eleven o'clock all the
pillars of the society had assembled, having finished their own household
work and laid out on their respective kitchen tables comfortable
luncheons for the men of the family, if they were fortunate enough to
number any among their luxuries.  Water was heated upon oil-stoves set
about here and there, and there was a brave array of scrubbing-brushes,
cloths, soap, and even sand and soda, for it had been decided and
manifested-by-the-usual-sign-and-no-contrary-minded-and-it-was-a-vote
that the dirt was to come off, whether the paint came with it or not.
Each of the fifteen women present selected a block of seats, preferably
one in which her own was situated, and all fell busily to work.

"There is nobody here to clean the right-wing pews," said Nancy
Wentworth, "so I will take those for my share."

"You're not making a very wise choice, Nancy," and the minister's wife
smiled as she spoke.  "The infant class of the Sunday-school sits there,
you know, and I expect the paint has had extra wear and tear.  Families
don't seem to occupy those pews regularly nowadays."

"I can remember when every seat in the whole church was filled, wings an'
all," mused Mrs. Sargent, wringing out her wascloth in a reminiscent
mood.  "The one in front o' you, Nancy, was always called the 'deef pew'
in the old times, and all the folks that was hard o' hearin' used to
congregate there."

"The next pew hasn't been occupied since I came here," said the
minister's wife.

"No," answered Mrs. Sargent, glad of any opportunity to retail
neighbourhood news.  "'Squire Bean's folks have moved to Portland to be
with the married daughter.  Somebody has to stay with her, and her
husband won't.  The 'Squire ain't a strong man, and he's most too old to
go to meetin' now.  The youngest son has just died in New York, so I
hear."

"What ailed him?" inquired Maria Sharp.

"I guess he was completely wore out takin' care of his health," returned
Mrs. Sargent.  "He had a splendid constitution from a boy, but he was
always afraid it wouldn't last him.--The seat back o' 'Squire Bean's is
the old Peabody pew--ain't that the Peabody pew you're scrubbin', Nancy?"

"I believe so," Nancy answered, never pausing in her labours.  "It's so
long since anybody sat there, it's hard to remember."

"It is the Peabodys', I know it, because the aisle runs right up facin'
it.  I can see old Deacon Peabody settin' in this end same as if 'twas
yesterday."

"He had died before Jere and I came back here to live," said Mrs.
Burbank.  "The first I remember, Justin Peabody sat in the end seat; the
sister that died, next, and in the corner, against the wall, Mrs.
Peabody, with a crepe shawl and a palm-leaf fan.  They were a handsome
family.  You used to sit with them sometimes, Nancy; Esther was great
friends with you."

"Yes, she was," Nancy replied, lifting the tattered cushion from its
place and brushing it; "and I with her.--What is the use of scrubbing and
carpeting, when there are only twenty pew-cushions and six hassocks in
the whole church, and most of them ragged?  How can I ever mend this?"

"I shouldn't trouble myself to darn other people's cushions!"

This unchristian sentiment came in Mrs. Miller's ringing tones from the
rear of the church.

"I don't know why," argued Maria Sharp.  "I'm going to mend my Aunt
Achsa's cushion, and we haven't spoken for years; but hers is the next
pew to mine, and I'm going to have my part of the church look decent,
even if she is too stingy to do her share.  Besides, there aren't any
Peabodys left to do their own darning, and Nancy was friends with
Esther."

"Yes, it's nothing more than right," Nancy replied, with a note of relief
in her voice, "considering Esther."

"Though he don't belong to the scrubbin' sex, there is one Peabody alive,
as you know, if you stop to think, Maria; for Justin's alive, and livin'
out West somewheres.  At least, he's as much alive as ever he was; he was
as good as dead when he was twenty-one, but his mother was always too
soft-hearted to bury him."

There was considerable laughter over this sally of the outspoken Mrs.
Sargent, whose keen wit was the delight of the neighbourhood.

"I know he's alive and doing business in Detroit, for I got his address a
week or ten days ago, and wrote, asking him if he'd like to give a couple
of dollars toward repairing the old church."

Everybody looked at Mrs. Burbank with interest.

"Hasn't he answered?" asked Maria Sharp.

Nancy Wentworth held her breath, turned her face to the wall, and
silently wiped the paint of the wainscoting.  The blood that had rushed
into her cheeks at Mrs. Sargent's jeering reference to Justin Peabody
still lingered there for any one who ran to read, but fortunately nobody
ran; they were too busy scrubbing.

"Not yet.  Folks don't hurry about answering when you ask them for a
contribution," replied the president, with a cynicism common to persons
who collect funds for charitable purposes.  "George Wickham sent me
twenty-five cents from Denver.  When I wrote him a receipt, I said thank
you same as Aunt Polly did when the neighbours brought her a piece of
beef: 'Ever so much obleeged, but don't forget me when you come to kill a
pig.'--Now, Mrs. Baxter, you shan't clean James Bruce's pew, or what was
his before he turned Second Advent.  I'll do that myself, for he used to
be in my Sunday-school class."

"He's the backbone o' that congregation now," asserted Mrs. Sargent, "and
they say he's goin' to marry Mrs. Sam Peters, who sings in their choir as
soon as his year is up.  They make a perfect fool of him in that church."

"You can't make a fool of a man that nature ain't begun with," argued
Miss Brewster.  "Jim Bruce never was very strong-minded, but I declare it
seems to me that when men lose their wives, they lose their wits!  I was
sure Jim would marry Hannah Thompson that keeps house for him.  I
suspected she was lookin' out for a life job when she hired out with
him."

"Hannah Thompson may keep Jim's house, but she'll never keep Jim, that's
certain!" affirmed the president; "and I can't see that Mrs. Peters will
better herself much."

"I don't blame her, for one!" came in no uncertain tones from the left-
wing pews, and the Widow Buzzell rose from her knees and approached the
group by the pulpit.  "If there's anything duller than cookin' three
meals a day _for_ yourself, and settin' down and eatin' 'em _by_
yourself, and then gettin' up and clearin' 'em away _after_ yourself, I'd
like to know it!  I shouldn't want any good-lookin', pleasant-spoken man
to offer himself to me without he expected to be snapped up, that's all!
But if you've made out to get one husband in York County, you can thank
the Lord and not expect any more favours.  I used to think Tom was poor
comp'ny and complain I couldn't have any conversation with him, but land,
I could talk at him, and there's considerable comfort in that.  And I
could pick up after him!  Now every room in my house is clean, and every
closet and bureau drawer, too; I can't start drawin' in another rug, for
I've got all the rugs I can step foot on.  I dried so many apples last
year I shan't need to cut up any this season.  My jelly and preserves
ain't out, and there I am; and there most of us are, in this village,
without a man to take steps for and trot 'round after!  There's just
three husbands among the fifteen women scrubbin' here now, and the rest
of us is all old maids and widders.  No wonder the men-folks die, or move
away like Justin Peabody; a place with such a mess o' women-folks ain't
healthy to live in, whatever Lobelia Brewster may say."




CHAPTER III


Justin Peabody had once faithfully struggled with the practical
difficulties of life in Edgewood, or so he had thought, in those old days
of which Nancy Wentworth was thinking as she wiped the paint of the
Peabody pew.  Work in the mills did not attract him; he had no capital to
invest in a stock of goods for store-keeping; school-teaching offered him
only a pittance; there remained then only the farm, if he were to stay at
home and keep his mother company.

"Justin don't seem to take no holt of things," said the neighbours.

"Good Heavens!"  It seemed to him that there were no things to take hold
of!  That was his first thought; later he grew to think that the trouble
all lay in himself, and both thoughts bred weakness.

The farm had somehow supported the family in the old Deacon's time, but
Justin seemed unable to coax a competence from the soil.  He could, and
did, rise early and work late; till the earth, sow crops; but he could
not make the rain fall nor the sun shine at the times he needed them, and
the elements, however much they might seem to favour his neighbours,
seldom smiled on his enterprises.  The crows liked Justin's corn better
than any other in Edgewood.  It had a richness peculiar to itself, a
quality that appealed to the most jaded palate, so that it was really
worth while to fly over a mile of intervening fields and pay it the
delicate compliment of preference.

Justin could explain the attitude of caterpillars, worms, grasshoppers,
and potato-bugs toward him only by assuming that he attracted them as the
magnet in the toy boxes attracts the miniature fishes.

"Land of liberty! look at 'em congregate!" ejaculated Jabe Slocum, when
he was called in for consultation.  "Now if you'd gone in for breedin'
insecks, you could be as proud as Cuffy an' exhibit 'em at the County
Fair!  They'd give yer prizes for size an' numbers an' speed, I guess!
Why, say, they're real crowded for room--the plants ain't give 'em enough
leaves to roost on!  Have you tried 'Bug Death'?"

"It acts like a tonic on them," said Justin gloomily.

"Sho! you don't say so!  Now mine can't abide the sight nor smell of it.
What 'bout Paris green?"

"They thrive on it; it's as good as an appetizer."

"Well," said Jabe Slocum, revolving the quid of tobacco in his mouth
reflectively, "the bug that ain't got no objection to p'ison is a bug
that's got ways o' thinkin' an' feelin' an' reasonin' that I ain't able
to cope with!  P'r'aps it's all a leadin' o' Providence.  Mebbe it shows
you'd ought to quit farmin' crops an' take to raisin' live stock!"

Justin did just that, as a matter of fact, a year or two later; but stock
that has within itself the power of being "live" has also rare
qualifications for being dead when occasion suits, and it generally did
suit Justin's stock.  It proved prone not only to all the general
diseases that cattle-flesh is heir to, but was capable even of suicide.
At least, it is true that two valuable Jersey calves, tied to stakes on
the hillside, had flung themselves violently down the bank and strangled
themselves with their own ropes in a manner which seemed to show that
they found no pleasure in existence, at all events on the Peabody farm.

These were some of the little tragedies that had sickened young Justin
Peabody with life in Edgewood, and Nancy Wentworth, even then, realized
some of them and sympathized without speaking, in a girl's poor, helpless
way.

Mrs. Simpson had washed the floor in the right wing of the church and
Nancy had cleaned all the paint.  Now she sat in the old Peabody pew
darning the forlorn, faded cushion with grey carpet-thread: thread as
grey as her own life.

The scrubbing-party had moved to its labours in a far corner of the
church, and two of the women were beginning preparations for the basket
luncheons.  Nancy's needle was no busier than her memory.  Long years ago
she had often sat in the Peabody pew, sometimes at first as a girl of
sixteen when asked by Esther, and then, on coming home from school at
eighteen, "finished," she had been invited now and again by Mrs. Peabody
herself, on those Sundays when her own invalid mother had not attended
service.

Those were wonderful Sundays--Sundays of quiet, trembling peace and
maiden joy.

Justin sat beside her, and she had been sure then, but had long since
grown to doubt the evidence of her senses, that he, too, vibrated with
pleasure at the nearness.  Was there not a summer morning when his hand
touched her white lace mitt as they held the hymn-book together, and the
lines of the

   Rise, my soul, and stretch thy wings,
   Thy better portion trace,

became blurred on the page and melted into something indistinguishable
for a full minute or two afterward?  Were there not looks, and looks, and
looks?  Or had she some misleading trick of vision in those days?
Justin's dark, handsome profile rose before her: the level brows and fine
lashes; the well-cut nose and lovable mouth--the Peabody mouth and chin,
somewhat too sweet and pliant for strength, perhaps.  Then the eyes
turned to hers in the old way, just for a fleeting glance, as they had so
often done at prayer-meeting, or sociable, or Sunday service.  Was it not
a man's heart she had seen in them?  And oh, if she could only be sure
that her own woman's heart had not looked out from hers, drawn from its
maiden shelter in spite of all her wish to keep it hidden!

Then followed two dreary years of indecision and suspense, when Justin's
eyes met hers less freely; when his looks were always gloomy and anxious;
when affairs at the Peabody farm grew worse and worse; when his mother
followed her husband, the old Deacon, and her daughter Esther to the
burying-ground in the churchyard.  Then the end of all things came, the
end of the world for Nancy: Justin's departure for the West in a very
frenzy of discouragement over the narrowness and limitation and injustice
of his lot; over the rockiness and barrenness and unkindness of the New
England soil; over the general bitterness of fate and the "bludgeonings
of chance."

He was a failure, born of a family of failures.  If the world owed him a
living, he had yet to find the method by which it could be earned.  All
this he thought and uttered, and much more of the same sort.  In these
days of humbled pride self was paramount, though it was a self he
despised.  There was no time for love.  Who was he for a girl to lean
upon?--he who could not stand erect himself!

He bade a stiff good-bye to his neighbours, and to Nancy he vouchsafed
little more.  A handshake, with no thrill of love in it such as might
have furnished her palm, at least, some memories to dwell upon; a few
stilted words of leave-taking; a halting, meaningless sentence or two
about his "botch" of life--then he walked away from the Wentworth
doorstep.  But half way down the garden path, where the shrivelled
hollyhocks stood like sentinels, did a wave of something different sweep
over him--a wave of the boyish, irresponsible past when his heart had
wings and could fly without fear to its mate--a wave of the past that was
rushing through Nancy's mind, well-nigh burying her in its bitter-sweet
waters!  For he lifted his head, and suddenly retracing his steps, he
came toward her, and, taking her hand again, said forlornly: "You'll see
me back when my luck turns, Nancy."

Nancy knew that the words might mean little or much, according to the
manner in which they were uttered, but to her hurt pride and sore, shamed
woman-instinct, they were a promise, simply because there was a choking
sound in Justin's voice and tears in Justin's eyes.  "You'll see me back
when my luck turns, Nancy;" this was the phrase upon which she had lived
for more than ten years.  Nancy had once heard the old parson say, ages
ago, that the whole purpose of life was the growth of the soul; that we
eat, sleep, clothe ourselves, work, love, all to give the soul another
day, month, year, in which to develop.  She used to wonder if her soul
could be growing in the monotonous round of her dull duties and her
duller pleasures.  She did not confess it even to herself; nevertheless
she knew that she worked, ate, slept, to live until Justin's luck turned.
Her love had lain in her heart a bird without a song, year after year.
Her mother had dwelt by her side and never guessed; her father too; and
both were dead.  The neighbours also, lynx-eyed and curious, had never
suspected.  If she had suffered, no one in Edgewood was any the wiser,
for the maiden heart is not commonly worn on the sleeve in New England.
If she had been openly pledged to Justin Peabody, she could have waited
twice ten years with a decent show of self-respect, for long engagements
were viewed rather as a matter of course in that neighbourhood.  The
endless months had gone on since that grey November day when Justin had
said good-bye.  It had been just before Thanksgiving, and she went to
church with an aching and ungrateful heart.  The parson read from the
eighth chapter of St. Matthew, a most unexpected selection for that
holiday.  "If you can't find anything else to be thankful for," he cried,
"go home and be thankful you are not a leper!"

Nancy took the drastic counsel away from the church with her, and it was
many a year before she could manage to add to this slender store anything
to increase her gratitude for mercies given, though all the time she was
outwardly busy, cheerful, and helpful.

Justin had once come back to Edgewood, and it was the bitterest drop in
her cup of bitterness that she was spending that winter in Berwick
(where, so the neighbours told him, she was a great favourite in society,
and was receiving much attention from gentlemen), so that she had never
heard of his visit until the spring had come again.  Parted friends did
not keep up with one another's affairs by means of epistolary
communication, in those days, in Edgewood; it was not the custom.  Spoken
words were difficult enough to Justin Peabody, and written words were
quite impossible, especially if they were to be used to define his half-
conscious desires and his fluctuations of will, or to recount his
disappointments and discouragements and mistakes.




CHAPTER IV


It was Saturday afternoon, the twenty-fourth of December, and the weary
sisters of the Dorcas band rose from their bruised knees and removed
their little stores of carpet-tacks from their mouths.  This was a
feminine custom of long standing, and as no village dressmaker had ever
died of pins in the digestive organs, so were no symptoms of carpet-tacks
ever discovered in any Dorcas, living or dead.  Men wondered at the habit
and reviled it, but stood confounded in the presence of its indubitable
harmlessness.

The red ingrain carpet was indeed very warm, beautiful, and comforting to
the eye, and the sisters were suitably grateful to Providence, and
devoutly thankful to themselves, that they had been enabled to buy, sew,
and lay so many yards of it.  But as they stood looking at their
completed task, it was cruelly true that there was much left to do.

The aisles had been painted dark brown on each side of the red strips
leading from the doors to the pulpit, but the rest of the church floor
was "a thing of shreds and patches."  Each member of the carpet committee
had paid (as a matter of pride, however ill she could afford it) three
dollars and sixty-seven cents for sufficient carpet to lay in her own
pew; but these brilliant spots of conscientious effort only made the
stretches of bare, unpainted floor more evident.  And that was not all.
Traces of former spasmodic and individual efforts desecrated the present
ideals.  The doctor's pew had a pink and blue Brussels on it; the
lawyer's, striped stair-carpeting; the Browns from Deerwander sported
straw matting and were not abashed; while the Greens, the Whites, the
Blacks and the Greys displayed floor coverings as dissimilar as their
names.

"I never noticed it before!" exclaimed Maria Sharp, "but it ain't
Christian, that floor! it's heathenish and ungodly!"

"For mercy's sake, don't swear, Maria," said Mrs. Miller nervously.
"We've done our best, and let's hope that folks will look up and not
down.  It isn't as if they were going to set in the chandelier; they'll
have something else to think about when Nancy gets her hemlock branches
and white carnations in the pulpit vases.  This morning my Abner picked
off two pinks from the plant I've been nursing in my dining-room for
weeks, trying to make it bloom for Christmas.  I slapped his hands good,
and it's been haunting me ever since to think I had to correct him the
day before Christmas--Come, Lobelia, we must be hurrying!"

"One thing comforts me," exclaimed the Widow Buzzell, as she took her
hammer and tacks preparatory to leaving; "and that is that the Methodist
meetin'-house ain't got any carpet at all."

"Mrs. Buzzell, Mrs. Buzzell!" interrupted the minister's wife, with a
smile that took the sting from her speech.  "It will be like punishing
little Abner Miller; if we think those thoughts on Christmas Eve, we
shall surely be haunted afterward."

"And anyway," interjected Maria Sharp, who always saved the situation,
"you just wait and see if the Methodists don't say they'd rather have no
carpet at all than have one that don't go all over the floor.  I know
'em!" and she put on her hood and blanket-shawl as she gave one last fond
look at the improvements.

"I'm going home to get my supper, and come back afterward to lay the
carpet in my pew; my beans and brown bread will be just right by now, and
perhaps it will rest me a little; besides, I must feed 'Zekiel."

As Nancy Wentworth spoke, she sat in a corner of her own modest rear
seat, looking a little pale and tired.  Her waving dark hair had loosened
and fallen over her cheeks, and her eyes gleamed from under it wistfully.
Nowadays Nancy's eyes never had the sparkle of gazing into the future,
but always the liquid softness that comes from looking backward.

"The church will be real cold by then, Nancy," objected Mrs.
Burbank.--"Good-night, Mrs. Baxter."

"Oh, no!  I shall be back by half-past six, and I shall not work long.  Do
you know what I believe I'll do, Mrs. Burbank, just through the holidays?
Christmas and New Year's both coming on Sunday this year, there'll be a
great many out to church, not counting the strangers that'll come to the
special service to-morrow.  Instead of putting down my own pew carpet
that'll never be noticed here in the back, I'll lay it in the old Peabody
pew, for the red aisle-strip leads straight up to it; the ministers
always go up that side, and it does look forlorn."

"That's so!  And all the more because my pew, that's exactly opposite in
the left wing, is new carpeted and cushioned," replied the president.  "I
think it's real generous of you, Nancy, because the Riverboro folks,
knowing that you're a member of the carpet committee, will be sure to
notice, and think it's queer you haven't made an effort to carpet your
own pew."

"Never mind!" smiled Nancy wearily.  "Riverboro folks never go to bed on
Saturday nights without wondering what Edgewood is thinking about them!"

The minister's wife stood at her window watching Nancy as she passed the
parsonage.

"How wasted!  How wasted!" she sighed.  "Going home to eat her lonely
supper and feed 'Zekiel . . . I can bear it for the others, but not for
Nancy . . . Now she has lighted her lamp, now she has put fresh pine on
the fire, for new smoke comes from the chimney.  Why should I sit down
and serve my dear husband, and Nancy feed 'Zekiel?"

There was some truth in Mrs. Baxter's feeling.  Mrs. Buzzell, for
instance, had three sons; Maria Sharp was absorbed in her lame father and
her Sunday-school work; and Lobelia Brewster would not have considered
matrimony a blessing, even under the most favourable conditions.  But
Nancy was framed and planned for other things, and 'Zekiel was an
insufficient channel for her soft, womanly sympathy and her bright
activity of mind and body.

'Zekiel had lost his tail in a mowing-machine; 'Zekiel had the asthma,
and the immersion of his nose in milk made him sneeze, so he was wont to
slip his paw in and out of the dish and lick it patiently for five
minutes together.  Nancy often watched him pityingly, giving him kind and
gentle words to sustain his fainting spirit, but to-night she paid no
heed to him, although he sneezed violently to attract her attention.

She had put her supper on the lighted table by the kitchen window and was
pouring out her cup of tea, when a boy rapped at the door.  "Here's a
paper and a letter, Miss Wentworth," he said.  "It's the second this
week, and they think over to the store that that Berwick widower must be
settin' up and takin' notice!"

She had indeed received a letter the day before, an unsigned
communication, consisting only of the words, "Second Epistle of John.
Verse 12."

She had taken her Bible to look out the reference and found it to be:--

"Having many things to write unto you, I would not write with paper and
ink; but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy
may be full."

The envelope was postmarked New York, and she smiled, thinking that Mrs.
Emerson, a charming lady who had spent the summer in Edgewood, and had
sung with her in the village choir, was coming back, as she had promised,
to have a sleigh ride and see Edgewood in its winter dress.  Nancy had
almost forgotten the first letter in the excitements of her busy day, and
now here was another, from Boston this time.  She opened the envelope and
found again only a single sentence, printed, not written.  (Lest she
should guess the hand, she wondered?)

"Second Epistle of John.  Verse 5."

"And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment
unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one
another."

Was it Mrs. Emerson?  Could it be--any one else?  Was it--?  No, it might
have been, years ago; but not now; not now!--And yet; he was always so
different from other people; and once, in church, he had handed her the
hymn-book with his finger pointing to a certain verse.

She always fancied that her secret fidelity of heart rose from the fact
that Justin Peabody was "different."  From the hour of their first
acquaintance, she was ever comparing him with his companions, and always
to his advantage.  So long as a woman finds all men very much alike (as
Lobelia Brewster did, save that she allowed some to be worse!), she is in
no danger.  But the moment in which she perceives and discriminates
subtle differences, marvelling that there can be two opinions about a
man's superiority, that moment the miracle has happened.

"And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment
unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one
another."

No, it could not be from Justin.  She drank her tea, played with her
beans abstractedly, and nibbled her slice of steaming brown bread.

"Not as though I wrote a new commandment unto thee."

No, not a new one; twelve, fifteen years old, that commandment!

"That we love one another."

Who was speaking?  Who had written these words?  The first letter sounded
just like Mrs. Emerson, who had said she was a very poor correspondent,
but that she should just "drop down" on Nancy one of these days; but this
second letter never came from Mrs. Emerson.--Well, there would be an
explanation some time; a pleasant one; one to smile over, and tell
'Zekiel and repeat to the neighbours; but not an unexpected, sacred,
beautiful explanation, such a one as the heart of a woman could imagine,
if she were young enough and happy enough to hope.

She washed her cup and plate; replaced the uneaten beans in the brown
pot, and put them away with the round loaf, folded the cloth (Lobelia
Brewster said Nancy always "set out her meals as if she was entertainin'
company from Portland"), closed the stove dampers, carried the lighted
lamp to a safe corner shelf, and lifted 'Zekiel to his cushion on the
high-backed rocker, doing all with the nice precision of long habit.  Then
she wrapped herself warmly, and locking the lonely little house behind
her, set out to finish her work in the church.




CHAPTER V


At this precise moment Justin Peabody was eating his own beans and brown
bread (articles of diet of which his Detroit landlady was lamentably
ignorant) at the new tavern, not far from the meeting-house.

It would not be fair to him to say that Mrs. Burbank's letter had brought
him back to Edgewood, but it had certainly accelerated his steps.

For the first six years after Justin Peabody left home, he had drifted
about from place to place, saving every possible dollar of his uncertain
earnings in the conscious hope that he could go back to New England and
ask Nancy Wentworth to marry him.  The West was prosperous and
progressive, but how he yearned, in idle moments, for the grimmer and
more sterile soil that had given him birth!

Then came what seemed to him a brilliant chance for a lucky turn of his
savings, and he invested them in an enterprise which, wonderfully as it
promised, failed within six months and left him penniless.  At that
moment he definitely gave up all hope, and for the next few years he put
Nancy as far as possible out of his mind, in the full belief that he was
acting an honourable part in refusing to drag her into his tangled and
fruitless way of life.  If she ever did care for him,--and he could not
be sure, she was always so shy,--she must have outgrown the feeling long
since, and be living happily, or at least contentedly, in her own way.  He
was glad in spite of himself when he heard that she had never married;
but at least he hadn't it on his conscience that _he_ had kept her
single!

On the seventeenth of December, Justin, his business day over, was
walking toward the dreary house in which he ate and slept.  As he turned
the corner, he heard one woman say to another, as they watched a man
stumbling sorrowfully down the street: "Going home will be the worst of
all for him--to find nobody there!"  That was what going home had meant
for him these ten years, but he afterward felt it strange that this
thought should have struck him so forcibly on that particular day.
Entering the boarding-house, he found Mrs. Burbank's letter with its
Edgewood postmark on the hall table, and took it up to his room.  He
kindled a little fire in the air-tight stove, watching the flame creep
from shavings to kindlings, from kindlings to small pine, and from small
pine to the round, hardwood sticks; then when the result seemed certain,
he closed the stove door and sat down to read the letter.  Whereupon all
manner of strange things happened in his head and heart and flesh and
spirit as he sat there alone, his hands in his pockets, his feet braced
against the legs of the stove.

It was a cold winter night, and the snow and sleet beat against the
windows.  He looked about the ugly room: at the washstand with its square
of oilcloth in front and its detestable bowl and pitcher; at the rigours
of his white iron bedstead, with the valley in the middle of the lumpy
mattress and the darns in the rumpled pillowcases; at the dull
photographs of the landlady's hideous husband and children enshrined on
the mantelshelf; looked at the abomination of desolation surrounding him
until his soul sickened and cried out like a child's for something more
like home.  It was as if a spring thaw had melted his ice-bound heart,
and on the crest of a wave it was drifting out into the milder waters of
some unknown sea.  He could have laid his head in the kind lap of a woman
and cried: "Comfort me!  Give me companionship or I die!"

The wind howled in the chimney and rattled the loose window-sashes; the
snow, freezing as it fell, dashed against the glass with hard, cutting
little blows; at least, that is the way in which the wind and snow
flattered themselves they were making existence disagreeable to Justin
Peabody when he read the letter; but never were elements more mistaken.

It was a June Sunday in the boarding-house bedroom; and for that matter
it was not the boarding-house bedroom at all: it was the old Orthodox
church on Tory Hill in Edgewood.

The windows were wide open, and the smell of the purple clover and the
humming of the bees were drifting into the sweet, wide spaces within.
Justin was sitting in the end of the Peabody pew, and Nancy Wentworth was
beside him; Nancy, cool and restful in her white dress; dark-haired Nancy
under the shadow of her shirred muslin hat.

   Rise, my soul, and stretch thy wings,
   Thy better portion trace.

The melodeon gave the tune, and Nancy and he stood to sing, taking the
book between them.  His hand touched hers, and as the music of the hymn
rose and fell, the future unrolled itself before his eyes; a future in
which Nancy was his wedded wife; and the happy years stretched on and on
in front of them until there was a row of little heads in the old Peabody
pew, and mother and father could look proudly along the line at the young
things they were bringing into the house of the Lord.

The recalling of that vision worked like magic in Justin's blood.  His
soul rose and stretched its wings and "traced its better portion"
vividly, as he sprang to his feet and walked up and down the bedroom
floor.  He would get a few days' leave and go back to Edgewood for
Christmas, to join, with all the old neighbours, in the service at the
meeting-house; and in pursuance of this resolve, he shook his fist in the
face of the landlady's husband on the mantelpiece and dared him to
prevent.

He had a salary of fifty dollars a month, with some very slight prospect
of an increase after January.  He did not see how two persons could eat,
and drink, and lodge, and dress on it in Detroit, but he proposed to give
Nancy Wentworth the refusal of that magnificent future, that brilliant
and tempting offer.  He had exactly one hundred dollars in the bank, and
sixty or seventy of them would be spent in the journeys, counting two
happy, blessed fares back from Edgewood to Detroit; and if he paid only
his own fare back, he would throw the price of the other into the pond
behind the Wentworth house.  He would drop another ten dollars into the
plate on Christmas Day toward the repairs on the church; if he starved,
he would do that.  He was a failure.  Everything his hand touched turned
to naught.  He looked himself full in the face, recognizing his weakness,
and in this supremest moment of recognition he was a stronger man than he
had been an hour before.  His drooping shoulders had straightened; the
restless look had gone from his eyes; his sombre face had something of
repose in it, the repose of a settled purpose.  He was a failure, but
perhaps if he took the risks (and if Nancy would take them--but that was
the trouble, women were so unselfish, they were always willing to take
risks, and one ought not to let them!), perhaps he might do better in
trying to make a living for two than he had in working for himself alone.
He would go home, tell Nancy that he was an unlucky good-for-naught, and
ask her if she would try her hand at making him over.




CHAPTER VI


These were the reasons that had brought Justin Peabody to Edgewood on the
Saturday afternoon before Christmas, and had taken him to the new tavern
on Tory Hill, near the Meeting-House.

Nobody recognized him at the station or noticed him at the tavern, and
after his supper he put on his overcoat and started out for a walk,
aimlessly hoping that he might meet a friend, or failing that, intending
to call on some of his old neighbours, with the view of hearing the
village news and securing some information which might help him to decide
when he had better lay himself and his misfortunes at Nancy Wentworth's
feet.  They were pretty feet!  He remembered that fact well enough under
the magical influence of familiar sights and sounds and odours.  He was
restless, miserable, anxious, homesick--not for Detroit, but for some
heretofore unimagined good; yet, like Bunyan's shepherd boy in the Valley
of Humiliation, he carried "the herb called Hearts-ease in his bosom,"
for he was at last loving consciously.

How white the old church looked, and how green the blinds!  It must have
been painted very lately: that meant that the parish was fairly
prosperous.  There were new shutters in the belfry tower, too; he
remembered the former open space and the rusty bell, and he liked the
change.  Did the chimney use to be in that corner?  No; but his father
had always said it would have drawn better if it had been put there in
the beginning.  New shingles within a year: that was evident to a
practised eye.  He wondered if anything had been done to the inside of
the building, but he must wait until the morrow to see, for, of course,
the doors would be locked.  No; the one at the right side was ajar.  He
opened it softly and stepped into the tiny square entry that he recalled
so well--the one through which the Sunday-school children ran out to the
steps from their catechism, apparently enjoying the sunshine after a
spell of orthodoxy; the little entry where the village girls congregated
while waiting for the last bell to ring--they made a soft blur of pink
and blue and buff, a little flutter of curls and braids and fans and
sunshades, in his mind's eye, as he closed the outer door behind him and
gently opened the inner one.  The church was flooded with moonlight and
snowlight, and there was one lamp burning at the back of the pulpit; a
candle, too, on the pulpit steps.  There was the tip-tap-tip of a tack-
hammer going on in a distant corner.  Was somebody hanging Christmas
garlands?  The new red carpet attracted his notice, and as he grew
accustomed to the dim light, it carried his eye along the aisle he had
trod so many years of Sundays, to the old familiar pew.  The sound of the
hammer ceased and a woman rose from her knees.  A stranger was doing for
the family honour what he ought himself to have done.  The woman turned
to shake her skirt, and it was Nancy Wentworth.  He might have known it.
Women were always faithful; they always remembered old landmarks, old
days, old friends, old duties.  His father and mother and Esther were all
gone; who but dear Nancy would have made the old Peabody pew right and
tidy for the Christmas festival?  Bless her kind womanly heart!

She looked just the same to him as when he last saw her.  Mercifully he
seemed to have held in remembrance all these years not so much her
youthful bloom as her general qualities of mind and heart: her
cheeriness, her spirit, her unflagging zeal, her bright womanliness.  Her
grey dress was turned up in front over a crimson moreen petticoat.  She
had on a cosy jacket, a fur turban of some sort with a redbreast in it,
and her cheeks were flushed from exertion.  "Sweet records, and promises
as sweet," had always met in Nancy's face, and either he had forgotten
how pretty she was, or else she had absolutely grown prettier during his
absence.

Nancy would have chosen the supreme moment of meeting very differently,
but she might well have chosen worse.  She unpinned her skirt and brushed
the threads off, smoothed the pew cushions carefully, and took a last
stitch in the ragged hassock.  She then lifted the Bible and the hymn-
book from the rack, and putting down a bit of flannel on the pulpit
steps, took a flatiron from an oil-stove, and opening the ancient books,
pressed out the well-thumbed leaves one by one with infinite care.  After
replacing the volumes in their accustomed place, she first extinguished
the flame of her stove, which she tucked out of sight, and then blew out
the lamp and the candle.  The church was still light enough for objects
to be seen in a shadowy way, like the objects in a dream, and Justin did
not realize that he was a man in the flesh, looking at a woman; spying,
it might be, upon her privacy.  He was one part of a dream and she
another, and he stood as if waiting, and fearing, to be awakened.

Nancy, having done all, came out of the pew, and standing in the aisle,
looked back at the scene of her labours with pride and content.  And as
she looked, some desire to stay a little longer in the dear old place
must have come over her, or some dread of going back to her lonely
cottage, for she sat down in Justin's corner of the pew with folded
hands, her eyes fixed dreamily on the pulpit and her ears hearing: "Not
as though I wrote a new commandment unto thee, but that which we had from
the beginning."

Justin's grasp on the latch tightened as he prepared to close the door
and leave the place, but his instinct did not warn him quickly enough,
after all, for, obeying some uncontrollable impulse, Nancy suddenly fell
on her knees in the pew and buried her face in the cushions.

The dream broke, and in an instant Justin was a man--worse than that, he
was an eavesdropper, ashamed of his unsuspected presence.  He felt
himself standing, with covered head and feet shod, in the holy temple of
a woman's heart.

But his involuntary irreverence brought abundant grace with it.  The
glimpse and the revelation wrought their miracles silently and
irresistibly, not by the slow processes of growth which Nature demands
for her enterprises, but with the sudden swiftness of the spirit.  In an
instant changes had taken place in Justin's soul which his so-called
"experiencing religion" twenty-five years back had been powerless to
effect.  He had indeed been baptized then, but the recording angel could
have borne witness that this second baptism fructified the first, and
became the real herald of the new birth and the new creature.




CHAPTER VII


Justin Peabody silently closed the inner door, and stood in the entry
with his head bent and his heart in a whirl until he should hear Nancy
rise to her feet.  He must take this Heaven-sent chance of telling her
all, but how do it without alarming her?

A moment, and her step sounded in the stillness of the empty church.

Obeying the first impulse, he passed through the outer door, and standing
on the step, knocked once, twice, three times; then, opening it a little
and speaking through the chink, he called, "Is Miss Nancy Wentworth
here?"

"I'm here!" in a moment came Nancy's answer, and then, with a little
wondering tremor in her voice, as if a hint of the truth had already
dawned: "What's wanted?"

"You're wanted, Nancy, wanted badly, by Justin Peabody, come back from
the West."

The door opened wide, and Justin faced Nancy standing half-way down the
aisle, her eyes brilliant, her lips parted.  A week ago Justin's
apparition confronting her in the empty Meeting-House after nightfall,
even had she been prepared for it as now, by his voice, would have
terrified her beyond measure.  Now it seemed almost natural and
inevitable.  She had spent these last days in the church where both of
them had been young and happy together; the two letters had brought him
vividly to mind, and her labour in the old Peabody pew had been one long
excursion into the past in which he was the most prominent and the best-
loved figure.

"I said I'd come back to you when my luck turned, Nancy."

These were so precisely the words she expected him to say, should she
ever see him again face to face, that for an additional moment they but
heightened her sense of unreality.

"Well, the luck hasn't turned, after all, but I couldn't wait any longer.
Have you given a thought to me all these years, Nancy?"

"More than one, Justin"; for the very look upon his face, the tenderness
of his voice, the attitude of his body, outran his words and told her
what he had come home to say, told her that her years of waiting were
over at last.

"You ought to despise me for coming back again with only myself and my
empty hands to offer you."

How easy it was to speak his heart out in this dim and quiet place!  How
tongue-tied he would have been, sitting on the black haircloth sofa in
the Wentworth parlour and gazing at the open soapstone stove!

"Oh, men are such fools!" cried Nancy, smiles and tears struggling
together in her speech, as she sat down suddenly in her own pew and put
her hands over her face.

"They are," agreed Justin humbly, "but I've never stopped loving you,
whenever I've had time for thinking or loving.  And I wasn't sure that
you really cared anything about me; and how could I have asked you when I
hadn't a dollar in the world?"

"There are other things to give a woman besides dollars, Justin."

"Are there?  Well, you shall have them all, every one of them, Nancy, if
you can make up your mind to do without the dollars; for dollars seem to
be just what I can't manage."

Her hand was in his by this time, and they were sitting side by side in
the cushionless, carpetless Wentworth pew.  The door stood open; the
winter moon shone in upon them.  That it was beginning to grow cold in
the church passed unnoticed.  The grasp of the woman's hand seemed to
give the man new hope and courage, and Justin's warm, confiding, pleading
pressure brought balm to Nancy, balm and healing for the wounds her pride
had suffered; joy, too, half-conscious still, that her life need not be
lived to the end in unfruitful solitude.  She had waited, "as some grey
lake lies, full and smooth, awaiting the star below the twilight."  Justin
Peabody might have been no other woman's star, but he was Nancy's!

"Just you sitting beside me here makes me feel as if I'd been asleep or
dead all these years, and just born over again," said Justin.  "I've led
a respectable, hard-working, honest life, Nancy," he continued, "and I
don't owe any man a cent; the trouble is that no man owes me one.  I've
got enough money to pay two fares back to Detroit on Monday, although I
was terribly afraid you wouldn't let me do it.  It'll need a good deal of
thinking and planning, Nancy, for we shall be very poor."

Nancy had been storing up fidelity and affection deep, deep in the hive
of her heart all these years, and now the honey of her helpfulness stood
ready to be gathered.

"Could I keep hens in Detroit?" she asked.  "I can always make them pay."

"Hens--in three rooms, Nancy?"

Her face fell.  "And no yard?"

"No yard."

A moment's pause, and then the smile came.  "Oh, well, I've had yards and
hens for thirty-five years.  Doing without them will be a change.  I can
take in sewing."

"No, you can't, Nancy.  I need your backbone and wits and pluck and
ingenuity, but if I can't ask you to sit with your hands folded for the
rest of your life, as I'd like to, you shan't use them for other people.
You're marrying me to make a man of me, but I'm not marrying you to make
you a drudge."

His voice rang clear and true in the silence, and Nancy's heart vibrated
at the sound.

"Oh, Justin, Justin!" she whispered.  "There's something wrong somewhere,
but we'll find it out together, you and I, and make it right.  You're not
like a failure.  You don't even _look_ poor, Justin; there isn't a man in
Edgewood to compare with you, or I should be washing his dishes and
darning his stockings this minute.  And I am not a pauper!  There'll be
the rent of my little house and a carload of my furniture, so you can put
the three-room idea out of your mind, and your firm will offer you a
larger salary when you tell them you have a wife to take care of.  Oh, I
see it all, and it is as easy and bright and happy as can be!"

Justin put his arm around her and drew her close, with such a throb of
gratitude for her belief and trust that it moved him almost to tears.

There was a long pause: then he said:--

"Now I shall call for you to-morrow morning after the last bell has
stopped ringing, and we will walk up the aisle together and sit in the
old Peabody pew.  We shall be a nine-days' wonder anyway, but this will
be equal to an announcement, especially if you take my arm.  We don't
either of us like to be stared at, but this will show without a word what
we think of each other and what we've promised to be to each other, and
it's the only thing that will make me feel sure of you and settled in my
mind after all these mistaken years.  Have you got the courage, Nancy?"

"I shouldn't wonder!  I guess if I've had courage enough to wait for you,
I've got courage enough to walk up the aisle with you and marry you
besides!" said Nancy.--"Now it is too late for us to stay here any
longer, and you must see me only as far as my gate, for perhaps you
haven't forgotten yet how interested the Brewsters are in their
neighbours."

They stood at the little Wentworth gate for a moment, hand close clasped
in hand.  The night was clear, the air was cold and sparkling, but with
nothing of bitterness in it; the sky was steely blue and the evening star
glowed and burned like a tiny sun.  Nancy remembered the shepherd's song
she had taught the Sunday-school children, and repeated softly:--

   For I my sheep was watching
   Beneath the silent skies,
   When sudden, far to eastward,
   I saw a star arise;
   Then all the peaceful heavens
   With sweetest music rang,
   And glory, glory, glory!
   The happy angels sang.

   So I this night am joyful,
   Though I can scarce tell why,
   It seemeth me that glory
   Hath met us very nigh;
   And we, though poor and humble,
   Have part in heavenly plan,
   For, born to-night, the Prince of Peace
   Shall rule the heart of man.

Justin's heart melted within him like wax to the woman's vision and the
woman's touch.

"Oh, Nancy, Nancy!" he whispered.  "If I had brought my bad luck to you
long, long ago, would you have taken me then, and have I lost years of
such happiness as this?"

"There are some things it is not best for a man to be certain about,"
said Nancy, with a wise smile and a last good-night.




CHAPTER VIII


   "Ring out, sweet bells,
   O'er woods and dells
   Your lovely strains repeat,
   While happy throngs
   With joyous songs
   Each accent gladly greet."

Christmas morning in the old Tory Hill Meeting-House was felt by all of
the persons who were present in that particular year to be a most
exciting and memorable occasion.

The old sexton quite outdid himself, for although he had rung the bell
for more than thirty years, he had never felt greater pride or joy in his
task.  Was not his son John home for Christmas, and John's wife, and a
grandchild newly named Nathaniel for himself?  Were there not spareribs
and turkeys and cranberries and mince pies on the pantry shelves, and
barrels of rosy Baldwins in the cellar and bottles of mother's root beer
just waiting to give a holiday pop?  The bell itself forgot its age and
the suspicion of a crack that dulled its voice on a damp day, and,
inspired by the bright, frosty air, the sexton's inspiring pull, and the
Christmas spirit, gave out nothing but joyous tones.

Ding-dong!  Ding-dong!  It fired the ambitions of star scholars about to
recite hymns and sing solos.  It thrilled little girls expecting dolls
before night.  It excited beyond bearing dozens of little boys being
buttoned into refractory overcoats.  Ding-dong!  Ding-dong!  Mothers'
fingers trembled when they heard it, and mothers' voices cried: "If that
is the second bell, the children will never be ready in time!  Where are
the overshoes?  Where are the mittens?  Hurry, Jack!  Hurry, Jennie!"
Ding-dong!  Ding-dong!  "Where's Sally's muff?  Where's father's fur cap?
Is the sleigh at the door?  Are the hot soapstones in?  Have all of you
your money for the contribution box?"

Ding-dong!  Ding-dong!  It was a blithe bell, a sweet, true bell, a holy
bell, and to Justin, pacing his tavern room, as to Nancy, trembling in
her maiden chamber, it rang a Christmas message:--

   Awake, glad heart!  Arise and sing;
   It is the birthday of thy King!

The congregation filled every seat in the old Meeting-House.

As Maria Sharp had prophesied, there was one ill-natured spinster from a
rival village who declared that the church floor looked like Joseph's
coat laid out smooth; but in the general chorus of admiration, approval,
and good will, this envious speech, though repeated from mouth to mouth,
left no sting.

Another item of interest long recalled was the fact that on that august
and unapproachable day the pulpit vases stood erect and empty, though
Nancy Wentworth had filled them every Sunday since any one could
remember.  This instance, though felt at the time to be of mysterious
significance if the cause were ever revealed, paled into nothingness
when, after the ringing of the last bell, Nancy Wentworth walked up the
aisle on Justin Peabody's arm, and they took their seats side by side in
the old family pew.

("And consid'able close, too, though there was plenty o' room!")

("And no one that I ever heard of so much as suspicioned that they had
ever kept company!")

("And do you s'pose she knew Justin was expected back when she scrubbed
his pew a-Friday?")

("And this explains the empty pulpit vases!")

("And I always said that Nancy would make a real handsome couple if she
ever got anybody to couple with!")

During the unexpected and solemn procession of the two up the aisle the
soprano of the village choir stopped short in the middle of the Doxology,
and the three other voices carried it to the end without any treble.
Also, among those present there were some who could not remember
afterward the precise petitions wafted upward in the opening prayer.

And could it be explained otherwise than by cheerfully acknowledging the
bounty of an overruling Providence that Nancy Wentworth should have had a
new winter dress for the first time in five years--a winter dress of dark
brown cloth to match her beaver muff and victorine?  The existence of
this toilette had been known and discussed in Edgewood for a month past,
and it was thought to be nothing more than a proper token of respect from
a member of the carpet committee to the general magnificence of the
church on the occasion of its reopening after repairs.  Indeed, you could
have identified every member of the Dorcas Society that Sunday morning by
the freshness of her apparel.  The brown dress, then, was generally
expected; but why the white cashmere waist with collar and cuffs of point
lace, devised only and suitable only for the minister's wedding, where it
first saw the light?

"The white waist can only be explained as showing distinct hope!"
whispered the minister's wife during the reading of the church notices.

"To me it shows more than hope; I am very sure that Nancy would never
take any wear out of that lace for hope; it means certainty!" answered
Maria, who was always strong in the prophetic line.

By sermon time Justin's identity had dawned upon most of the
congregation.  A stranger to all but one or two at first, his presence in
the Peabody pew brought his face and figure back, little by little, to
the minds of the old parishioners.

When the contribution plate was passed, the sexton always began at the
right-wing pews, as all the sextons before him had done for a hundred
years.  Every eye in the church was already turned upon Justin and Nancy,
and it was with almost a gasp that those in the vicinity saw a ten dollar
bill fall in the plate.  The sexton reeled, or, if that is too
intemperate a word for a pillar of the church, the good man tottered, but
caught hold of the pew rail with one hand, and, putting the thumb of his
other over the bill, proceeded quickly to the next pew, lest the stranger
should think better of his gift, or demand change, as had occasionally
been done in the olden time.

Nancy never fluttered an eyelash, but sat quietly by Justin's side with
her bosom rising and falling under the beaver fur and her cold hands
clasped tight in the little brown muff.  Far from grudging this
appreciable part of their slender resources, she thrilled with pride to
see Justin's offering fall in the plate.

Justin was too absorbed in his own thoughts to notice anything, but his
munificent contribution had a most unexpected effect upon his reputation,
after all; for on that day, and on many another later one, when his
sudden marriage and departure with Nancy Wentworth were under discussion,
the neighbours said to one another:--

"Justin must be making money fast out West!  He put ten dollars in the
contribution plate a-Sunday, and paid the minister ten more next day for
marryin' him to Nancy; so the Peabody luck has turned at last!" which, as
a matter of fact, it had.

"And all the time," said the chairman of the carpet committee to the
treasurer of the Dorcas Society--"all the time, little as she realized
it, Nancy was laying the carpet in her own pew.  Now she's married to
Justin she'll be the makin' of him, or I miss my guess.  You can't do a
thing with men folks without they're right alongside where you can keep
your eye and hand on 'em.  Justin's handsome and good and stiddy; all he
need is some nice woman to put starch into him.  The Edgewood Peabodys
never had a mite o' stiffenin' in 'em,--limp as dishrags, every blessed
one!  Nancy Wentworth fairly rustles with starch.  Justin hadn't been
engaged to her but a few hours when they walked up the aisle together,
but did you notice the way he carried his head?  I declare I thought 't
would fall off behind!  I shouldn't wonder a mite but they prospered and
come back every summer to set in the old Peabody Pew."

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1902 Gay and Bird edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk

{Book cover: cover.jpg}





THE DIARY OF A GOOSE GIRL


BY
KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY
CLAUDE A. SHEPPERSON

GAY AND BIRD
22 BEDFORD STREET, STRAND
LONDON
1902

{I looked about me with what Stevenson calls a 'fine dizzy, muddle-headed
job': p01.jpg}

TO THE HENS, DUCKS, AND GEESE
WHO SO KINDLY GAVE ME
SITTINGS FOR THESE
SKETCHES THE BOOK
IS GRATEFULLY
INSCRIBED




CHAPTER I.


{Thornycroft House: p1a.jpg}

THORNYCROFT FARM, near Barbury Green, July 1, 190-.

{Picture of woman and goose: p1b.jpg}

In alluding to myself as a Goose Girl, I am using only the most modest of
my titles; for I am also a poultry-maid, a tender of Belgian hares and
rabbits, and a shepherdess; but I particularly fancy the role of Goose
Girl, because it recalls the German fairy tales of my early youth, when I
always yearned, but never hoped, to be precisely what I now am.

As I was jolting along these charming Sussex roads the other day, a fat
buff pony and a tippy cart being my manner of progression, I chanced upon
the village of Barbury Green.

One glance was enough for any woman, who, having eyes to see, could see
with them; but I made assurance doubly sure by driving about a little,
struggling to conceal my new-born passion from the stable-boy who was my
escort.  Then, it being high noon of a cloudless day, I descended from
the trap and said to the astonished yokel: "You may go back to the
Hydropathic; I am spending a month or two here.  Wait a moment--I'll send
a message, please!"

I then scribbled a word or two to those having me in custody.

"I am very tired of people," the note ran, "and want to rest myself by
living a while with things.  Address me (if you must) at Barbury Green
post-office, or at all events send me a box of simple clothing
there--nothing but shirts and skirts, please.  I cannot forget that I am
only twenty miles from Oxenbridge (though it might be one hundred and
twenty, which is the reason I adore it), but I rely upon you to keep an
honourable distance yourselves, and not to divulge my place of retreat to
others, especially to--you know whom!  Do not pursue me.  I will never be
taken alive!"

Having cut, thus, the cable that bound me to civilisation, and having
seen the buff pony and the dazed yokel disappear in a cloud of dust, I
looked about me with what Stevenson calls a "fine, dizzy, muddle-headed
joy," the joy of a successful rebel or a liberated serf.  Plenty of money
in my purse--that was unromantic, of course, but it simplified
matters--and nine hours of daylight remaining in which to find a lodging.

{Life converges there, just at the public duck-pond: p3.jpg}

The village is one of the oldest, and I am sure it must be one of the
quaintest, in England.  It is too small to be printed on the map (an
honour that has spoiled more than one Arcadia), so pray do not look
there, but just believe in it, and some day you may be rewarded by
driving into it by chance, as I did, and feel the same Columbus thrill
running, like an electric current, through your veins.  I withhold
specific geographical information in order that you may not miss that
Columbus thrill, which comes too seldom in a world of railroads.

The Green is in the very centre of Barbury village, and all civic,
political, family, and social life converges there, just at the public
duck-pond--a wee, sleepy lake with a slope of grass-covered stones by
which the ducks descend for their swim.

The houses are set about the Green like those in a toy village.  They are
of old brick, with crumpled, up-and-down roofs of deep-toned red, and
tufts of stonecrop growing from the eaves.  Diamond-paned windows, half
open, admit the sweet summer air; and as for the gardens in front, it
would seem as if the inhabitants had nothing to do but work in them,
there is such a riotous profusion of colour and bloom.  To add to the
effect, there are always pots of flowers hanging from the trees, blue
flax and yellow myrtle; and cages of Java sparrows and canaries singing
joyously, as well they may in such a paradise.

{The houses are set about the Green: p5.jpg}

The shops are idyllic, too, as if Nature had seized even the man of trade
and made him subservient to her designs.  The general draper's, where I
fitted myself out for a day or two quite easily, is set back in a tangle
of poppies and sweet peas, Madonna lilies and Canterbury bells.  The shop
itself has a gay awning, and what do you think the draper has suspended
from it, just as a picturesque suggestion to the passer-by?  Suggestion I
call it, because I should blush to use the word advertisement in
describing anything so dainty and decorative.  Well, then, garlands of
shoes, if you please!  Baby bootlets of bronze; tiny ankle-ties in
yellow, blue, and scarlet kid; glossy patent-leather pumps shining in the
sun, with festoons of slippers at the corners, flowery slippers in
imitation Berlin wool-work.  If you make this picture in your mind's-eye,
just add a window above the awning, and over the fringe of marigolds in
the window-box put the draper's wife dancing a rosy-cheeked baby.  Alas!
my words are only black and white, I fear, and this picture needs a
palette drenched in primary colours.

Along the street, a short distance, is the old watchmaker's.  Set in the
hedge at the gate is a glass case with _Multum in Parvo_ painted on the
woodwork.  Within, a little stand of trinkets revolves slowly; as slowly,
I imagine, as the current of business in that quiet street.  The house
stands a trifle back and is covered thickly with ivy, while over the
entrance-door of the shop is a great round clock set in a green frame of
clustering vine.  The hands pointed to one when I passed the watchmaker's
garden with its thicket of fragrant lavender and its murmuring bees; so I
went in to the sign of the "Strong i' the Arm" for some cold luncheon,
determining to patronise "The Running Footman" at the very next
opportunity.  Neither of these inns is starred by Baedeker, and this fact
adds the last touch of enchantment to the picture.

The landlady at the "Strong i' the Arm" stabbed me in the heart by
telling me that there were no apartments to let in the village, and that
she had no private sitting-room in the inn; but she speedily healed the
wound by saying that I might be accommodated at one of the farm-houses in
the vicinity.  Did I object to a farm-'ouse?  Then she could cheerfully
recommend the Evan's farm, only 'alf a mile away.  She 'ad understood
from Miss Phoebe Evan, who sold her poultry, that they would take one
lady lodger if she didn't wish much waiting upon.

In my present mood I was in search of the strenuous life, and eager to
wait, rather than to be waited upon; so I walked along the edge of the
Green, wishing that some mentally unbalanced householder would take a
sudden fancy to me and ask me to come in and lodge awhile.  I suppose
these families live under their roofs of peach-blow tiles, in the midst
of their blooming gardens, for a guinea a week or thereabouts; yet if
they "undertook" me (to use their own phrase), the bill for my humble
meals and bed would be at least double that.  I don't know that I blame
them; one should have proper compensation for admitting a world-stained
lodger into such an Eden.

When I was searching for rooms a week ago, I chanced upon a pretty
cottage where the woman had sometimes let apartments.  She showed me the
premises and asked me if I would mind taking my meals in her own dining-
room, where I could be served privately at certain hours: and, since she
had but the one sitting-room, would I allow her to go on using it
occasionally? also, if I had no special preference, would I take the
second-sized bedroom and leave her in possession of the largest one,
which permitted her to have the baby's crib by her bedside?  She thought
I should be quite as comfortable, and it was her opinion that in making
arrangements with lodgers, it was a good plan not to "bryke up the 'ome
any more than was necessary."

"Bryke up the 'ome!"  That is seemingly the malignant purpose with which
I entered Barbury Green.




CHAPTER II


July 4th.

Enter the family of Thornycroft Farm, of which I am already a member in
good and regular standing.

I introduce Mrs. Heaven first, for she is a self-saturated person who
would never forgive the insult should she receive any lower place.

She welcomed me with the statement: "We do not take lodgers here, nor
boarders; no lodgers, nor boarders, but we do occasionally admit paying
guests, those who look as if they would appreciate the quietude of the
plyce and be willing as you might say to remunerate according."

{Mrs. Heaven: p10.jpg}

I did not mind at this particular juncture what I was called, so long as
the epithet was comparatively unobjectionable, so I am a paying guest,
therefore, and I expect to pay handsomely for the handsome appellation.
Mrs. Heaven is short and fat; she fills her dress as a pin-cushion fills
its cover; she wears a cap and apron, and she is so full of platitudes
that she would have burst had I not appeared as a providential outlet for
them.  Her accent is not of the farm, but of the town, and smacks wholly
of the marts of trade.  She is repetitious, too, as well as
platitudinous.  "I 'ope if there's anythink you require you will let us
know, let us know," she says several times each day; and whenever she
enters my sitting-room she prefaces her conversation with the remark: "I
trust you are finding it quiet here, miss?  It's the quietude of the
plyce that is its charm, yes, the quietude.  And yet" (she dribbles on)
"it wears on a body after a while, miss.  I often go into Woodmucket to
visit one of my sons just for the noise, simply for the noise, miss, for
nothink else in the world but the noise.  There's nothink like noise for
soothing nerves that is worn threadbare with the quietude, miss, or at
least that's my experience; and yet to a strynger the quietude of the
plyce is its charm, undoubtedly its chief charm; and that is what our
paying guests always say, although our charges are somewhat higher than
other plyces.  If there's anythink you require, miss, I 'ope you'll
mention it.  There is not a commodious assortment in Barbury Green, but
we can always send the pony to Woodmucket in case of urgency.  Our paying
guest last summer was a Mrs. Pollock, and she was by way of having sudden
fancies.  Young and unmarried though you are, miss, I think you will tyke
my meaning without my speaking plyner?  Well, at six o'clock of a rainy
afternoon, she was seized with an unaccountable desire for vegetable
marrows, and Mr. 'Eaven put the pony in the cart and went to Woodmucket
for them, which is a great advantage to be so near a town and yet 'ave
the quietude."

{Mr. Heaven: p11.jpg}

Mr. Heaven is merged, like Mr. Jellyby, in the more shining qualities of
his wife.  A line of description is too long for him.  Indeed, I can
think of no single word brief enough, at least in English.  The Latin
"nil" will do, since no language is rich in words of less than three
letters.  He is nice, kind, bald, timid, thin, and so colourless that he
can scarcely be discerned save in a strong light.  When Mrs. Heaven goes
out into the orchard in search of him, I can hardly help calling from my
window, "Bear a trifle to the right, Mrs. Heaven--now to the left--just
in front of you now--if you put out your hands you will touch him."

Phoebe, aged seventeen, is the daughter of the house.  She is virtuous,
industrious, conscientious, and singularly destitute of physical charm.
She is more than plain; she looks as if she had been planned without any
definite purpose in view, made of the wrong materials, been badly put
together, and never properly finished off; but "plain" after all is a
relative word.  Many a plain girl has been married for her beauty; and
now and then a beauty, falling under a cold eye, has been thought plain.

Phoebe has her compensations, for she is beloved by, and reciprocates the
passion of, the Woodmancote carrier, Woodmucket being the English manner
of pronouncing the place of his abode.  If he "carries" as energetically
for the great public as he fetches for Phoebe, then he must be a rising
and a prosperous man.  He brings her daily, wild strawberries, cherries,
birds' nests, peacock feathers, sea-shells, green hazel-nuts, samples of
hens' food, or bouquets of wilted field flowers tied together tightly and
held with a large, moist, loving hand.  He has fine curly hair of sandy
hue, which forms an aureole on his brow, and a reddish beard, which makes
another inverted aureole to match, round his chin.  One cannot look at
him, especially when the sun shines through him, without thinking how
lovely he would be if stuffed and set on wheels, with a little string to
drag him about.

{The Woodmancote carrier: p13.jpg}

Phoebe confided to me that she was on the eve of loving the postman when
the carrier came across her horizon.

"It doesn't do to be too hysty, does it, miss?" she asked me as we were
weeding the onion bed.  "I was to give the postman his answer on the
Monday night, and it was on the Monday morning that Mr. Gladwish made his
first trip here as carrier.  I may say I never wyvered from that moment,
and no more did he.  When I think how near I came to promising the
postman it gives me a turn."  (I can understand that, for I once met the
man I nearly promised years before to marry, and we both experienced such
a sense of relief at being free instead of bound that we came near
falling in love for sheer joy.)

{Picture of toy on wheels: p14.jpg}

The last and most important member of the household is the Square Baby.
His name is Albert Edward, and he is really five years old and no baby at
all; but his appearance on this planet was in the nature of a complete
surprise to all parties concerned, and he is spoiled accordingly.  He has
a square head and jaw, square shoulders, square hands and feet.  He is
red and white and solid and stolid and slow-witted, as the young of his
class commonly are, and will make a bulwark of the nation in course of
time, I should think; for England has to produce a few thousand such
square babies every year for use in the colonies and in the standing
army.  Albert Edward has already a military gait, and when he has
acquired a habit of obedience at all comparable with his power of
command, he will be able to take up the white man's burden with
distinguished success.  Meantime I can never look at him without
marvelling how the English climate can transmute bacon and eggs, tea and
the solid household loaf into such radiant roses and lilies as bloom upon
his cheeks and lips.




CHAPTER III


July 8th.

Thornycroft is by way of being a small poultry farm.

In reaching it from Barbury Green, you take the first left-hand road, go
till you drop, and there you are.

It reminds me of my "grandmother's farm at Older."  Did you know the song
when you were a child?--

   My grandmother had a very fine farm
      'Way down in the fields of Older.
         With a cluck-cluck here,
         And a cluck-cluck there,
         Here and there a cluck-cluck,
         Cluck-cluck here and there,
      Down in the fields at Older.

It goes on for ever by the simple subterfuge of changing a few words in
each verse.

   My grandmother had a very fine farm
      'Way down in the fields of Older.
         With a quack-quack here,
         And a quack-quack there,
         Here and there a quack-quack,
         Quack-quack here and there,
      Down in the fields at Older.

This is followed by the gobble-gobble, moo-moo, baa-baa, etc., as long as
the laureate's imagination and the infant's breath hold good.  The tune
is pretty, and I do not know, or did not, when I was young, a more
fascinating lyric.

{The sitting hens: p17.jpg}

Thornycroft House must have belonged to a country gentleman once upon a
time, or to more than one; men who built on a bit here and there once in
a hundred years, until finally we have this charmingly irregular and
dilapidated whole.  You go up three steps into Mrs. Heaven's room, down
two into mine, while Phoebe's is up in a sort of turret with long, narrow
lattices opening into the creepers.  There are crooked little
stair-cases, passages that branch off into other passages and lead
nowhere in particular; I can't think of a better house in which to play
hide and seek on a wet day.  In front, what was once, doubtless, a green,
is cut up into greens; to wit, a vegetable garden, where the onions,
turnips, and potatoes grow cosily up to the very door-sill; the
utilitarian aspect of it all being varied by some scarlet-runners and a
scattering of poppies on either side of the path.

The Belgian hares have their habitation in a corner fifty feet distant;
one large enclosure for poultry lies just outside the sweetbrier hedge;
the others, with all the houses and coops, are in the meadow at the back,
where also our tumbler pigeons are kept.

Phoebe attends to the poultry; it is her department.  Mr. Heaven has
neither the force nor the _finesse_ required, and the gentle reader who
thinks these qualities unneeded in so humble a calling has only to spend
a few days at Thornycroft to be convinced.  Mrs. Heaven would be of use,
but she is dressing the Square Baby in the morning and putting him to bed
at night just at the hours when the feathered young things are undergoing
the same operation.

A Goose Girl, like a poet, is sometimes born, sometimes otherwise.  I am
of the born variety.  No training was necessary; I put my head on my
pillow as a complicated product of modern civilisation on a Tuesday
night, and on a Wednesday morning I awoke as a Goose Girl.

{Hens . . . go to bed at a virtuous hour: p19.jpg}

My destiny slumbered during the day, but at eight o'clock I heard a
terrific squawking in the direction of the duck-ponds, and, aimlessly
drifting in that direction, I came upon Phoebe trying to induce ducks and
drakes, geese and ganders, to retire for the night.  They have to be
driven into enclosures behind fences of wire netting, fastened into
little rat-proof boxes, or shut into separate coops, so as to be safe
from their natural enemies, the rats and foxes; which, obeying, I
suppose, the law of supply and demand, abound in this neighbourhood.  The
old ganders are allowed their liberty, being of such age, discretion,
sagacity, and pugnacity that they can be trusted to fight their own
battles.

{Ducks and geese . . . would roam the streets till morning: p20.jpg}

The intelligence of hens, though modest, is of such an order that it
prompts them to go to bed at a virtuous hour of their own accord; but
ducks and geese have to be materially assisted, or I believe they would
roam till morning.  Never did small boy detest and resist being carried
off to his nursery as these dullards, young and old, detest and resist
being driven to theirs.  Whether they suffer from insomnia, or nightmare,
or whether they simply prefer the sweet air of liberty (and death) to the
odour of captivity and the coop, I have no means of knowing.

{The pole was not long enough: p21.jpg}

Phoebe stood by one of the duck-ponds, a long pole in her hand, and a
helpless expression in that doughlike countenance of hers, where aimless
contours and features unite to make a kind of facial blur.  (What does
the carrier see in it?)  The pole was not long enough to reach the ducks,
and Phoebe's method lacked spirit and adroitness, so that it was natural,
perhaps, that they refused to leave the water, the evening being warm,
with an uncommon fine sunset.

{They . . . waddle under the wrong fence: p22.jpg}

I saw the situation at once and ran to meet it with a glow of interest
and anticipation.  If there is anything in the world I enjoy, it is
making somebody do something that he doesn't want to do; and if, when
victory perches upon my banner, the somebody can be brought to say that
he ought to have done it without my making him, that adds the
unforgettable touch to pleasure, though seldom, alas! does it happen.
Then ensued the delightful and stimulating hour that has now become a
feature of the day; an hour in which the remembrance of the table-d'hote
dinner at the Hydro, going on at identically the same time, only stirs me
to a keener joy and gratitude.

{Honking and hissing like a bewildered orchestra: p23.jpg}

{Harried and pecked by the big geese: p24.jpg}

The ducks swim round in circles, hide under the willows, and attempt to
creep into the rat-holes in the banks, a stupidity so crass that it
merits instant death, which it somehow always escapes.  Then they come
out in couples and waddle under the wrong fence into the lower meadow,
fly madly under the tool-house, pitch blindly in with the sitting hens,
and out again in short order, all the time quacking and squawking,
honking and hissing like a bewildered orchestra.  By dint of splashing
the water with poles, throwing pebbles, beating the shrubs at the pond's
edges, "shooing" frantically with our skirts, crawling beneath bars to
head them off, and prodding them from under bushes to urge them on, we
finally get the older ones out of the water and the younger ones into
some sort of relation to their various retreats; but, owing to their lack
of geography, hatred of home, and general recalcitrancy, they none of
them turn up in the right place and have to be sorted out.  We uncover
the top of the little house, or the enclosure as it may be, or reach in
at the door, and, seizing the struggling victim, drag him forth and take
him where he should have had the wit to go in the first instance.  The
weak ones get in with the strong and are in danger of being trampled; two
May goslings that look almost full-grown have run into a house with a
brood of ducklings a week old.  There are twenty-seven crowded into one
coop, five in another, nineteen in another; the gosling with one leg has
to come out, and the duckling threatened with the gapes; their place is
with the "invaleeds," as Phoebe calls them, but they never learn the
location of the hospital, nor have the slightest scruple about spreading
contagious diseases.

{In solitary splendour: p25.jpg}

Finally, when we have separated and sorted exhaustively, an operation in
which Phoebe shows a delicacy of discrimination and a fearlessness of
attack amounting to genius, we count the entire number and find several
missing.  Searching for their animate or inanimate bodies, we "scoop" one
from under the tool-house, chance upon two more who are being harried and
pecked by the big geese in the lower meadow, and discover one sailing by
himself in solitary splendour in the middle of the deserted pond, a look
of evil triumph in his bead-like eye.  Still we lack one young duckling,
and he at length is found dead by the hedge.  A rat has evidently seized
him and choked him at a single throttle, but in such haste that he has
not had time to carry away the tiny body.

"Poor think!" says Phoebe tearfully; "it looks as if it was 'it with some
kind of a wepping.  I don't know whatever to do with the rats, they're
gettin' that fearocious!"

Before I was admitted into daily contact with the living goose (my
previous intercourse with him having been carried on when gravy and
stuffing obscured his true personality), I thought him a very Dreyfus
among fowls, a sorely slandered bird, to whom justice had never been
done; for even the gentle Darwin is hard upon him.  My opinion is
undergoing some slight modifications, but I withhold judgment at present,
hoping that some of the follies, faults, vagaries, and limitations that I
observe in Phoebe's geese may be due to Phoebe's educational methods,
which were, before my advent, those of the darkest ages.




CHAPTER IV


{Dryshod warnings which are never heeded: p27.jpg}

July 9th.

By the time the ducks and geese are incarcerated for the night, the
reasonable, sensible, practical-minded hens--especially those whose
mentality is increased and whose virtue is heightened by the
responsibilities of motherhood--have gone into their own particular rat-
proof boxes, where they are waiting in a semi-somnolent state to have the
wire doors closed, the bricks set against them, and the bits of sacking
flung over the tops to keep out the draught.  We have a great many young
families, both ducklings and chicks, but we have no duck mothers at
present.  The variety of bird which Phoebe seems to have bred during the
past year may be called the New Duck, with certain radical ideas about
woman's sphere.  What will happen to Thornycroft if we develop a New Hen
and a New Cow, my imagination fails to conceive.  There does not seem to
be the slightest danger for the moment, however, and our hens lay and sit
and sit and lay as if laying and sitting were the twin purposes of life.

{The mother goes off to bed: p28.jpg}

The nature of the hen seems to broaden with the duties of maternity, but
I think myself that we presume a little upon her amiability and natural
motherliness.  It is one thing to desire a family of one's own, to lay
eggs with that idea in view, to sit upon them three long weeks and hatch
out and bring up a nice brood of chicks.  It must be quite another to
have one's eggs abstracted day by day and eaten by a callous public, the
nest filled with deceitful substitutes, and at the end of a dull and
weary period of hatching to bring into the world another person's
children--children, too, of the wrong size, the wrong kind of bills and
feet, and, still more subtle grievance, the wrong kind of instincts,
leading them to a dangerous aquatic career, one which the mother may not
enter to guide, guard, and teach; one on the brink of which she must ever
stand, uttering dryshod warnings which are never heeded.  They grow used
to this strange order of things after a bit, it is true, and are less
anxious and excited.  When the duck-brood returns safely again and again
from what the hen-mother thinks will prove a watery grave, she becomes
accustomed to the situation, I suppose.  I find that at night she stands
by the pond for what she considers a decent, self-respecting length of
time, calling the ducklings out of the water; then, if they refuse to
come, the mother goes off to bed and leaves them to Providence, or Phoebe.

{Cornelia and the web-footed Gracchi: p29.jpg}

The brown hen that we have named Cornelia is the best mother, the one who
waits longest and most patiently for the web-footed Gracchi to finish
their swim.

When a chick is taken out of the incubytor (as Phoebe calls it) and
refused by all the other hens, Cornelia generally accepts it, though she
had twelve of her own when we began using her as an orphan asylum.  "Wings
are made to stretch," she seems to say cheerfully, and with a kind glance
of her round eye she welcomes the wanderer and the outcast.  She even
tended for a time the offspring of an absent-minded, light-headed
pheasant who flew over a four-foot wall and left her young behind her to
starve; it was not a New Pheasant, either; for the most conservative and
old-fashioned of her tribe occasionally commits domestic solecisms of
this sort.

{An orphan asylum: p30.jpg}

There is no telling when, where, or how the maternal instinct will assert
itself.  Among our Thornycroft cats is a certain Mrs. Greyskin.  She had
not been seen for many days, and Mrs. Heaven concluded that she had
hidden herself somewhere with a family of kittens; but as the supply of
that article with us more than equals the demand, we had not searched for
her with especial zeal.

{Phoebe and I followed her stealthily: p31.jpg}

The other day Mrs. Greyskin appeared at the dairy door, and when she had
been fed Phoebe and I followed her stealthily, from a distance.  She
walked slowly about as if her mind were quite free from harassing care,
and finally approached a deserted cow-house where there was a great mound
of straw.  At this moment she caught sight of us and turned in another
direction to throw us off the scent.  We persevered in our intention of
going into her probable retreat, and were cautiously looking for some
sign of life in the haymow, when we heard a soft cackle and a ruffling of
plumage.  Coming closer to the sound we saw a black hen brooding a nest,
her bright bead eyes turning nervously from side to side; and, coaxed out
from her protecting wings by youthful curiosity, came four kittens, eyes
wide open, warm, happy, ready for sport!

The sight was irresistible, and Phoebe ran for Mr. and Mrs. Heaven and
the Square Baby.  Mother Hen was not to be embarrassed or daunted, even
if her most sacred feelings were regarded in the light of a cheap
entertainment.  She held her ground while one of the kits slid up and
down her glossy back, and two others, more timid, crept underneath her
breast, only daring to put out their pink noses!  We retired then for
very shame and met Mrs. Greyskin in the doorway.  This should have
thickened the plot, but there is apparently no rivalry nor animosity
between the co-mothers.  We watch them every day now, through a window in
the roof.  Mother Greyskin visits the kittens frequently, lies down
beside the home nest, and gives them their dinner.  While this is going
on Mother Blackwing goes modestly away for a bite, a sup, and a little
exercise, returning to the kittens when the cat leaves them.  It is
pretty to see her settle down over the four, fat, furry dumplings, and
they seem to know no difference in warmth or comfort, whichever mother is
brooding them; while, as their eyes have been open for a week, it can no
longer be called a blind error on their part.

{Coaxed out . . . by youthful curiosity: p33.jpg}

When we have closed all our small hen-nurseries for the night, there is
still the large house inhabited by the thirty-two full-grown chickens
which Phoebe calls the broilers.  I cannot endure the term, and will not
use it.  "Now for the April chicks," I say every evening.

"Do you mean the broilers?" asks Phoebe.

"I mean the big April chicks," say I.

"Yes, them are the broilers," says she.

But is it not disagreeable enough to be a broiler when one's time comes,
without having the gridiron waved in one's face for weeks beforehand?

{Nine huddle together: p34.jpg}

The April chicks are all lively and desirous of seeing the world as
thoroughly as possible before going to roost or broil.  As a general
thing, we find in the large house sixteen young fowls of the
contemplative, flavourless, resigned-to-the-inevitable variety; three
more (the same three every night) perch on the roof and are driven down;
four (always the same four) cling to the edge of the open door, waiting
to fly off, but not in, when you attempt to close it; nine huddle
together on a place in the grass about forty feet distant, where a small
coop formerly stood in the prehistoric ages.  This small coop was one in
which they lodged for a fortnight when they were younger, and when those
absolutely indelible impressions are formed of which we read in
educational maxims.  It was taken away long since, but the nine loyal (or
stupid) Casabiancas cling to the sacred spot where its foundations
rested; they accordingly have to be caught and deposited bodily in the
house, and this requires strategy, as they note our approach from a
considerable distance.

{Of a wandering mind: p35.jpg}

Finally all are housed but two, the little white cock and the black
pullet, who are still impish and of a wandering mind.  Though headed off
in every direction, they fly into the hedges and hide in the underbrush.
We beat the hedge on the other side, but with no avail.  We dive into the
thicket of wild roses, sweetbrier, and thistles on our hands and knees,
coming out with tangled hair, scratched noses, and no hens.  Then, when
all has been done that human ingenuity can suggest, Phoebe goes to her
late supper and I do sentry-work.  I stroll to a safe distance, and,
sitting on one of the rat-proof boxes, watch the bushes with an eagle
eye.  Five minutes go by, ten, fifteen; and then out steps the white
cock, stealthily tiptoeing toward the home into which he refused to go at
our instigation.  In a moment out creeps the obstinate little beast of a
black pullet from the opposite clump.  The wayward pair meet at their own
door, which I have left open a few inches.  When all is still I walk
gently down the field, and, warned by previous experiences, approach the
house from behind.  I draw the door to softly and quickly; but not so
quickly that the evil-minded and suspicious black pullet hasn't time to
spring out, with a make-believe squawk of fright--that induces three
other blameless chickens to fly down from their perches and set the whole
flock in a flutter.  Then I fall from grace and call her a Broiler; and
when, after some minutes of hot pursuit, I catch her by falling over her
in the corner by the goose-pen, I address her as a fat, juicy Broiler
with parsley butter and a bit of bacon.

{With tangled hair, scratched noses, and no hens: p36.jpg}




CHAPTER V


July 10th.

At ten thirty or so in the morning the cackling begins.  I wonder exactly
what it means!  Have the forest-lovers who listen so respectfully to, and
interpret so exquisitely, the notes of birds--have none of them made
psychological investigations of the hen cackle?  Can it be simple
elation?  One could believe that of the first few eggs, but a hen who has
laid two or three hundred can hardly feel the same exuberant pride and
joy daily.  Can it be the excitement incident to successful achievement?
Hardly, because the task is so extremely simple.  Eggs are more or less
alike; a little larger or smaller, a trifle whiter or browner; and almost
sure to be quite right as to details; that is, the big end never gets
confused with the little end, they are always ovoid and never spherical,
and the yolk is always inside of the white.  As for a soft-shelled egg,
it is so rare an occurrence that the fear of laying one could not set the
whole race of hens in a panic; so there really cannot be any intellectual
or emotional agitation in producing a thing that might be made by a
machine.  Can it be simply "fussiness"; since the people who have the
least to do commonly make the most flutter about doing it?

Perhaps it is merely conversation.  "_Cut-cut-cut-cut-cut_-DAH_cut_! . . .
I have finished my strictly fresh egg, have you laid yours?  Make
haste, then, for the cock has found a gap in the wire-fence and wants us
to wander in the strawberry-bed. . . . Cut-cut-cut-cut-cut-DAH_cut_ . . .
Every moment is precious, for the Goose Girl will find us, when she
gathers the strawberries for her luncheon . . . Cut-cut-cut-cut!  On the
way out we can find sweet places to steal nests . . . Cut-cut-cut! . . .
I am so glad I am not sitting this heavenly morning; it _is_ a dull
life."

A Lancashire poultryman drifted into Barbury Green yesterday.  He is an
old acquaintance of Mr. Heaven, and spent the night and part of the next
day at Thornycroft Farm.  He possessed a deal of fowl philosophy, and
tells many a good hen story, which, like fish stories, draw rather
largely on the credulity of the audience.  We were sitting in the
rickyard talking comfortably about laying and cackling and kindred
matters when he took his pipe from his mouth and told us the following
tale--not a bad one if you can translate the dialect:--

'Aw were once towd as, if yo' could only get th' hen's egg away afooar
she hed sin it, th' hen 'ud think it hed med a mistek an' sit deawn
ageean an' lay another.

"An' it seemed to me it were a varra sensible way o' lukkin' at it.  Sooa
aw set to wark to mek a nest as 'ud tek a rise eawt o' th' hens.  An' aw
dud it too.  Aw med a nest wi' a fause bottom, th' idea bein' as when a
hen hed laid, th' egg 'ud drop through into a box underneyth.

"Aw felt varra preawd o' that nest, too, aw con tell yo', an' aw remember
aw felt quite excited when aw see an awd black Minorca, th' best layer as
aw hed, gooa an' settle hersel deawn i' th' nest an' get ready for wark.
Th' hen seemed quite comfortable enough, aw were glad to see, an' geet
through th' operation beawt ony seemin' trouble.

"Well, aw darsay yo' know heaw a hen carries on as soon as it's laid a
egg.  It starts "chuckin'" away like a showman's racket, an' after
tekkin' a good Ink at th' egg to see whether it's a big 'un or a little
'un, gooas eawt an' tells all t'other hens abeawt it.

"Neaw, this black Minorca, as aw sed, were a owdish bird, an' maybe knew
mooar than aw thowt.  Happen it hed laid on a nest wi' a fause bottom
afooar, an' were up to th' trick, but whether or not, aw never see a hen
luk mooar disgusted i' mi life when it lukked i' th' nest an' see as it
hed hed all that trouble fer nowt.

"It woked reawnd th' nest as if it couldn't believe its own eyes.

"But it dudn't do as aw expected.  Aw expected as it 'ud sit deawn ageean
an' lay another.

"But it just gi'e one wonderin' sooart o' chuck, an then, after a long
stare reawnd th' hen-coyt, it woked eawt, as mad a hen as aw've ever sin.
Aw fun' eawt after, what th' long stare meant.  It were tekkin' farewell!
For if yo'll believe me that hen never laid another egg i' ony o' my
nests.

"Varra like it laid away in a spot wheear it could hev summat to luk at
when it hed done wark for th' day.

"Sooa aw lost mi best layer through mi actin', an' aw've never invented
owt sen."




CHAPTER VI


One learns to be modest by living on a poultry farm, for there are
constant expositions of the most deplorable vanity among the cocks.  We
have a couple of pea-fowl who certainly are an addition to the landscape,
as they step mincingly along the square of turf we dignify by the name of
lawn.  The head of the house has a most languid and self-conscious strut,
and his microscopic mind is fixed entirely on his splendid trailing tail.
If I could only master his language sufficiently to tell him how
hideously ugly the back view of this gorgeous fan is, when he spreads it
for the edification of the observer in front of him, he would of course
retort that there is a "congregation side" to everything, but I should at
least force him into a defence of his tail and a confession of its
limitations.  This would be new and unpleasant, I fancy; and if it
produced no perceptible effect upon his super-arrogant demeanour, I might
remind him that he is likely to be used, eventually, for a feather
duster, unless, indeed, the Heavens are superstitious and prefer to throw
his tail away, rather than bring ill luck and the evil eye into the
house.

{More pride of bearing, and less to be proud of: p43.jpg}

The longer I study the cock, whether Black Spanish, White Leghorn,
Dorking, or the common barnyard fowl, the more intimately I am acquainted
with him, the less I am impressed with his character.  He has more pride
of bearing, and less to be proud of, than any bird I know.  He is
indolent, though he struts pompously over the grass as if the day were
all too short for his onerous duties.  He calls the hens about him when I
throw corn from the basket, but many a time I have seen him swallow
hurriedly, and in private, some dainty titbit he has found unexpectedly.
He has no particular chivalry.  He gives no special encouragement to his
hen when he becomes a prospective father, and renders little assistance
when the responsibilities become actualities.  His only personal message
or contribution to the world is his raucous cock-a-doodle-doo, which,
being uttered most frequently at dawn, is the most ill-timed and
offensive of all musical notes.  It is so unnecessary too, as if the day
didn't come soon enough without his warning; but I suppose he is anxious
to waken his hens and get them at their daily task, and so he disturbs
the entire community.  In short, I dislike him; his swagger, his
autocratic strut, his greed, his irritating self-consciousness, his
endless parading of himself up and down in a procession of one.

Of course his character is largely the result of polygamy.  His
weaknesses are only what might be expected; and as for the hens, I have
considerable respect for the patience, sobriety, and dignity with which
they endure an institution particularly offensive to all women.  In their
case they do not even have the sustaining thought of its being an article
of religion, so they are to be complimented the more.

There is nothing on earth so feminine as a hen--not womanly, simply
feminine.  Those men of insight who write the Woman's Page in the Sunday
newspapers study hens more than women, I sometimes think; at any rate,
their favourite types are all present on this poultry farm.

Some families of White Leghorns spend most of their time in the rickyard,
where they look extremely pretty, their slender white shapes and red
combs and wattles well set off by the background of golden hayricks.
There is a great oak-tree in one corner, with a tall ladder leaning
against its trunk, and a capital roosting-place on a long branch running
at right angles with the ladder.  I try to spend a quarter of an hour
there every night before supper, just for the pleasure of seeing the
feathered "women-folks" mount that ladder.

A dozen of them surround the foot, waiting restlessly for their turn.  One
little white lady flutters up on the lowest round and perches there until
she reviews the past, faces the present, and forecasts the future; during
which time she is gathering courage for the next jump.  She cackles,
takes up one foot and then the other, tilts back and forth, holds up her
skirts and drops them again, cocks her head nervously to see whether they
are all staring at her below, gives half a dozen preliminary springs
which mean nothing, declares she can't and won't go up any faster, unties
her bonnet strings and pushes back her hair, pulls down her dress to
cover her toes, and finally alights on the next round, swaying to and fro
until she gains her equilibrium, when she proceeds to enact the same
scene over again.

All this time the hens at the foot of the ladder are criticising her
methods and exclaiming at the length of time she requires in mounting;
while the cocks stroll about the yard keeping one eye on the ladder,
picking up a seed here and there, and giving a masculine sneer now and
then at the too-familiar scene.  They approach the party at intervals,
but only to remark that it always makes a man laugh to see a woman go up
a ladder.  The next hen, stirred to the depths by this speech, flies up
entirely too fast, loses her head, tumbles off the top round, and has to
make the ascent over again.  Thus it goes on and on, this _petite comedie
humaine_, and I could enjoy it with my whole heart if Mr. Heaven did not
insist on sharing the spectacle with me.  He is so inexpressibly dull, so
destitute of humour, that I did not think it likely he would see in the
performance anything more than a flock of hens going up a ladder to
roost.  But he did; for there is no man so blind that he cannot see the
follies of women; and, when he forgot himself so far as to utter a few
genial, silly, well-worn reflections upon femininity at large, I turned
upon him and revealed to him some of the characteristics of his own sex,
gained from an exhaustive study of the barnyard fowl of the masculine
gender.  He went into the house discomfited, though chuckling a little at
my vehemence; but at least I have made it for ever impossible for him to
watch his hens without an occasional glance at the cocks.

{Mr. Heaven discomfited: p46.jpg}




CHAPTER VII


July 12th.

O the pathos of a poultry farm!  Catherine of Aragon, the black Spanish
hen that stole her nest, brought out nine chicks this morning, and the
business-like and marble-hearted Phoebe has taken them away and given
them to another hen who has only seven.  Two mothers cannot be wasted on
these small families--it would not be profitable; and the older mother,
having been tried and found faithful over seven, has been given the other
nine and accepted them.  What of the bereft one?  She is miserable and
stands about moping and forlorn, but it is no use fighting against the
inevitable; hens' hearts must obey the same laws that govern the rotation
of crops.  Catherine of Aragon feels her lot a bitter one just now, but
in time she will succumb, and lay, which is more to the point.

We have had a very busy evening, beginning with the rats' supper--delicate
sandwiches of bread-and-butter spread with Paris green.

We have a new brood of seventeen ducklings just hatched this afternoon.
When we came to the nest the yellow and brown bunches of down and fluff
were peeping out from under the hen's wings in the prettiest fashion in
the world.

"It's a noble hen!" I said to Phoebe.

"She ain't so nowble as she looks," Phoebe answered grimly.  "It was
another 'en that brooded these eggs for near on three weeks and then this
big one come along with a fancy she'd like a family 'erself if she could
steal one without too much trouble; so she drove the rightful 'en off the
nest, finished up the last few days, and 'ere she is in possession of the
ducklings!"

"Why don't you take them away from her and give them back to the first
hen, who did most of the work?" I asked, with some spirit.

"Like as not she wouldn't tyke them now," said Phoebe, as she lifted the
hen off the broken egg-shells and moved her gently into a clean box, on a
bed of fresh hay.  We put food and drink within reach of the family, and
very proud and handsome that highway robber of a hen looked, as she
stretched her wings over the seventeen easily-earned ducklings.

Going back to the old nesting-box, I found one egg forgotten among the
shells.  It was still warm, and I took it up to run across the field with
it to Phoebe.  It was heavy, and the carrying of it was a queer
sensation, inasmuch as it squirmed and "yipped" vociferously in transit,
threatening so unmistakably to hatch in my hand that I was decidedly
nervous.  The intrepid little youngster burst his shell as he touched
Phoebe's apron, and has become the strongest and handsomest of the brood.

All this tending of downy young things, this feeding and putting to bed,
this petting and nursing and rearing, is such pretty, comforting woman's
work.  I am sure Phoebe will make a better wife to the carrier for having
been a poultry-maid, and though good enough for most practical purposes
when I came here, I am an infinitely better woman now.  I am afraid I was
not particularly nice the last few days at the Hydro.  Such a lot of
dull, prosy, inquisitive, bothering old tabbies!  Aunt Margaret
furnishing imaginary symptoms enough to keep a fond husband and two
trained nurses distracted; a man I had never encouraged in my life coming
to stay in the neighbourhood and turning up daily for rejection; another
man taking rooms at the very hotel with the avowed purpose of making my
life a burden; and on the heels of both, a widow of thirty-five in full
chase!  Small wonder I thought it more dignified to retire than to
compete, and so I did.

I need not, however, have cut the threads that bound me to Oxenbridge
with such particularly sharp scissors, nor given them such a vicious
snap; for, so far as I can observe, the little world of which I imagined
myself the sun continues to revolve, and, probably, about some other
centre.  I can well imagine who has taken up that delightful but somewhat
exposed and responsible position--it would be just like her!

{Threatened . . . to hatch in my hand: p51.jpg}

I am perfectly happy where I am; it is not that; but it seems so strange
that they can be perfectly happy without me, after all that they--after
all that was said on the subject not many days ago.  Nothing turns out as
one expects.  There have been no hot pursuits, no rewards offered, no
bills posted, no printed placards issued describing the beauty and charms
of a young person who supposed herself the cynosure of every eye.  Heigh-
ho!  What does it matter, after all?  One can always be a Goose Girl!

* * * * *

I wonder if the hen mother is quite, quite satisfied with her ducklings!
Do you suppose the fact of hatching and brooding them breaks down all the
sense of difference?  Does she not sometimes reflect that if her children
were the ordinary sort, and not these changelings, she would be enjoying
certain pretty little attentions dear to a mother's heart?  The chicks
would be pecking the food off her broad beak with their tiny ones, and
jumping on her back to slide down her glossy feathers.  They would be far
nicer to cuddle, too, so small and graceful and light; the changelings
are a trifle solid and brawny.  And personally, just as a matter of
taste, would she not prefer wee, round, glancing heads, and pointed
beaks, peeping from under her wings, to these teaspoon-shaped things
larger than her own?  I wonder!

We are training fourteen large young chickens to sit on the perches in
their new house, instead of huddling together on the floor as has been
their habit, because we discover rat-holes under the wire flooring
occasionally, and fear that toes may be bitten.  At nine o'clock Phoebe
and I lift the chickens one by one, and, as it were, glue them to their
perches, squawking.  Three nights have we gone patiently through with
this performance, but they have not learned the lesson.  The ducks and
geese are, however, greatly improved by the application of advanced
educational methods, and the _regime_ of perfect order and system
instituted by Me begins to show results.

{One can always be a Goose Girl: p53.jpg}

There is no more violent splashing and pebbling, racing, chasing,
separating.  The pole, indeed, still has to be produced, but at the first
majestic wave of my hand they scuttle toward the shore.  The geese turn
to the right, cross the rickyard, and go to their pen; the May ducks turn
to the left for their coops, the June ducks follow the hens to the top
meadow, and even the idiot gosling has an inspiration now and then and
stumbles on his own habitation.

{The geese . . . cross the rickyard: p54.jpg}

Mrs. Heaven has no reverence for the principles of Comenius, Pestalozzi,
or Herbert Spencer as applied to poultry, and when the ducks and geese
came out of the pond badly the other night and went waddling and tumbling
and hissing all over creation, did not approve of my sending them back
into the pond to start afresh.

"I consider it a great waste of time, of good time, miss," she said;
"and, after all, do you consider that educated poultry will be any better
eating, or that it will lay more than one egg a day, miss?"

I have given the matter some attention, and I fear Mrs. Heaven is right.
A duck, a goose, or a hen in which I have developed a larger brain,
implanted a sense of duty, or instilled an idea of self-government, is
likely, on the whole, to be leaner, not fatter.  There is nothing like
obeying the voice of conscience for taking the flesh off one's bones;
and, speaking of conscience, Phoebe, whose metaphysics are of the farm
farmy, says that hers "felt like a hunlaid hegg for dyes" after she had
jilted the postman.

As to the eggs, I am sure the birds will go on laying one a day for 'tis
their nature to.  Whether the product of the intelligent, conscious,
logical fowl, will be as rich in quality as that of the uneducated and
barbaric bird, I cannot say; but it ought at least to be equal to the
Denmark egg eaten now by all Londoners; and if, perchance, left uneaten,
it is certain to be a very superior wife and mother.

While we are discussing the subject of educating poultry, I confess that
the case of Cannibal Ann gives me much anxiety.  Twice in her short
career has she been under suspicion of eating her own eggs, but Phoebe
has never succeeded in catching her _in flagrante delicto_.  That eminent
detective service was reserved for me, and I have been haunted by the
picture ever since.  It is an awful sight to witness a hen gulp her own
newly-laid fresh egg, yolk, white, shell, and all; to realise that you
have fed, sheltered, chased, and occasionally run in, a being possessed
of no moral sense, a being likely to set a bad example, inculcate vicious
habits among her innocent sisters, and lower the standard of an entire
poultry-yard.  _The Young Poultry Keeper's Friend_ gives us no advice on
this topic, and we do not know whether to treat Cannibal Ann as the
victim of a disease, or as a confirmed criminal; whether to administer
remedies or cut her off in the flower of her youth.

{Poor little chap, . . . 'e never was a fyvorite: p56.jpg}

We have had a sad scene to-night.  A chick has been ailing all day, and
when we shut up the brood we found him dead in a corner.

Phoebe put him on the ground while she busied herself about the coop.  The
other chicks came out and walked about the dead one again and again,
eyeing him curiously.

"Poor little chap!" said Phoebe.  "'E's never 'ad a mother!  'E was an
incubytor chicken, and wherever I took 'im 'e was picked at.  There was
somethink wrong with 'im; 'e never was a fyvorite!"

I put the fluffy body into a hole in the turf, and strewed a handful of
grass over him.  "Sad little epitaph!" I thought.  "He never was a
fyvorite!"




CHAPTER VIII


July 13th.

I like to watch the Belgian hares eating their trifolium or pea-pods or
grass; graceful, gentle things they are, crowding about Mr. Heaven, and
standing prettily, not greedily, on their hind legs, to reach for the
clover, their delicate nostrils and whiskers all a-quiver with
excitement.

As I look out of my window in the dusk I can see one of the mothers
galloping across the enclosure, the soft white lining of her tail acting
as a beacon-light to the eight infant hares following her, a quaint
procession of eight white spots in it glancing line.  In the darkest
night those baby creatures could follow their mother through grass or
hedge or thicket, and she would need no warning note to show them where
to flee in case of danger.  "All you have to do is to follow the white
night-light that I keep in the lining of my tail," she says, when she is
giving her first maternal lectures; and it seems a beneficent provision
of Nature.  To be sure, Mr. Heaven took his gun and went out to shoot
wild rabbits to-day, and I noted that he marked them by those same self-
betraying tails, as they scuttled toward their holes or leaped toward the
protecting cover of the hedge; so it does not appear whether Nature is on
the side of the farmer or the rabbit . . .

{Mr. Heaven . . . went out to shoot wild rabbits: p59.jpg}

There is as much comedy and as much tragedy in poultry life as anywhere,
and already I see rifts within lutes.  We have in a cage a French
gentleman partridge married to a Hungarian lady of defective sight.  He
paces back and forth in the pen restlessly, anything but content with the
domestic fireside.  One can see plainly that he is devoted to the
Boulevards, and that if left to his own inclinations he would never have
chosen any spouse but a thorough Parisienne.

The Hungarian lady is blind of one eye, from some stray shot, I suppose.
She is melancholy at all times, and occasionally goes so far as to beat
her head against the wire netting.  If liberated, Mr. Heaven says that
her blindness would only expose her to death at the hands of the first
sportsman, and it always seems to me as if she knows this, and is ever
trying to decide whether a loveless marriage is any better than the tomb.

Then, again, the great, grey gander is, for some mysterious reason, out
of favour with the entire family.  He is a noble and amiable bird, by far
the best all-round character in the flock, for dignity of mien and large-
minded common-sense.  What is the treatment vouchsafed to this blameless
husband and father?  One that puts anybody out of sorts with virtue and
its scant rewards.  To begin with, the others will not allow him to go
into the pond.  There is an organised cabal against it, and he sits
solitary on the bank, calm and resigned, but, naturally, a trifle hurt.
His favourite retreat is a tiny sort of island on the edge of the pool
under the alders, where with his bent head, and red-rimmed philosophic
eyes he regards his own breast and dreams of happier days.  When the
others walk into the country twenty-three of them keep together, and Burd
Alane (as I have named him from the old ballad) walks by himself.  The
lack of harmony is so evident here, and the slight so intentional and
direct, that it almost moves me to tears.  The others walk soberly,
always in couples, but even Burd Alane's rightful spouse is on the side
of the majority, and avoids her consort.

{Out of favour with the entire family: p61.jpg}

What is the nature of his offence?  There can be no connubial jealousies,
I judge, as geese are strictly monogamous, and having chosen a partner of
their joys and sorrows they cleave to each other until death or some
other inexorable circumstance does them part.  If they are ever mistaken
in their choice, and think they might have done better, the world is none
the wiser.  Burd Alane looks in good condition, but Phoebe thinks he is
not quite himself, and that some day when he is in greater strength he
will turn on his foes and rend them, regaining thus his lost prestige,
for formerly he was king of the flock.

* * * * *

Phoebe has not a vestige of sentiment.  She just asked me if I would have
a duckling or a gosling for dinner; that there were two quite ready--the
brown and yellow duckling, that is the last to leave the water at night,
and the white gosling that never knows his own 'ouse.  Which would I
'ave, and would I 'ave it with sage and onion?

Now, had I found a duckling on the table at dinner I should have eaten it
without thinking at all, or with the thought that it had come from
Barbury Green.  But eat a duckling that I have stoned out of the pond,
pursued up the bank, chased behind the wire netting, caught, screaming,
in a corner, and carried struggling to his bed?  Feed upon an idiot
gosling that I have found in nine different coops on nine successive
nights--in with the newly-hatched chicks, the half-grown pullets, the
setting hen, the "invaleed goose," the drake with the gapes, the old
ducks in the pen?--Eat a gosling that I have caught and put in with his
brothers and sisters (whom he never recognises) so frequently and
regularly that I am familiar with every joint in his body?

In the first place, with my own small bump of locality and lack of
geography, I would never willingly consume a creature who might, by some
strange process of assimilation, make me worse in this respect; in the
second place, I should have to be ravenous indeed to sit down
deliberately and make a meal of an intimate friend, no matter if I had
not a high opinion of his intelligence.  I should as soon think of eating
the Square Baby, stuffed with sage and onion and garnished with green
apple-sauce, as the yellow duckling or the idiot gosling.

Mrs. Heaven has just called me into her sitting-room, ostensibly to ask
me to order breakfast, but really for the pleasure of conversation.  Why
she should inquire whether I would relish some gammon of bacon with eggs,
when she knows that there has not been, is not now, and never will be,
anything but gammon of bacon with eggs, is more than I can explain.

"Would you like to see my flowers, miss?" she asks, folding her plump
hands over her white apron.  "They are looking beautiful this morning.  I
am so fond of potted plants, of plants in pots.  Look at these geraniums!
Now, I consider that pink one a perfect bloom; yes, a perfect bloom.  This
is a fine red one, is it not, miss?  Especially fine, don't you think?
The trouble with the red variety is that they're apt to get "bobby" and
have to be washed regularly; quite bobby they do get indeed, I assure
you.  That white one has just gone out of blossom, and it was really
wonderful.  You could 'ardly have told it from a paper flower, miss, not
from a white paper flower.  My plants are my children nowadays, since
Albert Edward is my only care.  I have been the mother of eleven
children, miss, all of them living, so far as I know; I know nothing to
the contrary.  I 'ope you are not wearying of this solitary place, miss?
It will grow upon you, I am sure, as it did upon Mrs. Pollock, with all
her peculiar fancies, and as it 'as grown upon us.--We formerly had a
butcher's shop in Buffington, and it was naturally a great
responsibility.  Mr. Heaven's nerves are not strong, and at last he
wanted a life of more quietude, more quietude was what he craved.  The
life of a retail butcher is a most exciting and wearying one.  Nobody
satisfied with their meat; as if it mattered in a world of change!
Everybody complaining of too much bone or too little fat; nobody wishing
tough chops or cutlets, but always seeking after fine joints, when it's
against reason and nature that all joints should be juicy and all cutlets
tender; always complaining if livers are not sent with every fowl, always
asking you to remember the trimmin's, always wanting their beef well
'ung, and then if you 'ang it a minute too long, it's left on your 'ands!
I often used to say to Mr. Heaven, yes many's the time I've said it, that
if people would think more of the great 'ereafter and less about their
own little stomachs, it would be a deal better for them, yes, a deal
better, and make it much more comfortable for the butchers!"

{The life . . . is a most exciting and wearying one: p65.jpg}

* * * * *

Burd Alane has had a good quarter of an hour to-day.

{His spouse took a brief promenade with him: p66.jpg}

His spouse took a brief promenade with him.  To be sure, it was during an
absence of the flock on the other side of the hedge so that the moral
effect of her spasm of wifely loyalty was quite lost upon them.  I
strongly suspect that she would not have granted anything but a secret
interview.  What a petty, weak, ignoble character!  I really don't like
to think so badly of any fellow-creature as I am forced to think of that
politic, time-serving, pusillanimous goose.  I believe she laid the egg
that produced the idiot gosling!




CHAPTER IX


Here follows the true story of Sir Muscovy Drake, the Lady Blanche, and
Miss Malardina Crippletoes.

Phoebe's flock consisted at first mostly of Brown Mallards, but a friend
gave her a sitting of eggs warranted to produce a most beautiful variety
of white ducks.  They were hatched in due time, but proved hard to raise,
till at length there was only one survivor, of such uncommon grace and
beauty that we called her the Lady Blanche.  Presently a neighbour sold
Phoebe his favourite Muscovy drake, and these two splendid creatures by
"natural selection" disdained to notice the rest of the flock, but
forming a close friendship, wandered in the pleasant paths of duckdom
together, swimming and eating quite apart from the others.

In the brown flock there was one unfortunate, misshapen from the egg,
quite lame, and with no smoothness of plumage; but on that very account,
apparently, or because she was too weak to resist them, the others
treated her cruelly, biting her and pushing her away from the food.

One day it happened that the two ducks--Sir Muscovy and Lady Blanche--had
come up from the water before the others, and having taken their repast
were sitting together under the shade of a flowering currant-bush, when
they chanced to see poor Miss Crippletoes very badly used and crowded
away from the dish.  Sir Muscovy rose to his feet; a few rapid words
seemed to pass between him and his mate, and then he fell upon the other
drake and the heartless minions who had persecuted the helpless one,
drove them far away out of sight, and, returning, went to the corner
where the victim was cowering, her face to the wall.  He seemed to
whisper to her, or in some way to convey to her a sense of protection;
for after a few moments she tremblingly went with him to the dish, and
hurriedly ate her dinner while he stood by, repulsing the advances of the
few brown ducks who remained near and seemed inclined to attack her.

When she had eaten enough Lady Blanche joined them, and they went down
the hill together to their favourite swimming-place.  After that Miss
Crippletoes always followed a little behind her protectors, and thus
shielded and fed she grew stronger and well-feathered, though she was
always smaller than she should have been and had a lowly manner, keeping
a few steps in the rear of her superiors and sitting at some distance
from their noon resting-place.

Phoebe noticed after a while that Lady Blanche was seldom to be seen, and
Sir Muscovy and Miss Crippletoes often came to their meals without her.
The would-be mother refused to inhabit the house Phoebe had given her,
and for a long time the place she had chosen for her sitting could not be
found.  At length the Square Baby discovered her in a most ideal spot.  A
large boulder had dropped years ago into the brook that fills our duck-
pond; dropped and split in halves with the two smooth walls leaning away
from each other.  A grassy bank towered behind, and on either side of the
opening, tall bushes made a miniature forest where the romantic mother
could brood her treasures while her two guardians enjoyed the water close
by her retreat.

All this happened before my coming to Thornycroft Farm, but it was I who
named the hero and heroines of the romance when Phoebe had told me all
the particulars.  Yesterday morning I was sitting by my open window.  It
was warm, sunny, and still, but in the country sounds travel far, and I
could hear fowl conversation in various parts of the poultry-yard as well
as in all the outlying bits of territory occupied by our feathered
friends.  Hens have only three words and a scream in their language, but
ducks, having more thoughts to express, converse quite fluently, so
fluently, in fact, that it reminds me of dinner at the Hydropathic Hotel.
I fancy I have learned to distinguish seven separate sounds, each varied
by degrees of intensity, and with upward or downward inflections like the
Chinese tongue.

In the distance, then, I heard the faint voice of a duck calling as if
breathless and excited.  While I wondered what was happening, I saw Miss
Crippletoes struggling up the steep bank above the duck-pond.  It was the
quickest way from the water to the house, but difficult for the little
lame webbed feet.  When she reached the level grass sward she sank down a
moment, exhausted; but when she could speak again she cried out, a sharp
staccato call, and ran forward.

Instantly she was answered from a distant knoll, where for some reason
Sir Muscovy loved to retire for meditation.  The cries grew lower and
softer as the birds approached each other, and they met at the corner
just under my window.  Instantly they put their two bills together and
the loud cries changed to confiding murmurs.  Evidently some hurried
questions and answers passed between them, and then Sir Muscovy waddled
rapidly by the quickest path, Miss Crippletoes following him at a slower
pace, and both passed out of sight, using their wings to help their feet
down the steep declivity.  The next morning, when I wakened early, my
first thought was to look out, and there on the sunny greensward where
they were accustomed to be fed, Sir Muscovy, Lady Blanche, and their
humble maid, Malardina Crippletoes, were scattering their own breakfast
before the bills of twelve beautiful golden balls of ducklings.  The
little creatures could never have climbed the bank, but must have started
from their nest at dawn, coming round by the brook to the level at the
foot of the garden, and so by slow degrees up to the house.

Judging from what I heard and knew of their habits, I am sure the
excitement of the previous morning was occasioned by the hatching of the
eggs, and that Lady Blanche had hastily sent her friend to call Sir
Muscovy, the family remaining together until they could bring the babies
with them and display their beauty to Phoebe and me.




CHAPTER X


July 14th.

We are not wholly without the pleasures of the town in Barbury Green.
Once or twice in a summer, late on a Saturday afternoon, a procession of
red and yellow vans drives into a field near the centre of the village.
By the time the vans are unpacked all the children in the community are
surrounding the gate of entrance.  There is rifle-shooting, there is
fortune-telling, there are games of pitch and toss, and swings, and
French bagatelle; and, to crown all, a wonderful orchestrion that goes by
steam.  The water is boiled for the public's tea, and at the same time
thrilling strains of melody are flung into the air.  There is at present
only one tune in the orchestrion's repertory, but it is a very good tune;
though after hearing it three hundred and seven times in a single
afternoon, it pursues one, sleeping and waking, for the next week.  Phoebe
and I took the Square Baby and went in to this diversified entertainment.
There was a small crowd of children at the entrance, but as none of them
seemed to be provided with pennies, and I felt in a fairy godmother mood,
I offered them the freedom of the place at my expense.

I never purchased more radiant good-will for less money, but the combined
effect of the well-boiled tea and the boiling orchestrion produced many
village nightmares, so the mothers told me at chapel next morning.

* * * * *

I have many friends in Barbury Green, and often have a pleasant chat with
the draper, and the watchmaker, and the chemist.

{The freedom of the place at my expense: p74.jpg}

The last house on the principal street is rather an ugly one, with
especially nice window curtains.  As I was taking my daily walk to the
post-office (an entirely unfruitful expedition thus far, as nobody has
taken the pains to write to me) I saw a nursemaid coming out of the gate,
wheeling a baby in a perambulator.  She was going placidly away from the
Green when, far in the distance, she espied a man walking rapidly toward
us, a heavy Gladstone bag in one hand.  She gazed fixedly for a moment,
her eyes brightening and her cheeks flushing with pleasure,--whoever it
was, it was an unexpected arrival;--then she retraced her steps and,
running up the garden-path, opened the front door and held an excited
colloquy with somebody; a slender somebody in a nice print gown and
neatly-dressed hair, who came to the gate and peeped beyond the hedge
several times, drawing back between peeps with smiles and heightened
colour.  She did not run down the road, even when she had satisfied
herself of the identity of the traveller; perhaps that would not have
been good form in an English village, for there were houses on the
opposite side of the way.  She waited until he opened the gate, the
nursemaid took the bag and looked discreetly into the hedge, then the
mistress slipped her hand through the traveller's arm and walked up the
path as if she had nothing else in the world to wish for.  The nurse had
a part in the joy, for she lifted the baby out of the perambulator and
showed proudly how much he had grown.

It was a dear little scene, and I, a passer-by, had shared in it and felt
better for it.  I think their content was no less because part of it had
enriched my life, for happiness, like mercy, is twice blessed; it blesses
those who are most intimately associated in it, and it blesses all those
who see it, hear it, feel it, touch it, or breathe the same atmosphere.  A
laughing, crowing baby in a house, one cheerful woman singing about her
work, a boy whistling at the plough, a romance just suspected, with its
miracle of two hearts melting into one--the wind's always in the west
when you have any of these wonder-workers in your neighbourhood.

I have talks too, sometimes, with the old parson, who lives in a quaint
house with "_Parva Domus Magna Quies_" cut into the stone over the
doorway.  He is not a preaching parson, but a retired one, almost the
nicest kind, I often think.

He has been married thirty years, he tells me; thirty years, spent in the
one little house with the bricks painted red and grey alternately, and
the scarlet holly-hocks growing under the windows.  I am sure they have
been sweet, true, kind years, and that his heart must be a quiet,
peaceful place just like his house and garden.

"I was only eleven years old when I fell in love with my wife," he told
me as we sat on the seat under the lime-tree; he puffing cosily at his
pipe, I plaiting grasses for a hatband.

{Puffing cosily at his pipe: p77.jpg}

"It was just before Sunday-school.  Her mother had dressed her all in
white muslin like a fairy, but she had stepped on the edge of a puddle,
and some of the muddy water had bespattered her frock.  A circle of
children had surrounded her, and some of the motherly little girls were
on their knees rubbing at the spots anxiously, while one of them wiped
away the tears that were running down her pretty cheeks.  I looked!  It
was fatal!  I did not look again, but I was smitten to the very heart!  I
did not speak to her for six years, but when I did, it was all right with
both of us, thank God! and I've been in love with her ever since, when
she behaves herself!"

That is the way they speak of love in Barbury Green, and oh! how much
sweeter and more wholesome it is than the language of the town!  Who
would not be a Goose Girl, "to win the secret of the weed's plain heart"?
It seems to me that in society we are always gazing at magic-lantern
shows, but here we rest our tired eyes with looking at the stars.




CHAPTER XI


{A Hen Conference: p79.jpg}

July 16th.

Phoebe and I have been to a Hen Conference at Buffington.  It was for the
purpose of raising the standard of the British Hen, and our local
Countess, who is much interested in poultry, was in the chair.

It was a very learned body, but Phoebe had coached me so well that at the
noon recess I could talk confidently with the members, discussing the
various advantages of True and Crossed Minorcas, Feverels, Andalusians,
Cochin Chinas, Shanghais, and the White Leghorn.  (Phoebe, when she
pronounces this word, leaves out the "h" and bears down heavily on the
last syllable, so that it rhymes with begone!)

As I was sitting under the trees waiting for Phoebe to finish some
shopping in the village, a travelling poultry-dealer came along and
offered to sell me a silver Wyandotte pullet and cockerel.  This was a
new breed to me and I asked the price, which proved to be more than I
should pay for a hat in Bond Street.  I hesitated, thinking meantime what
a delightful parting gift they would be for Phoebe; I mean if we ever
should part, which seems more and more unlikely, as I shall never leave
Thornycroft until somebody comes properly to fetch me; indeed, unless the
"fetching" is done somewhat speedily I may decline to go under any
circumstances.  My indecision as to the purchase was finally banished
when the poultryman asserted that the fowls had clear open centres all
over, black lacing entirely round the white centres, were free from white
edging, and each had a cherry-red eye.  This catalogue of charms inflamed
my imagination, though it gave me no mental picture of a silver Wyandotte
fowl, and I paid the money while the dealer crammed the chicks, squawking
into my five-o'clock tea-basket.

{Arguing questions of diet: p81.jpg}

The afternoon session of the conference was most exciting, for we reached
the subject of imported eggs, an industry that is assuming terrifying
proportions.  The London hotel egg comes from Denmark, it seems,--I
should think by sailing vessel, not steamer, but I may be wrong.  After
we had settled that the British Hen should be protected and encouraged,
and agreed solemnly to abstain from Danish eggs in any form, and made a
resolution stating that our loyalty to Queen Alexandra would remain
undiminished, we argued the subject of hen diet.  There was a great
difference of opinion here and the discussion was heated; the honorary
treasurer standing for pulped mangold and flint grit, the chair insisting
on barley meal and randans, while one eloquent young woman declared, to
loud cries of "'Ear, 'ear!" that rice pudding and bone chips produce more
eggs to the square hen than any other sort of food.  Impassioned orators
arose here and there in the audience demanding recognition for beef
scraps, charcoal, round corn or buckwheat.  Foods were regarded from
various standpoints: as general invigorators, growth assisters, and egg
producers.  A very handsome young farmer carried off final honours, and
proved to the satisfaction of all the feminine poultry-raisers that green
young hog bones fresh cut in the Banner Bone Breaker (of which he was the
agent) possessed a nutritive value not to be expressed in human language.

{The afternoon session was most exciting: p82.jpg}

Phoebe was distinctly nervous when I rose to say a few words on poultry
breeding, announcing as my topic "Mothers, Stepmothers, Foster-Mothers,
and Incubators."  Protected by the consciousness that no one in the
assemblage could possibly know me, I made a distinct success in my maiden
speech; indeed, I somewhat overshot the mark, for the Countess in the
chair sent me a note asking me to dine with her that evening.  I
suppressed the note and took Phoebe away before the proceedings were
finished, vanishing from the scene of my triumphs like a veiled prophet.

Just as we were passing out the door we paused to hear the report of a
special committee whose chairman read the following resolutions:--

_Whereas_,--It has pleased the Almighty to remove from our midst our
greatest Rose Comb Buff Orpington fancier and esteemed friend, Albert
Edward Sheridain; therefore be it

_Resolved_,--That the next edition of our catalogue contain an
illustrated memorial page in his honour and

_Resolved_,--That the Rose Comb Buff Orpington Club extend to the
bereaved family their heartfelt sympathy.

{Not asked to the Conference: p84.jpg}

The handsome young farmer followed us out to our trap, invited us to
attend the next meeting of the R. C. B. O. Club, of which he was the
secretary, and asked if I were intending to "show."  I introduced Phoebe
as the senior partner, and she concealed the fact that we possessed but
one Buff Orpington, and he was a sad "invaleed" not suitable for
exhibition.  The farmer's expression as he looked at me was almost lover-
like, and when he pressed a bit of paper into my hand I was sure it must
be an offer of marriage.  It was in fact only a circular describing the
Banner Bone Breaker.  It closed with an appeal to Buff Orpington breeders
to raise and ever raise the standard, bidding them remember, in the midst
of a low-minded and sordid civilisation, that the rose comb should be
small and neat, firmly set on, with good working, a nice spike at the
back lying well down to head, and never, under any circumstances, never
sticking up.  This adjuration somewhat alarmed us as Phoebe and I had
been giving our Buff Orpington cockerel the most drastic remedies for his
languid and prostrate comb.

{Coming home: p85.jpg}

Coming home we alighted from the trap to gather hogweed for the rabbits.
I sat by the wayside lazily and let Phoebe gather the appetising weed,
which grows along the thorniest hedges in close proximity to nettles and
thistles.

Workmen were trudging along with their luncheon-baskets of woven
bulrushes slung over their shoulders.  Fields of ripening grain lay on
either hand, the sun shining on their every shade of green and yellow,
bronze and orange, while the breeze stirred the bearded barley into a
rippling golden sea.

Phoebe asked me if the people I had left behind at the Hydropathic were
my relatives.

"Some of them are of remote consanguinity," I responded evasively, and
the next question was hushed upon her awe-stricken tongue, as I intended.

"They are obeying my wish to be let alone, there's no doubt of that," I
was thinking.  "For my part, I like a little more spirit, and a little
less 'letter'!"

{Workmen were trudging home: p87.jpg}

As the word "letter" flitted through my thoughts, I pulled one from my
pocket and glanced through it carelessly.  It arrived, somewhat tardily,
only last night, or I should not have had it with me.  I wore the same
dress to the post-office yesterday that I wore to the Hen Conference to-
day, and so it chanced to be still in the pocket.  If it had been
anything I valued, of course I should have lost or destroyed it by
mistake; it is only silly, worthless little things like this that keep
turning up and turning up after one has forgotten their existence.

   "You are a mystery!" [it ran.]  "I can apprehend, but not comprehend
   you.  I know you in part.  I understand various bits of your nature;
   but my knowledge is always fragmentary and disconnected, and when I
   attempt to make a whole of the mosaics I merely get a kaleidoscopic
   effect.  Do you know those geographical dissected puzzles that they
   give to children?  You remind me of one of them.

   "I have spent many charming (and dangerous) hours trying to 'put you
   together'; but I find, when I examine my picture closely, that after
   all I've made a purple mountain grow out of a green tree; that my
   river is running up a steep hillside; and that the pretty milkmaid,
   who should be wandering in the forest, is standing on her head with
   her pail in the air

   "Do you understand yourself clearly?  Or is it just possible that when
   you dive to the depths of your own consciousness, you sometimes find
   the pretty milkmaid standing on her head?  I wonder!" . . .

Ah, well, it is no wonder that he wonders!   So do I, for that matter!




CHAPTER XII


{Along the highway: p89.jpg}

July 17th.

Thornycroft Farm seems to be the musical centre of the universe.

When I wake very early in the morning I lie in a drowsy sort of dream,
trying to disentangle, one from the other, the various bird notes,
trills, coos, croons, chirps, chirrups, and warbles.  Suddenly there
falls on the air a delicious, liquid, finished song; so pure, so mellow,
so joyous, that I go to the window and look out at the morning world,
half awakened, like myself.

There is I know not what charm in a window that does not push up, but
opens its lattices out into the greenness.  And mine is like a little
jewelled door, for the sun is shining from behind the chimneys and
lighting the tiny diamond panes with amber flashes.

A faint delicate haze lies over the meadow, and rising out of it, and
soaring toward the blue is the lark, flinging out that matchless matin
song, so rich, so thrilling, so lavish!  As the blithe melody fades away,
I hear the plaintive ballad-fragments of the robin on a curtsying branch
near my window; and there is always the liquid pipe of the thrush, who
must quaff a fairy goblet of dew between his songs, I should think, so
fresh and eternally young is his note.

There is another beautiful song that I follow whenever I hear it,
straining my eyes to the treetops, yet never finding a bird that I can
identify as the singer.  Can it be the--

   "Ousel-cock so black of hue,
   With orange-tawny bill"?

He is called the poet-laureate of the primrose time, but I don't know
whether he sings in midsummer, and I have not seen him hereabouts.  I
must write and ask my dear Man of the North.  The Man of the North, I
sometimes think, had a Fairy Grandmother who was a robin; and perhaps she
made a nest of fresh moss and put him in the green wood when he was a wee
bairnie, so that he waxed wise in bird-lore without knowing it.  At all
events, describe to him the cock of a head, the glance of an eye, the tip-
up of a tail, or the sheen of a feather, and he will name you the bird.
Near-sighted he is, too, the Man of the North, but that is only for
people.

The Square Baby and I have a new game.

I bought a doll's table and china tea-set in Buffington.  We put it under
an apple-tree in the side garden, where the scarlet lightning grows so
tall and the Madonna lilies stand so white against the flaming
background.  We built a little fence around it, and every afternoon at
tea-time we sprinkle seeds and crumbs in the dishes, water in the tiny
cups, drop a cherry in each of the fruit-plates, and have a _the
chantant_ for the birdies.  We sometimes invite an "invaleed" duckling,
or one of the baby rabbits, or the peacock, in which case the cards
read:--

   _Thornycroft Farm_.
   The pleasure of your company is requested
   at a
   _The Chantant_
   Under the Apple Tree.
   Music at five.

It is a charming game, as I say, but I'd far rather play it with the Man
of the North; he is so much younger than the Square Baby, and so much
more responsive, too.

{The scent of the hay: p92.jpg}

Thornycroft Farm is a sweet place, too, of odours as well as sounds.  The
scent of the hay is for ever in the nostrils, the hedges are thick with
wild honeysuckle, so deliciously fragrant, the last of the June roses are
lingering to do their share, and blackberry blossoms and ripening fruit
as well.

I have never known a place in which it is so easy to be good.  I have not
said a word, nor scarcely harboured a thought, that was not lovely and
virtuous since I entered these gates, and yet there are those who think
me fantastic, difficult, hard to please, unreasonable!

{The last of June: p93.jpg}

I believe the saints must have lived in the country mostly (I am certain
they never tried Hydropathic hotels), and why anybody with a black heart
and natural love of wickedness should not simply buy a poultry farm and
become an angel, I cannot understand.

{A place in which it is so easy to be good: p94.jpg}

Living with animals is really a very improving and wholesome kind of
life, to the person who will allow himself to be influenced by their
sensible and high-minded ideals.  When you come to think about it, man is
really the only animal that ever makes a fool of himself; the others are
highly civilised, and never make mistakes.  I am going to mention this
when I write to somebody, sometime; I mean if I ever do.  To be sure, our
human life is much more complicated than theirs, and I believe when the
other animals notice our errors of judgment they make allowances.  The
bee is as busy as a bee, and the beaver works like a beaver, but there
their responsibility ends.  The bee doesn't have to go about seeing that
other bees are not crowded into unsanitary tenements or victimised by the
sweating system.  When the beaver's day of toil is over he doesn't have
to discuss the sphere, the rights, or the voting privileges of
beaveresses; all he has to do is to work like a beaver, and that is
comparatively simple.




CHAPTER XIII


{Not particularly attracted by the poultry: p96.jpg}

I have been studying _The Young Poultry Keeper's Friend_ of late.  If
there is anything I dislike and deplore, it is the possession of
knowledge which I cannot put to practical use.  Having discovered an
interesting disease called Scaly Leg in the July number, I took the
magazine out into the poultry-yard and identified the malady on three
hens and a cock.  Phoebe joined me in the diagnosis and we treated the
victims with a carbolic lotion and scrubbed them with vaseline.

{Leaned languidly against the netting: p97.jpg}

As Phoebe and I grow wise in medical lore the case of Cannibal Ann
assumes a different aspect.  As the bibulous man quaffs more and more
flagons of beer and wine when his daily food is ham, salt fish, and
cabbage, so does the hen avenge her wrongs of diet and woes of
environment.  Cannibal Ann, herself, has, so far as we know, been raised
in a Christian manner and enjoyed all the advantages of modern methods;
but her maternal parent may have lived in some heathen poultry-yard which
was asphalted or bricked or flagged, so that she was debarred from
scratching in Mother Earth and was forced to eat her own shells in self-
defence.

* * * * *

The Square Baby is not particularly attracted by the poultry as a whole,
save when it is boiled with bacon or roasted with bread-sauce; but he is
much interested in the "invaleeds."  Whenever Phoebe and I start for the
hospital with the tobacco-pills, the tin of paraffin, and the bottle of
oil, he is very much in evidence.  Perhaps he has a natural leaning
toward the medical profession; at any rate, when pain and anguish wring
the brow, he is in close attendance upon the ministering angels.

{Staggered and reeled: p98.jpg}

Now it is necessary for the physician to have practice as well as theory,
so the Square Baby, being left to himself this afternoon, proceeded to
perfect himself in some of the healing arts used by country
practitioners.

{Caught her son red-handed: p99.jpg}

When discovered, he was seated in front of the wire-covered "run"
attached to a coop occupied by the youngest goslings.  A couple of
bottles and a box stood by his side, and I should think he had
administered a cup of sweet oil, a pint of paraffin, and a quarter of a
pound of tobacco during his clinic.  He had used the remedies
impartially, sometimes giving the paraffin internally and rubbing the
patient's head with tobacco or oil, sometimes the reverse.

Several goslings leaned languidly against the netting, or supported
themselves by the edge of the water-dish, while others staggered and
reeled about with eyes half closed.

{He was treated summarily and smartly: p100.jpg}

It was Mrs. Heaven who caught her son red-handed, so to speak.  She was
dressed in her best, and just driving off to Woodmucket to spend a day or
two with her married daughter, and soothe her nerves with the uproar
incident to a town of six hundred inhabitants.  She delayed her journey a
half-hour--long enough, in fact, to change her black silk waist for a
loose sacque which would give her arms full and comfortable play.  The
joy and astonishment that greeted the Square Baby on his advent, five
years ago, was forgotten for the first time in his brief life, and he was
treated precisely as any ordinary wrongdoer would have been treated under
the same circumstances, summarily and smartly; the "wepping," as Phoebe
would say, being Mrs. Heaven's hand.

All but one of the goslings lived, like thousands of others who recover
in spite of the doctors, but the Square Baby's interest in the healing
art is now perceptibly lessened.




CHAPTER XIV


July 18th.

The day was Friday; Phoebe's day to go to Buffington with eggs and
chickens and rabbits; her day to solicit orders for ducklings and
goslings.  The village cart was ready in the stable; Mr. and Mrs. Heaven
were in Woodmucket; I was eating my breakfast (which I remember was an
egg and a rasher) when Phoebe came in, a figure of woe.

The Square Baby was ill, very ill, and would not permit her to leave him
and go to market.  Would I look at him?  For he must have dowsed 'imself
as well as the goslings yesterday; anyways he was strong of paraffin and
tobacco, though he 'ad 'ad a good barth.

I prescribed for Albert Edward, who was as uncomfortable and feverish as
any little sinner in the county of Sussex, and I then promptly proposed
going to Buffington in Phoebe's place.

She did not think it at all proper, and said that, notwithstanding my
cotton gown and sailor hat, I looked quite, quite the lydy, and it would
never do.

"I cannot get any new orders," said I, "but I can certainly leave the
rabbits and eggs at the customary places.  I know Argent's Dining
Parlours, and Songhurst's Tea Rooms, and the Six Bells Inn, as well as
you do."

{The Six Bells found the last poultry somewhat tough: p103.jpg}

So, donning a pair of Phoebe's large white cotton gloves with open-work
wrists (than which I always fancy there is no one article that so
disguises the perfect lydy), I set out upon my travels, upborne by a
lively sense of amusement that was at least equal to my feeling that I
was doing Phoebe Heaven a good turn.

Prices in dressed poultry were fluctuating, but I had a copy of _The
Trade Review_, issued that very day, and was able to get some idea of
values and the state of the market as I jogged along.  The general
movement, I learned, was moderate and of a "selective" character.  Choice
large capons and ducks were in steady demand, but I blushed for my
profession when I read that roasting chickens were running coarse,
staggy, and of irregular value.  Old hens were held firmly at sixpence,
and it is my experience that they always have to be, at whatever price.
Geese were plenty, dull, and weak.  Old cocks,--why don't they say
roosters?--declined to threepence ha'penny on Thursday in sympathy with
fowls,--and who shall say that chivalry is dead?  Turkeys were a trifle
steadier, and there was a speculative movement in limed eggs.  All this
was illuminating, and I only wished I were quite certain whether the
sympathetic old roosters were threepence ha'penny apiece, or a pound.

{The gadabout hen: p105.jpg}

Everything happened as it should, on this first business journey of my
life, which is equivalent to saying that nothing happened at all.
Songhurst's Tea Rooms took five dozen eggs and told me to bring six dozen
the next week.  Argent's Dining Parlours purchased three pairs of
chickens and four rabbits.  The Six Bells found the last poultry somewhat
tough and tasteless; whereupon I said that our orders were more than we
could possibly fill, still I hoped we could go on "selling them," as we
never liked to part with old customers, no matter how many new ones there
were.  Privately, I understood the complaint only too well, for I knew
the fowls in question very intimately.  Two of them were the runaway
rooster and the gadabout hen that never wanted to go to bed with the
others.  The third was Cannibal Ann.  I should have expected them to be
tough, but I cannot believe they were lacking in flavour.

The only troublesome feature of the trip was that Mrs. Sowerbutt's
lodgers had suddenly left for London and she was unable to take the four
rabbits as she had hoped; but as an offset to that piece of ill-fortune
the Coke and Coal Yard and the Bicycle Repairing Rooms came out into the
street, and, stepping up to the trap, requested regular weekly deliveries
of eggs and chickens, and hoped that I would be able to bring them
myself.  And so, in a happy frame of mind, I turned out of the Buffington
main street, and was jogging along homeward, when a very startling thing
happened; namely, a whole verse of the Bailiff's Daughter of Islington:--

   "And as she went along the high road,
   The weather being hot and dry,
   She sat her down upon a green bank,
   And her true love came riding by."

That true lovers are given to riding by, in ballads, I know very well,
but I hardly supposed they did so in real life, especially when every
precaution had been taken to avert such a catastrophe.  I had told the
Barbury Green postmistress, on the morning of my arrival, not to give the
Thornycroft address to anybody whatsoever, but finding, as the days
passed, that no one was bold enough or sensible enough to ask for it, I
haughtily withdrew my prohibition.  About this time I began sending
envelopes, carefully addressed in a feigned hand, to a certain person at
the Oxenbridge Hydro.  These envelopes contained no word of writing, but
held, on one day, only a bit of down from a hen's breast, on another, a
goose-quill, on another, a glossy tail-feather, on another, a grain of
corn, and so on.  These trifles were regarded by me not as degrading or
unmaidenly hints and suggestions, but simply as tests of intelligence.
Could a man receive tokens of this sort and fail to put two and two
together?  I feel that I might possibly support life with a domineering
and autocratic husband,--and there is every prospect that I shall be
called upon to do so,--but not with a stupid one.  Suppose one were
linked for ever to a man capable of asking,--"Did _you_ send those
feathers? . . . How was I to guess? . . . How was a fellow to know they
came from you? . . . What on earth could I suppose they meant? . . . What
clue did they offer me as to your whereabouts? . . . Am I a Sherlock
Holmes?"--No, better eternal celibacy than marriage with such a being!

{She was unable to take the four rabbits: p107.jpg}

These were the thoughts that had been coursing through my goose-girl mind
while I had been selling dressed poultry, but in some way they had not
prepared me for the appearance of the aforesaid true love.

To see the very person whom one has left civilisation to avoid is always
more or less surprising, and to make the meeting less likely, Buffington
is even farther from Oxenbridge than Barbury Green.  The creature was
well mounted (ominous, when he came to override my caprice!) and he
looked bigger, and, yes, handsomer, though that doesn't signify, and
still more determined than when I saw him last; although goodness knows
that timidity and feebleness of purpose were not in striking evidence on
that memorable occasion.  I had drawn up under the shade of a tree
ostensibly to eat some cherries, thinking that if I turned my face away I
might pass unrecognised.  It was a stupid plan, for if I had whipped up
the mare and driven on, he of course, would have had to follow, and he
has too much dignity and self-respect to shriek recriminations into a
woman's ear from a distance.

{The creature was well mounted: p109.jpg}

He approached with deliberation, reined in his horse, and lifted his hat
ceremoniously.  He has an extremely shapely head, but I did not show that
the sight of it melted in the least the ice of my resolve; whereupon we
talked, not very freely at first,--men are so stiff when they consider
themselves injured.  However, silence is even more embarrassing than
conversation, so at length I begin:--

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"It is a lovely day."

_True Love_.--"Yes, but the drought is getting rather oppressive, don't
you think?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"The crops certainly need rain, and the feed is
becoming scarce."

_True Love_.--"Are you a farmer's wife?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Oh no! that is a promotion to look forward to; I
am now only a Goose Girl."

_True Love_.--"Indeed!  If I wished to be severe I might remark: that I
am sure you have found at last your true vocation!"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"It was certainly through no desire to please
_you_ that I chose it."

_True Love_.--"I am quite sure of that!  Are you staying in this part?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Oh no!  I live many miles distant, over an
extremely rough road.  And you?"

_True Love_.--"I am still at the Hydropathic; or at least my luggage is
there."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"It must be very pleasant to attract you so long."

_True Love_.--"Not so pleasant as it was."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"No?  A new proprietor, I suppose."

_True Love_.--"No; same proprietor; but the house is empty."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (yawning purposely).--"That is strange; the hotels
are usually so full at this season.  Why did so many leave?"

_True Love_.--"As a matter of fact, only one left.  'Full' and 'empty'
are purely relative terms.  I call a hotel full when it has you in it,
empty when it hasn't."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (dying to laugh, but concealing her feelings).--"I
trust my bulk does not make the same impression on the general public!
Well, I won't detain you longer; good afternoon; I must go home to my
evening work."

_True Love_.--"I will accompany you."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"If you are a gentleman you will remain where you
are."

_True Love_.--"In the road?  Perhaps; but if I am a man I shall follow
you; they always do, I notice.  What are those foolish bundles in the
back of that silly cart?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Feed for the pony, please, sir; fish for dinner;
randans and barley meal for the poultry; and four unsold rabbits.
Wouldn't you like them?  Only one and sixpence apiece.  Shot at three
o'clock this morning."

_True Love_.--"Thanks; I don't like mine shot so early."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Oh, well! doubtless I shall be able to dispose of
them on my way home, though times is 'ard!"

_True Love_.--"Do you mean that you will "peddle" them along the road?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"You understand me better than usual,--in fact to
perfection."

He dismounts and strides to the back of the cart, lifts the covers,
seizes the rabbits, flings some silver contemptuously into the basket,
and looks about him for a place to bury his bargain.  A small boy
approaching in the far distance will probably bag the game.

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (modestly).--"Thanks for your trade, sir, rather
ungraciously bestowed, and we 'opes for a continuance of your past
fyvors."

_True Love_ (leaning on the wheel of the trap).--"Let us stop this
nonsense.  What did you hope to gain by running away?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Distance and absence."

_True Love_.--"You knew you couldn't prevent my offering myself to you
sometime or other."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Perhaps not; but I could at least defer it,
couldn't I?"

_True Love_.--"Why postpone the inevitable?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Doubtless I shrank from giving you the pain of a
refusal."

_True Love_.--"Perhaps; but do you know what I suspect?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"I'm not a suspicious person, thank goodness!"

_True Love_.--"That, on the contrary, you are wilfully withholding from
me the joy of acceptance."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"If I intended to accept you, why did I run away?"

_True Love_.--"To make yourself more desirable and precious, I suppose."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (with the most confident coquetry).--"Did I
succeed?"

_True Love_.--"No; you failed utterly."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (secretly piqued).--"Then I am glad I tried it."

_True Love_.--"You couldn't succeed because you were superlatively
desirable and precious already; but you should never have experimented.
Don't you know that Love is a high explosive?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Is it?  Then it ought always to be labelled
'dangerous,' oughtn't it?  But who thought of suggesting matches?  I'm
sure I didn't!"

_True Love_.--"No such luck; I wish you would."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"According to your theory, if you apply a match to
Love it is likely to 'go off.'"

_True Love_.--"I wish you would try it on mine and await the result.  Come
now, you'll have to marry somebody, sometime."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"I confess I don't see the necessity."

_True Love_ (morosely).--"You're the sort of woman men won't leave in
undisturbed spinsterhood; they'll keep on badgering you."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Oh, I don't mind the badgering of a number of
men; it's rather nice.  It's the one badger I find obnoxious."

_True Love_ (impatiently).--"That's just the perversity of things.  I
could put a stop to the protestations of the many; I should like nothing
better--but the pertinacity of the one!  Ah, well!  I can't drop that
without putting an end to my existence."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (politely).--"I shouldn't think of suggesting
anything so extreme."

_True Love_ (quoting).--"'Mrs. Hauksbee proceeded to take the conceit out
of Pluffles as you remove the ribs of an umbrella before re-covering.'
However, you couldn't ask me anything seriously that I wouldn't do, dear
Mistress Perversity."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (yielding a point).--"I'll put that boldly to the
proof.  Say you don't love me!"

_True Love_ (seizing his advantage).--"I don't!  It's imbecile and
besotted devotion!  Tell me, when may I come to take you away?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (sighing).--"It's like asking me to leave Heaven."

{Phoebe and Gladwish: p115.jpg}

_True Love_.--"I know it; she told me where to find you,--Thornycroft is
the seventh poultry-farm I've visited,--but you could never leave Heaven,
you can't be happy without poultry, why that is a wish easily gratified.
I'll get you a farm to-morrow; no, it's Saturday, and the real estate
offices close at noon, but on Monday, without fail.  Your ducks and
geese, always carrying it along with you.  All you would have to do is to
admit me; Heaven is full of twos.  If you shall swim on a crystal
lake--Phoebe told me what a genius you have for getting them out of the
muddy pond; she was sitting beside it when I called, her hand in that of
a straw-coloured person named Gladwish, and the ground in her vicinity
completely strewn with votive offerings.  You shall splash your silver
sea with an ivory wand; your hens shall have suburban cottages, each with
its garden; their perches shall be of satin-wood and their water dishes
of mother-of-pearl.  You shall be the Goose Girl and I will be the Swan
Herd--simply to be near you--for I hate live poultry.  Dost like the
picture?  It's a little like Claude Melnotte's, I confess.  The fact is I
am not quite sane; talking with you after a fortnight of the tabbies at
the Hydro is like quaffing inebriating vodka after Miffin's Food!  May I
come to-morrow?"

_Bailiffs Daughter_ (hedging).--"I shall be rather busy; the Crossed
Minorca hen comes off to-morrow."

_True Love_.--"Oh, never mind!  I'll take her off to-night when I escort
you to the farm; then she'll get a day's advantage."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"And rob fourteen prospective chicks of a mother;
nay, lose the chicks themselves?  Never!"

_True Love_.--"So long as you are a Goose Girl, does it make any
difference whose you are?  Is it any more agreeable to be Mrs. Heaven's
Goose Girl than mine?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Ah! but in one case the term of service is
limited; in the other, permanent."

_True Love_.--"But in the one case you are the slave of the employer, in
the other the employer of the slave.  Why did you run away?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"A man's mind is too dull an instrument to measure
a woman's reason; even my own fails sometimes to deal with all its
delicate shades; but I think I must have run away chiefly to taste the
pleasure of being pursued and brought back.  If it is necessary to your
happiness that you should explore all the Bluebeard chambers of my being,
I will confess further that it has taken you nearly three weeks to
accomplish what I supposed you would do in three days!"

_True Love_ (after a well-spent interval).--"To-morrow, then; shall we
say before breakfast?  All, do!  Why not?  Well, then, immediately after
breakfast, and I breakfast at seven nowadays, and sometimes earlier.  Do
take off those ugly cotton gloves, dear; they are five sizes too large
for you, and so rough and baggy to the touch!"

========================================
========================================

THE FLAG-RAISING


by

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN




CONTENTS

   I. A DIFFERENCE IN HEARTS
  II. REBECCA'S POINT OF VIEW
 III. WISDOM'S WAYS
  IV. THE SAVING OF THE COLORS
   V. THE STATE O' MAINE




I

A DIFFERENCE IN HEARTS

"I DON' know as I cal'lated to be the makin' of any child," Miranda had
said as she folded Aurelia's letter and laid it in the light-stand
drawer.  "I s'posed of course Aurelia would send us the one we asked
for, but it's just like her to palm off that wild young one on somebody
else."

"You remember we said that Rebecca, or even Jenny might come, in case
Hannah could n't," interposed Jane.

"I know we did, but we hadn't any notion it would turn out that way,"
grumbled Miranda.

"She was a mite of a thing when we saw her three years ago," ventured
Jane; "she's had time to improve."

"And time to grow worse!"

"Won't it be kind of a privilege to put her on the right track?" asked
Jane timidly.

"I don' know about the privilege part; it'll be considerable work, I
guess. If her mother hasn't got her on the right track by now, she
won't take to it herself all of a sudden."

This depressed and depressing frame of mind had lasted until the
eventful day dawned on which Rebecca was to arrive.

"If she makes as much work after she comes as she has before, we might
as well give up hope of ever gettin' any rest," sighed Miranda as she
hung the dish towels on the barberry bushes at the side door.

"But we should have had to clean house, Rebecca or no Rebecca," urged
Jane; "and I can't see why you've scrubbed and washed and baked as you
have for that one child, nor why you've about bought out Watson's stock
of dry goods."

"I know Aurelia if you don't," responded Miranda. "I've seen her house,
and I've seen that batch o' children, wearin' one another's clothes and
never carin' whether they had 'em on right side out or not; I know what
they've had to live and dress on, and so do you. That child will like
as not come here with a bundle o' things borrowed from the rest o' the
family. She'll have Hannah's shoes and John's undershirts and Mark's
socks most likely. I suppose she never had a thimble on her finger in
her life, but she'll know the feelin' o' one before she's been here
many days. I've bought a piece of unbleached muslin and a piece o'
brown gingham for her to make up; that'll keep her busy. Of course she
won't pick up anything after herself; she probably never saw a duster,
and she'll be as hard to train into our ways as if she was a heathen."

"She'll make a dif'rence," acknowledged Jane, "but she may turn out
more biddable than we think."

"She'll mind when she's spoken to, biddable or not," remarked Miranda
with a shake of the last towel.

Miranda Sawyer had a heart, of course, but she had never used it for
any other purpose than the pumping and circulating of blood. She was
just, conscientious, economical, industrious; a regular attendant at
church and Sunday-school, and a member of the State Missionary and
Bible societies, but in the presence of all these chilly virtues you
longed for one warm little fault, or lacking that, one likable failing,
something to make you sure that she was thoroughly alive. She had never
had any education other than that of the neighborhood district school,
for her desires and ambitions had all pointed to the management of the
house, the farm, and the dairy. Jane, on the other hand, had gone to an
academy, and also to a boarding-school for young ladies; so had
Aurelia; and after all the years that had elapsed there was still a
slight difference in language and in manner between the elder and the
two younger sisters.

Jane, too, had had the inestimable advantage of a sorrow; not the
natural grief at the loss of her aged father and mother, for she had
been resigned to let them go; but something far deeper. She was engaged
to marry young, Tom Carter, who had nothing to marry on, it is true,
but who was sure to have, some time or other. Then the war broke out.
Tom enlisted at the first call. Up to that time Jane had loved him with
a  quiet, friendly sort of affection, and had given her country a mild
emotion of the same sort. But the strife, the danger, the anxiety of
the time, set new currents of feeling in motion. Life became something
other than the three meals a day, the round of cooking, washing,
sewing, and churchgoing. Personal gossip vanished from the village
conversation. Big things took the place of trifling ones,--sacred
sorrows of wives and mothers, pangs of fathers and husbands,
self-denials, sympathies, new desire to bear one another's burdens. Men
and women grew fast in those days of the nation's trouble and danger,
and Jane awoke from the vague dull dream she had hitherto called life
to new hopes, new fears, new purposes. Then after a year's anxiety, a
year when one never looked in the newspaper without dread and sickness
of suspense, came the telegram saying that Tom was wounded; and without
so much as asking Miranda's leave, she packed her trunk and started for
the South. She was in time to hold Tom's hand through hours of pain; to
show him for once the heart of a prim New England girl when it is
ablaze with love and grief; to put her arms about him so that he could
have a home to die in, and that was all;--all, but it served.

It carried her through weary months of nursing--nursing of other
soldiers for Tom's dear sake; it sent her home a better woman; and
though she had never left Riverboro in all the years that lay between,
and had grown into the counterfeit presentment of her sister and of all
other thin, spare, New England spinsters, it was something of a
counterfeit, and underneath was still the faint echo of that wild
heartbeat of her girlhood. Having learned the trick of beating and
loving and suffering, the poor faithful heart persisted, although it
lived on memories and carried on its sentimental operations mostly in
secret.

"You're soft, Jane," said Miranda once; "you allers was soft, and you
allers will be. If't wa'n't for me keeping you stiffened up, I b'lieve
you'd leak out o' the house into the dooryard."

It was already past the appointed hour for Mr. Cobb and his coach to be
lumbering down the street.

"The stage ought to be here," said Miranda, glancing nervously at the
tall clock for the twentieth time. "I guess everything's done. I've
tacked up two thick towels back of her washstand and put a mat under
her slop-jar; but children are awful hard on furniture. I expect we
sha'n't know this house a year from now." Jane's frame of mind was
naturally depressed and timorous, having been affected by Miranda's
gloomy presages of evil to come. The only difference between the
sisters in this matter was that while Miranda only wondered how they
could endure Rebecca, Jane had flashes of inspiration in which she
wondered how Rebecca would endure them. It was in one of these flashes
that she ran up the back stairs to put a vase of apple blossoms and a
red tomato-pincushion on Rebecca's bureau.

The stage rumbled to the side door of the brick house, and Mr. Cobb
handed Rebecca out like a real lady passenger. She alighted with great
circumspection, put a bunch of flowers in her aunt Miranda's hand, and
received her salute; it could hardly be called a kiss without injuring
the fair name of that commodity. "You need n't 'a'bothered to bring
flowers," remarked that gracious and tactful lady; "the garden's always
full of 'em here when it comes time."

Jane then kissed Rebecca, giving a somewhat better imitation of the
real thing than her sister.

"Put the trunk in the entry, Jeremiah, and we'll get it carried
upstairs this afternoon," she said.

"I'll take it up for ye now, if ye say the word, girls."

"No, no; don't leave the horses; somebody'll be comin' past, and we can
call 'em in."

"Well, good-by, Rebecca; good-day, Mirandy 'n' Jane.  You've got a
lively little girl there. I guess she'll be a first-rate company
keeper."

Miss Sawyer shuddered openly at the adjective "lively" as applied to a
child; her belief being that though children might be seen, if
absolutely necessary, they certainly should never be heard if she could
help it. "We're not much used to noise, Jane and me," she remarked
acidly.

Mr. Cobb saw that he had spoken indiscreetly, but he was too unused to
argument to explain himself readily, so he drove away, trying to think
by what safer word than "lively" he might have described his
interesting little passenger.

"I'll take you up and show you your room, Rebecca," Miss Miranda said.
"Shut the mosquito nettin' door tight behind you, so's to keep the
flies out; it ain't fly time yet, but I want you to start right; take
your parcel along with you and then you won't have to come down for it;
always make your head save your heels. Rub your feet on that braided
rug; hang your hat and cape in the entry as you go past."

"It's my best hat," said Rebecca.

"Take it upstairs then and put it in the clothes-press; but I shouldn't
'a' thought you'd 'a' worn your best hat on the stage."

"It's my only hat," explained Rebecca. "My every-day hat was n't good
enough to bring. Sister Fanny's going to finish it."

"Lay your parasol in the entry closet."

"Do you mind if I keep it in my room, please? It always seems safer."

"There ain't any thieves hereabouts, and if there was, I guess they
wouldn't make for your sunshade; but come along. Remember to always go
up the back way; we don't use the front stairs on account o' the
carpet; take care o' the turn and don't ketch your foot; look to your
right and go in. When you've washed your face and hands and brushed
your hair you can come down, and by and by we'll unpack your trunk and
get you settled before supper. Ain't you got your dress on hind side
foremost?"

Rebecca drew her chin down and looked at the row of smoked pearl
buttons running up and down the middle of her flat little chest. "Hind
side foremost?  Oh, I see! No, that's all right. If you have seven
children you can't keep buttonin' and unbuttonin' 'em all the
time--they have to do themselves. We're always buttoned up in front at
our house. Mira's only three, but she's buttoned up in front, too."

Miranda said nothing as she closed the door, but her looks were more
eloquent than words.

Rebecca stood perfectly still in the centre of the floor and looked
about her. There was a square of oilcloth in front of each article of
furniture and a drawn-in rug beside the single four poster, which was
covered with a fringed white dimity counterpane.

Everything was as neat as wax, but the ceilings were much higher than
Rebecca was accustomed to. It was a north room, and the window, which
was long and narrow, looked out on the back buildings and the barn.

It was not the room, which was far more comfortable than Rebecca's own
at Sunnybrook Farm, nor the lack of view, nor yet the long journey, for
she was not conscious of weariness; it was not the fear of a strange
place, for she adored new places and new sensations; it was because of
some curious blending of uncomprehended emotions that Rebecca stood her
beloved pink sunshade in the corner, tore off her best hat, flung it on
the bureau with the porcupine quills on the under side, and stripping
down the dimity spread, precipitated herself into the middle of the bed
and pulled the counterpane over her head.

In a moment the door opened with a clatter of the latch.

Knocking was a refinement quite unknown in Riverboro, and if it had
been heard of, it would never have been wasted on a child. Miss Miranda
entered, and as her eye wandered about the vacant room, it fell upon a
white and tempestuous ocean of counterpane, an ocean breaking into
strange movements of wave and crest and billow.

"Rebecca!"

The tone in which the word was voiced gave it all the effect of having
been shouted from the housetops.

A dark ruffled head and two frightened eyes appeared above the dimity
spread.

"What are you layin' on your good bed in the daytime for, messin' up
the feathers, and dirtyin' the comforter with your dusty boots?"

Rebecca rose guiltily. There seemed no excuse to make. Her offense was
beyond explanation or apology.

"I'm sorry, Aunt Mirandy-something came over me; I don't know what."

"Well, if it comes over you very soon again we'll have to find out what
't is. Spread your bed up smooth this minute, for 'Bijah Flagg's
bringin' your trunk upstairs, and I wouldn't let him see such a
cluttered-up room for anything; he'd tell it all over town."

When Mr. Cobb had put up his horses that night he carried a kitchen
chair to the side of his wife, who was sitting on the back porch.

"I brought a little Randall girl down on the stage from Maplewood
to-day, mother. She's related to the Sawyer girls an' is goin' to live
with 'em," he said, as he sat down and began to whittle. "She's
Aurelia's child, the sister that ran away with Susan Randall's son just
before we come here to live."

"How old a child?"

"Bout ten, or somewhere along there, an' small for her age; but land!
she might be a hundred to hear her talk! She kept me jumpin' tryin' to
answer her! Of all the queer children I ever come across she's the
queerest. She ain't no beauty--her face is all eyes; but if she ever
grows up to them eyes an' fills out a little she'll make folks stare.
Land, mother! I wish 't you could 'a' heard her talk."

"I don't see what she had to talk about, a child like that, to a
stranger," replied Mrs. Cobb.

"Stranger or no stranger, 't would n't make no difference to her. She'd
talk to a pump or a grindstone; she'd talk to herself ruther 'n keep
still."

"What did she talk about?

"Blamed if I can repeat any of it. She kept me so surprised I didn't
have my wits about me. She had a little pink sunshade--it kind o'
looked like a doll's umberella, 'n' she clung to it like a burr to a
woolen stockin'. I advised her to open it up--the sun was so hot; but
she said no, 't would fade, an' she tucked it under her dress.  'It's
the dearest thing in life to me,' says she, 'but it's a dreadful care.'
Them's the very words, an' it's all the words I remember.  'It's the
dearest thing in life to me, but it's an awful care!'"--here Mr. Cobb
laughed aloud as he tipped his chair back against the side of the
house. "There was another thing, but I can't get it right exactly. She
was talkin' 'bout the circus parade an' the snake charmer in a gold
chariot, an' says she, 'She was so beautiful beyond compare, Mr. Cobb,
that it made you have lumps in your throat to look at her.' She'll be
comin' over to see you, mother, an' you can size her up for yourself, I
don' know how she'll git on with Mirandy Sawyer--poor little soul!"

This doubt was more or less openly expressed in Riverboro, which,
however, had two opinions on the subject; one that it was a most
generous thing in the Sawyer girls to take one of Aurelia's children to
educate, the other that the education would be bought at a price wholly
out of proportion to its real value.

Rebecca's first letters to her mother would seem to indicate that she
cordially coincided with the latter view of the situation.



II

REBECCA'S POINT OF VIEW

DEAR MOTHER,--I am safely here. My dress was not much tumbled and Aunt
Jane helped me press it out. I like Mr. Cobb very much. He chews
tobacco but throws newspapers straight up to the doors of the houses. I
rode outside with him a little while, but got inside before I got to
Aunt Miranda's house. I did not want to, but thought you would like it
better. Miranda is such a long word that I think I will say Aunt M. and
Aunt J. in my Sunday letters. Aunt J. has given me a dictionary to look
up all the hard words in. It takes a good deal of time and I am glad
people can talk without stoping to spell. It is much eesier to talk
than write and much more fun. The brick house looks just the same as
you have told us. The parler is splendid and gives YOU creeps and
chills when you look in the door. The furnature is ellergant too, and
all the rooms but there are no good sitting-down places exsept in the
kitchen. The same cat is here but they never save the kittens and the
cat is too old to play with. Hannah told me once you ran away to be
married to father and I can see it would be nice. If Aunt M. would run
away I think I should like to live with Aunt J. She does not hate me as
bad as Aunt M. does.  Tell Mark he can have my paint box, but I should
like him to keep the red cake in case I come home again. I hope Hannah
and John do mot get tired doing my work.

Your afectionate friend

REBECCA.

P. S. Please give the piece of poetry to John because he likes my
poetry even when it is not very good. This piece is not very good but
it is true but I hope you won't mind what is in it as you ran away.

  This house is dark and dull and dreer
  No light doth shine from far or near
  Its like the tomb.

  And those of us who live herein
  Are almost as dead as serrafim
  Though not as good.

  My guardian angel is asleep
  At leest he doth not virgil keep
  Ah! Woe is me!

  Then give me back my lonely farm
  Where none alive did wish me harm
  Dear home of youth!

P.S. again. I made the poetry like a piece in a book but could not get
it right at first. You see "tomb" and "good" do not sound well together
but I wanted to say "tomb" dreadfully and as serrafim are always good I
could n't take that out. I have made it over now. It does not say my
thoughts as well but think it is more right. Give the best one to John
as he keeps them in a box with his bird's eggs. This is the best one.

SUNDAY THOUGHTS

BY

REBECCA ROWENA RANDALL

  This house is dark and dull and drear
  No light doth shine from far or near
  Nor ever could.

  And those of us who live herein
  Are most as dead as seraphim
  Though not as good.

  My guardian angel is asleep
  At least he doth no vigil keep
  But far doth roam.

  Then give me back my lonely farm
  Where none alive did wish me harm,
  Dear childhood home!

DEAR MOTHER,--I am thrilling with unhappyness this morning. I got that
out of a book called Cora The Doctor's Wife. Cora's husband's mother
was very cross and unfeeling to her like Aunt M. to me. I wish Hannah
had come instead of me for it was Hannah that Aunt M. wanted and she is
better than I am and does not answer back so quick. Are there any
peaces of my buff calico. Aunt J. wants enough to make a new waste,
button behind, so I wont look so outlandish. The stiles are quite
pretty in Riverboro and those at Meeting quite ellergant, more so than
in Temperance.

  This town is stilish, gay and fair,
  And full of wellthy riches rare,
  But I would pillow on my arm
  The thought of my sweet Brookside Farm.

School is pretty good. The Teacher can answer more questions than the
Temperance one but not so many as I can ask. I am smarter than all the
girls but one but not so smart as two boys. Emma Jane can add and
subtract in her head like a streek of lightning and knows the speling
book right through but has no thoughts of any kind. She is in the Third
Reader but does not like stories in books. I am in the Sixth Reader but
just because I cannot say the seven multiplication Table Miss Dearborn
threttens to put me in the baby primer class with Elijah and Elisha
Simpson little twins.

  Sore is my heart and bent my stubborn pride,
  With Lijah and with Lisha am I tied,
  My soul recoyles like Cora Doctor's Wife,
  Like her I feer I cannot bare this life.

I am going to try for the speling prize but fear I cannot get it. I
would not care but wrong speling looks dreadful in poetry. Last Sunday
when I found seraphim in the dictionary I was ashamed I had made it
serrafim but seraphim is not a word you can guess at like another long
one, outlandish, in this letter which spells itself. Miss Dearborn says
use the words you can spell and if you cant spell seraphim make angel
do but angels are not just the same as seraphims.  Seraphims are
brighter whiter and have bigger wings and I think are older and longer
dead than angels which are just freshly dead and after a long time in
heaven around the great white throne grow to be seraphims.

I sew on brown gingham dresses every afternoon when Emma Jane and the
Simpsons are playing house or running on the Logs when their mothers do
not know it. Their mothers are afraid they will drown and aunt M. is
afraid I will wet my clothes so will not let me either. I can play from
half past four to supper and after supper a little bit and Saturday
afternoons. I am glad our cow has a calf and it is spotted. It is going
to be a good year for apples and hay so you and John will be glad and
we can pay a little more morgage. Miss Dearborn asked us what is the
object of edducation and I said the object of mine was to help pay off
the morgage. She told Aunt M. and I had to sew extra for punishment
because she says a morgage is disgrace like stealing or smallpox and it
will be all over town that we have one on our farm. Emma Jane is not
morgaged nor Richard Carter nor Dr. Winship but the Simpsons are.

  Rise my soul, strain every nerve,
  Thy morgage to remove,
  Gain thy mother's heartfelt thanks
  Thy family's grateful love.

Pronounce family quick or it won't sound right.

Your loving little friend
  REBECCA.


DEAR JOHN,--YOU remember when we tide the new dog in the barn how he
bit the rope and howled. I am just like him only the brick house is the
barn and I can not bite Aunt M. because I must be grateful and
edducation is going to be the making of me and help you pay off the
mortgage when we grow up.

Your loving
  BECKY.



III.

WISDOM'S WAYS

THE day of Rebecca's arrival had been Friday, and on the Monday
following she began her education at the school which was in Riverboro
Centre, about a mile distant. Miss Sawyer borrowed a neighbor's horse
and wagon and drove her to the schoolhouse, interviewing the teacher,
Miss Dearborn, arranging for books, and generally starting the child on
the path that was to lead to boundless knowledge.

Rebecca walked to school after the first morning. She loved this part
of the day's programme. When the dew was not too heavy and the weather
was fair there was a short cut through the woods. She turned off the
main road, crept through Joshua Woodman's bars, waved away Mrs.
Carter's cows, trod the short grass of the pasture, with its well-worn
path running through gardens of buttercups and whiteweed, and groves of
boxberry leaves and sweet fern. She descended a little hill, jumped
from stone to stone across a woodland brook, startling the drowsy
frogs, who were always winking and blinking in the morning sun. Then
came the "woodsy bit," with her feet pressing the slippery carpet of
brown pine needles; the woodsy bit so full of dewy morning
surprises,--fungous growths of brilliant orange and crimson springing
up around the stumps of dead trees, beautiful things born in a single
night; and now and then the miracle of a little clump of waxen Indian
pipes, seen just quickly enough to be saved from her careless tread.
Then she climbed a stile, went through a grassy meadow, slid under
another pair of bars, and came out into the road again, having gained
nearly half a mile.

How delicious it all was! Rebecca clasped her Quackenbos's Grammar and
Greenleaf's Arithmetic with a joyful sense of knowing her lessons. Her
dinner pail swung from her right hand, and she had a blissful
consciousness of the two soda biscuits spread with butter and syrup,
the baked cup-custard, the doughnut, and the square of hard
gingerbread. Sometimes she said whatever "piece" she was going to speak
on the next Friday afternoon.

"A soldier of the Legion lay dying in Algiers, There was lack of
woman's nursing, there was dearth of woman's tears."

How she loved the swing and the sentiment of it! How her young voice
quivered whenever she came to the refrain:--

"But we'll meet no more at Bingen, dear Bingen on the Rhine."

It always sounded beautiful in her ears, as she sent her tearful little
treble into the clear morning air.

Another early favorite (for we must remember that Rebecca's only
knowledge of the great world of poetry consisted of the selections in
vogue in the old school Readers) was:--

  "Woodman, spare that tree!
  Touch not a single bough!
  In youth it sheltered me,
  And I'll protect it now."

When Emma Jane Perkins walked through the "short cut" with her, the two
children used to render this with appropriate dramatic action. Emma
Jane always chose to be the woodman because she had nothing to do but
raise on high an imaginary axe. On the one occasion when she essayed
the part of the tree's romantic protector, she represented herself as
feeling "so awful foolish" that she refused to undertake it again, much
to the secret delight of Rebecca, who found the woodman's role much too
tame for her vaulting ambition. She reveled in the impassioned appeal
of the poet, and implored the ruthless woodman to be as brutal as
possible with the axe, so that she might properly put greater spirit
into her lines. One morning, feeling more frisky than usual, she fell
upon her knees and wept in the woodman's petticoat. Curiously enough,
her sense of proportion rejected this as soon as it was done.

"That wasn't right, it was silly, Emma Jane; but I'll tell you where it
might come in--in 'Give me Three Grains of Corn.' You be the mother,
and I'll be the famishing Irish child. For pity's sake put the axe
down; you are not the woodman any longer!"

"What'll I do with my hands, then?" asked Emma Jane.

"Whatever you like," Rebecca answered wearily; "you're just a
mother--that's all. What does your mother do with her hands? Nowhere
goes!

  "'Give me three grains of corn, mother,
  Only three grains of corn,
  It will keep the little life I have
  Till the coming of the morn.'"

This sort of thing made Emma Jane nervous and fidgety, but she was
Rebecca's slave and obeyed her lightest commands. At the last pair of
bars the two girls were sometimes met by a detachment of the Simpson
children, who lived in a black house with a red door and a red barn
behind, on the Blueberry Plains road. Rebecca felt an interest in the
Simpsons from the first, because there were so many of them and they
were so patched and darned, just like her own brood at the home farm.

The little schoolhouse with its flagpole on top and its two doors in
front, one for boys and the other for girls, stood on the crest of a
hill, with rolling fields and meadows on one side, a stretch of pine
woods on the other, and the river glinting and sparkling in the
distance. It boasted no attractions within. All was as bare and ugly
and uncomfortable as it well could be, for the villages along the river
expended so much money in repairing and rebuilding bridges that they
were obliged to be very economical in school privileges. The teacher's
desk and chair stood on a platform in one corner; there was an uncouth
stove, never blackened oftener than once a year, a map of the United
States, two blackboards, a ten-quart tin pail of water and long-handled
dipper on a corner shelf, and wooden desks and benches for the
scholars, who only numbered twenty in Rebecca's time. The seats were
higher in the back of the room, and the more advanced and longer-legged
pupils sat there, the position being greatly to be envied, as they were
at once nearer to the windows and farther from the teacher.

There were classes of a sort, although nobody, broadly speaking,
studied the same book with anybody else, or had arrived at the same
degree of proficiency in any one branch of learning. Rebecca in
particular was so difficult to classify that Miss Dearborn at the end
of a fortnight gave up the attempt altogether. She read with Dick
Carter and Living Perkins, who were fitting for the academy; recited
arithmetic with lisping little "Thuthan Thimpthon;" geography with Emma
Jane Perkins, and grammar after school hours to Miss Dearborn alone.
Full to the brim as she was of clever thoughts and quaint fancies, she
made at first but a poor hand at composition. The labor of writing and
spelling, with the added difficulties of punctuation and capitals,
interfered sadly with the free expression of ideas. She took history
with Alice Robinson's class, which was attacking the subject of the
Revolution, while Rebecca was bidden to begin with the discovery of
America. In a week she had mastered the course of events up to the
Revolution, and in ten days had arrived at Yorktown, where the class
had apparently established summer quarters. Then finding that extra
effort would only result in her reciting with the oldest Simpson boy,
she deliberately held herself back, for wisdom's ways were not those of
pleasantness nor her paths those of peace if one were compelled to
tread them in the company of Seesaw Simpson. Samuel Simpson was
generally called Seesaw, because of his difficulty in making up his
mind. Whether it were a question of fact, of spelling, or of date, of
going swimming or fishing, of choosing a book in the Sunday-school
library or a stick of candy at the village store, he had no sooner
determined on one plan of action than his wish fondly reverted to the
opposite one. Seesaw was pale, flaxen haired, blue eyed, round
shouldered, and given to stammering when nervous. Perhaps because of
his very weakness, Rebecca's decision of character had a fascination
for him, and although she snubbed him to the verge of madness, he could
never keep his eyes away from her. The force with which she tied her
shoe when the lacing came undone, the flirt over shoulder she gave her
black braid when she was excited or warm, her manner of studying,--book
on desk, arms folded, eyes fixed on the opposite wall,--all had an
abiding charm for Seesaw Simpson. When, having obtained permission, she
walked to the water pail in the corner and drank from the dipper,
unseen forces dragged Seesaw from his seat to go and drink after her.
It was not only that there was something akin to association and
intimacy in drinking next, but there was the fearful joy of meeting her
in transit and receiving a cold and disdainful look from her wonderful
eyes.

On a certain warm day in summer Rebecca's thirst exceeded the bounds of
propriety. When she asked a third time for permission to quench it at
the common fountain Miss Dearborn nodded "yes," but lifted her eyebrows
unpleasantly as Rebecca neared the desk. As she replaced the dipper
Seesaw promptly raised his hand, and Miss Dearborn indicated a weary
affirmative.

"What is the matter with you, Rebecca?" she asked.

"It is a very thirsty morning," answered Rebecca.

There seemed nothing humorous about this reply, which was merely the
statement of a fact, but an irrepressible titter ran through the
school.  Miss Dearborn did not enjoy jokes neither made nor understood
by herself, and her face flushed.

"I think you had better stand by the pail for five minutes, Rebecca; it
may help you to control your thirst."

Rebecca's heart fluttered. She to stand in the corner by the water pail
and be stared at by all the scholars! She unconsciously made a gesture
of angry dissent and moved a step nearer her seat, but was arrested by
Miss Dearborn's command in a still firmer voice.

"Stand by the pail, Rebecca!--Samuel Simpson how many times have you
asked for water already?"

"This is the f-f-fourth."

"Don't touch the dipper, please. The school has done nothing but drink
all day; it has had no time whatever to study. What is the matter with
you, Samuel?"

"It is a v-very thirsty m-morning," remarked Samuel, looking at Rebecca
while the school tittered.

"I judged so. Stand by the other side of the pail, with Rebecca."
Rebecca's head was bowed with shame and wrath. Life looked too black a
thing to be endured. The punishment was bad enough, but to be coupled
in correction with Seesaw Simpson was beyond human endurance.

Singing was the last exercise in the afternoon, and Minnie Smellie
chose "Shall we Gather at the River?" It was a curious choice and
seemed to hold some secret association with the situation and general
progress of events; or at any rate there was apparently some obscure
reason for the energy and vim with which the scholars looked at the
empty water pail as they shouted the choral invitation again and
again:--

  "Shall we gather at the river,
  The beautiful, the beautiful river?"

Miss Dearborn stole a look at Rebecca's bent head, and was frightened.
The child's face was pale save for two red spots glowing on her checks.
Tears hung on her lashes; her breath came and went quickly, and the
hand that held her pocket handkerchief trembled like a leaf.

"You may go to your seat, Rebecca," said Miss Dearborn at the end of
the first song. "Samuel, stay where you are till the close of school.
And let me tell you, scholars, that I asked Rebecca to stand by the
pail only to break up this habit of incessant drinking, which is
nothing but empty-mindedness and desire to walk to and fro over the
floor. Every time Rebecca has asked for a drink to-day the whole school
has gone to the pail like a regiment. She is really thirsty, and I dare
say I ought to have punished you for following her example, not her for
setting it. What shall we sing now, Alice?"

"'The Old Oaken Bucket,' please."

"Think of something dry, Alice, and change the subject. Yes, 'The Star
Spangled Banner' if you like, or anything else." Rebecca sank into her
seat and pulled the singing book from her desk. Miss Dearborn's public
explanation had shifted some of the weight from her heart, and she felt
a trifle raised in her self-esteem.

Under cover of the general relaxation of singing, offerings of
respectful sympathy began to make their appearance at her shrine.
Living Perkins, who could not sing, dropped a piece of maple sugar in
her lap as he passed her on his way to the blackboard to draw the map
of Maine, while Alice Robinson rolled a perfectly new slate pencil over
the floor with her foot until it reached Rebecca's place.

Altogether existence grew brighter, and when she was left alone with
the teacher for her grammar lesson she had nearly recovered her
equanimity, which was more than Miss Dearborn had. The last clattering
foot had echoed through the hall, Seesaw's backward glance of penitence
had been met and answered defiantly by one of cold disdain.

"Rebecca, I am afraid I punished you more than I meant," said Miss
Dearborn, who was only eighteen herself, and in her year of teaching
country schools had never encountered a child like Rebecca.

"I had n't missed a question this whole day, nor whispered either,"
quavered the culprit; "and I don't think I ought to be shamed just for
drinking."

"You started all the others, or it seemed as if you did. Whatever you
do they all do, whether you laugh, or write notes, or ask to leave the
room, or drink; and it must be stopped."

"Sam Simpson is a copycoat!" stormed Rebecca. "I would n't have minded
standing in the corner alone--that is, not so very much; but I couldn't
bear standing with him."

"I saw that you could n't, and that's the reason I told you to take
your seat, and left him in the corner. Remember that you are a stranger
in the place, and they take more notice of what you do, so you must be
careful. Now let's have our conjugations. Give me the verb 'to be,'
potential mood, past perfect tense."

  "I might have been
  Thou mightst have been
  He might have been
  We might  have been
  You might have been
  They might have been"

"Give me an example, please."

  "I might have been glad
  Thou mightst have been glad
  He, she, or it might have been glad"

"'He' or 'she' might have been glad because they are masculine and
feminine, but could 'it' have been glad?" asked Miss Dearborn, who was
very fond of splitting hairs.

"Why not?" asked Rebecca.

"Because 'it' is neuter gender."

"Could n't we say, 'The kitten might have been glad if it had known it
was not going to be drowned'?"

"Ye-es," Miss Dearborn answered hesitatingly, never very sure of
herself under Rebecca's fire; "but though we often speak of a baby, a
chicken, or a kitten as 'it,' they are really masculine or feminine
gender, not neuter."

Rebecca reflected a long moment and then asked, "Is a hollyhock neuter?"

"Oh yes, of course it is, Rebecca."

"Well, could n't we say, 'The hollyhock might have been glad to see it
rain, but there was a weak little baby bud growing out of its stalk and
it was afraid it might be hurt by the storm; so the big hollyhock was
kind of afraid, instead of being real glad'?"

Miss Dearborn looked puzzled as she answered, "Of course, Rebecca,
hollyhocks could not be sorry, or glad, or afraid, really."

"We can't tell, I s'pose," replied the child; "but I think they are,
anyway. Now what shall I say?"

"The subjunctive mood, past perfect tense of the verb 'to know.'"

  "If I had known
  If thou hadst known
  If he had known
  If we had known
  If you had known
  If they had known"

"Oh, it is the saddest tense," sighed Rebecca with a little a little
break in her voice; "nothing but ifs, ifs, ifs! And it makes you feel
that if they only had known, things might have been better!"

Miss Dearborn had not thought of it before, but on reflection she
believed the subjective mood was a "sad" one and "if" rather a sorry
"part of speech."

"Give me some examples of the subjective, Rebecca, and that will do for
this afternoon," she said.

"If I had not eaten salt mackerel for breakfast I should not have been
thirsty," said Rebecca with an April smile, as she closed her grammar.
"If thou hadst love me truly thou wouldst not have stood me up in the
corner. If Samuel had not loved wickedness he would not have followed
me to the water pail."

"And if Rebecca had loved the rules of the school she would have
controlled her thirst," finished Miss Dearborn with a kiss, and the two
parted friends.



IV

THE SAVING OF THE COLORS

EVEN when Rebecca had left school, having attained the great age of
seventeen and therefore able to look back over a past incredibly long
and full, she still reckoned time not by years, but by certain
important occurrences. Between these epoch-making events certain other
happenings stood out in bold relief against the gray of dull daily
life. There was the coming of the new minister, for though many were
tried only one was chosen; and finally there was the flag-raising, a
festivity that thrilled Riverboro and Edgewood society from centre to
circumference, a festivity that took place just before she entered the
Female Seminary at Wareham and said good-by to kind Miss Dearborn and
the village school.

There must have been other flag-raisings in history,--even the persons
most interested in this particular one would grudgingly have allowed
that much,--but it would have seemed to them improbable that any such
flag-raising, as theirs could twice glorify the same century. Of some
pageants it is tacitly admitted that there can be no duplicates, and
the flag-raising at Riverboro Centre was one of these; so that it is
small wonder if Rebecca chose it as one of the important dates in her
personal almanac. Mrs. Baxter, the new minister's wife, was the being,
under Providence, who had conceived the first idea of the flag. Mrs.
Baxter communicated her patriotic idea of a new flag to the Dorcas
Society, proposing that the women should cut and make it themselves.

"It may not be quite as good as those manufactured in the large
cities," she said, "but we shall be proud to see our home-made flag
flying in the breeze, and it will mean all the more to the young voters
growing up, to remember that their mothers made it with their own
hands."

"How would it do to let some of the girls help?" modestly asked Miss
Dearborn, the Riverboro teacher. "We might chose the best sewers and
let them put in at least a few stitches, so that they can feel they
have a share in it."

"Just the thing!" exclaimed Mrs. Baxter. "We can cut the stripes and
sew them together, and after we have basted on the white stars the
girls can apply them to the blue ground. We must have it ready for the
campaign rally, and we could n't christen it at a better time than in
this presidential year."

In this way the great enterprise was started, and day by day the
preparations went forward in the two villages.

The boys, as future voters and soldiers, demanded an active share in
the proceedings, and were organized by Squire Bean into a fife and drum
corps, so that by day and night martial but most inharmonious music
woke the echoes, and deafened mothers felt their patriotism oozing out
at the soles of their shoes. Dick Carter was made captain, for his
grandfather had a gold medal given him by Queen Victoria for rescuing
three hundred and twenty-six passengers from a sinking British vessel.
Riverboro thought it high time to pay some graceful tribute to Great
Britain in return for her handsome, conduct to Captain Nahum Carter,
and human imagination could contrive nothing more impressive than a
vicarious share in the flag-raising.

Miss Dearborn was to be Columbia and the older girls of the two schools
were to be the States. Such trade in muslins and red, white, and blue
ribbons had never been known since "Watson kep' store," and the number
of brief white petticoats hanging out to bleach would leave caused the
passing stranger to imagine Riverboro a continual dancing-school.

Juvenile virtue, both male and female, reached an almost impossible
height, for parents had only to lift a finger and say, "You shan't go
to the flag-raising!" and the refractory spirit at once armed itself
for new struggles toward the perfect life. Mr. Jeremiah Cobb had
consented to impersonate Uncle Sam, and was to drive Columbia and the
States to the "raising" on the top of his own stage. Meantime the boys
were drilling, the ladies were cutting and basting and stitching, and
the girls were sewing on stars; for the starry part of the spangled
banner was to remain with each of them in turn until she had performed
her share of the work.

It was felt by one and all a fine and splendid service indeed to help
in the making of the flag, and if Rebecca was proud to be of the chosen
ones, so was her Aunt Jane Sawyer, who had taught her all her delicate
stitches.

On a long-looked-for afternoon in August the minister's wife drove up
to the brick-house door, and handed out the great piece of bunting to
Rebecca, who received it in her arms with as much solemnity as if it
had been a child awaiting baptismal rites.

"I'm so glad!" she sighed happily. "I thought it would never come my
turn!"

"You should have had it a week ago, but Huldah Meserve upset the ink
bottle over her star, and we had to baste on another one. You are the
last, though, and then we shall sew the stars and stripes together, and
Seth Strout will get the top ready for hanging. Just think, it won't be
many days before you children will be pulling the rope with all your
strength, the band will be playing, the men will be cheering, and the
new flag will go higher and higher, till the red, white, and blue shows
against the sky!"

Rebecca's eyes fairly blazed. "Shall I 'hem on' my star, or buttonhole
it?" she asked.

"Look at all the others and make the most beautiful stitches you can,
that's all. It is your star, you know, and you can even imagine it is
your state, and try and have it the best of all. If everybody else is
trying to do the same thing with her state, that will make a great
country, won't it?"

Rebecca's eyes spoke glad confirmation of the idea. "My star, my
state!" she repeated joyously. "Oh, Mrs. Baxter, I'll make such fine
stitches you'll, think the white grew out of the blue!"

The new minister's wife looked pleased to see her spark kindle a flame
in the young heart. "You can sew so much of yourself into your star,"
she went on in the glad voice that made her so winsome, "that when you
are an old lady you can put on your specs and find it among all the
others. Good-by! Come up to the parsonage Saturday afternoon; Mr.
Baxter wants to see you."

"Judson, help that dear little genius of a Rebecca all you can!" she
said that night. "I don't know what she may, or may not, come to, some
day; I only wish she were ours! If you could have seen her clasp the
flag tight in her arms and put her cheek against it, and watched the
tears of feeling start in her eyes when I told her that her star was
her state! I kept whispering to myself, "'Covet not thy neighbor's
child!

Daily at four o'clock Rebecca scrubbed her hands almost to the bone,
brushed her hair, and otherwise prepared herself in body, mind, and
spirit for the consecrated labor of sewing on her star. All the time
that her needle cautiously, conscientiously formed the tiny stitches
she was making rhymes "in her head," her favorite achievement being
this:--

  "Your star, my star, all our stars together,
  They make the dear old banner proud
  To float in the bright fall weather."

There was much discussion as to which of the girls should impersonate
the State of Maine, for that was felt to be the highest honor in the
gift of the committee.

Alice Robinson was the prettiest child in the village, but she was very
shy and by no means a general favorite.

Minnie Smellie possessed the handsomest dress and a pair of white
slippers and open-work stockings that nearly carried the day, but she
was not at all the person to select for the central figure on the
platform.

Huldah Meserve was next voted upon, and the fact that if she were not
chosen her father might withdraw his subscription to the brass band
fund was a matter for grave consideration.

"I kind of hate to have such a giggler for the State of Maine; let
Huldah be the Goddess of Liberty," proposed Mrs. Burbank, whose
patriotism was more local than national.

"How would Rebecca Randall do for Maine, and let her speak some of her
verses?" suggested the new minister's wife, who, could she have had her
way, would have given all the prominent parts to Rebecca, from Uncle
Sam down.

So, beauty, fashion, and wealth having been tried and found wanting,
the committee discussed the claims of talent, and it transpired that to
the awestricken Rebecca fell the chief plum in the pudding. It was a
tribute to her gifts that there was no jealousy or envy among the other
girls; they readily conceded her special fitness for the role.

Her life had not been pressed down full to the brim of pleasures, and
she had a sort of distrust of joy in the bud.  Not until she saw it in
full radiance of bloom did she dare embrace it. She had never read any
verse but Byron, Felicia Hemans, bits of "Paradise Lost," and the
selections in the school readers, but she would have agreed heartily
with the poet who said:--

  "Not by appointment do we meet delight
  And joy; they heed not our expectancy;
  But round some corner in the streets of life
  They on a sudden clasp us with a smile."

For many nights before the raising, when she went to her bed, she said
to herself after she had finished her prayers: "It can't be true that
I'm chosen for the State of Maine! It just can't be true! Nobody could
be good enough, but oh, I'll try to be as good as I can! To be going to
Wareham Seminary next week and to be the State of Maine too! Oh! I must
pray hard to God to keep me meek and humble!"

The flag was to be raised on a Tuesday, and on the previous Sunday it
became known to the children that Clara Belle Simpson was coming back
from Acreville, coming to live with Mrs. Fogg and take care of the
baby. Clara Belle was one of Miss Dearborn's original flock, and if she
were left wholly out of the festivities she would be the only girl of
suitable age to be thus slighted; it seemed clear to the juvenile mind,
therefore, that neither she nor her descendants would ever recover from
such a blow. But, under all the circumstances, would she be allowed to
join in the procession? Even Rebecca, the optimistic, feared not, and
the committee confirmed her fears by saying that Abner Simpson's
daughter certainly could not take any prominent part in the ceremony,
but that they hoped Mrs. Fogg would allow her to witness it.

When Abner Simpson, urged by the town authorities, took his wife and
seven children away from Riverboro to Acreville, just over the border
in the next county, Riverboro went to bed leaving its barn and shed
doors unfastened, and drew long breaths of gratitude to Providence.

Of most winning disposition and genial manners, Mr. Simpson had not
that instinctive comprehension of property rights which renders a man a
valuable citizen.

Abner was a most unusual thief, and conducted his operations with a
tact and neighborly consideration none too common in the profession. He
would never steal a man's scythe in haying-time, nor his fur lap-robe
in the coldest of the winter. The picking of a lock offered no
attractions to him; "he wa'n't no burglar," he would have scornfully
asserted. A strange horse and wagon hitched by the roadside was the
most flagrant of his thefts; but it was the small things--the hatchet
or axe on the chopping-block, the tin pans sunning at the side door, a
stray garment bleaching on the grass, a hoe, rake, shovel, or a bag of
early potatoes--that tempted him most sorely; and these appealed to him
not so much for their intrinsic value as because they were so
excellently adapted to "swapping." The swapping was really the
enjoyable part of the procedure, the theft was only a sad but necessary
preliminary; for if Abner himself had been a man of sufficient property
to carry on his business operations independently, it is doubtful if he
would have helped himself so freely to his neighbor's goods.

Riverboro regretted the loss of Mrs. Simpson, who was useful in
scrubbing, cleaning, and washing, and was thought to exercise some
influence over her predatory spouse. There was a story of their early
life together, when they had a farm; a story to the effect that Mrs.
Simpson always rode on every load of hay that her husband took to
Milltown, with the view of keeping him sober through the day. After he
turned out of the country road and approached the metropolis, it was
said that he used to bury the docile lady in the load. He would then
drive on to the scales, have the weight of hay entered in the buyer's
book, take his horses to the stable for feed and water, and when a
favorable opportunity offered he would assist the hot and panting Mrs.
Simpson out of the side or back of the rack, and gallantly brush the
straw from her person.  For this reason it was always asserted that
Abner Simpson sold his wife every time he went to Milltown, but the
story was never fully substantiated, and at all events it was the only
suspected blot on meek Mrs. Simpson's personal reputation.

As for the Simpson children, they were missed chiefly as familiar
figures by the roadside; but Rebecca honestly loved Clara Belle,
notwithstanding her Aunt Miranda's opposition to the intimacy.
Rebecca's curious taste in friends was a source of continual anxiety to
her aunt.

"Anything that's human flesh is good enough for her!" Miranda groaned
to Jane. "She'll ride with the rag-sack-and-bottle peddler just as
quick as she would with the minister; she always sets beside the
barefooted young ones at Sabbath school; and she's forever riggin' and
onriggin' that dirty Simpson baby! She reminds me of a puppy that'll
always go to everybody that'll have him!"

It was thought very creditable to Mrs. Fogg that she sent for Clara
Belle to live with her and go to school part of the year. "She'll be
useful," said Mrs. Fogg, "and she'll be out of her father's way, and so
keep honest; though she's so awful homely I've no fears for her. A girl
with her red hair, freckles, and cross-eyes can't fall into no kind of
sin, I don't believe."

Mrs. Fogg requested that Clara Belle should be started on her journey
from Acreville by train and come the rest of the way by stage, and she
was disturbed to receive word on Sunday that Mr. Simpson had borrowed a
horse from a new acquaintance, and would himself drive the girl from
Acreville to Riverboro, a distance of thirty-five miles. That he would
arrive in their vicinity on the very night before the flag-raising was
thought by Riverboro to be a public misfortune, and several residents
hastily determined to deny themselves a sight of the festivities and
remain watchfully on their own premises.

On Monday afternoon the children were rehearsing their songs at the
meeting-house. As Rebecca came out on the broad wooden steps she
watched Mrs. Peter Meserve's buggy out of sight, for in front, wrapped
in a cotton sheet, lay the precious flag. After a few chattering
good-byes and weather prophecies with the other girls, she started on
her homeward walk, dropping in at the parsonage to read her verses to
the minister.

He welcomed her gladly as she removed her white cotton gloves (hastily
slipped on outside the door, for ceremony) and pushed back the funny
hat with the yellow and black porcupine quills--the hat with which she
made her first appearance in Riverboro society.

"You've heard the beginning, Mr. Baxter; now will you please tell me if
you like the last verse?" she asked, taking out her paper. "I've only
read it to Alice Robinson, and I think perhaps she can never be a poet,
though she's a splendid writer. Last year when she was twelve she wrote
a birthday poem to herself, and she made 'natal' rhyme with 'Milton,'
which, of course, it wouldn't. I remember every verse ended:--

  'This is my day so natal
  And I will follow Milton.'

Another one of hers was written just because she couldn't help it she
said.  This was it:--

  'Let me to the hills away,
  Give me pen and paper;
  I'll write until the earth will sway
  The story of my Maker.'"

The minister could scarcely refrain from smiling, but he controlled
himself that he might lose none of Rebecca's quaint observations. When
she was perfectly at ease, unwatched and uncriticised, she was a
marvelous companion.

"The name of the poem is going to be 'My Star,'" she continued, "and
Mrs. Baxter gave me all the ideas, but somehow there's a kind of
magicness when they get into poetry, don't you think so?" (Rebecca
always talked to grown people as if she were their age, or, a more
subtle and truer distinction, as if they were hers.)

"It has often been so remarked, in different words," agreed the
minister.

"Mrs. Baxter said that each star was a state, and if each state did its
best we should have a splendid country. Then once she said that we
ought to be glad the war is over and the States are all at peace
together; and I thought Columbia must be glad, too, for Miss Dearborn
says she's the mother of all the States. So I'm going to have it end
like this: I did n't write it, I just sewed it while I was working on
my star:--

  "For it's your star, my star, all the stars together,
  That make our country's flag so proud
  To float in the bright fall weather.
  Northern stars, Southern stars, stars of the East and West,
  Side by side they lie at peace
  On the dear flag's mother-breast."

"'Oh! many are the poets that are sown by Nature,'" thought the
minister, quoting Wordsworth to himself. "And I wonder what becomes of
them! That's a pretty idea, little Rebecca, and I don't know whether
you or my wife ought to have the more praise. What made you think of
the stars lying on the flag's 'mother-breast'? Were did you get that
word?"

"Why" (and the young poet looked rather puzzled), "that's the way it
is; the flag is the whole country--the mother--and the stars are the
states. The stars had to lie somewhere: 'lap' nor 'arms' wouldn't sound
well with 'West,' so, of course, I said 'breast,'" Rebecca answered,
with some surprise at the question; and the minister put his hand under
her chin and kissed her softly on the forehead when he said good-by at
the door.

Rebecca walked rapidly along in the gathering twilight, thinking of the
eventful morrow.

As she approached the turning on the left, called the old Milltown
road, she saw a white horse and wagon, driven by a man with a rakish,
flapping, Panama hat, come rapidly around the turn and disappear over
the long hills leading down to the falls. There was no mistaking him;
there never was another Abner Simpson, with his lean height, his bushy
reddish hair, the gay cock of his hat, and the long, piratical,
upturned mustaches, which the boys used to say were used as hat-racks
by the Simpson children at night. The old Milltown road ran past Mrs.
Fogg's house, so he must have left Clara Belle there, and Rebecca's
heart glowed to think that her poor little friend need not miss the
raising.

She began to run now, fearful of being late for supper, and covered the
ground to the falls in a brief time. As she crossed the bridge she
again saw Abner Simpson's team, drawn up at the watering-trough.

Coming a little nearer with the view of inquiring for the family, her
quick eye caught sight of something unexpected. A gust of wind blew up
a corner of a linen lap-robe in the back of the wagon, and underneath
it she distinctly saw the white-sheeted bundle that held the flag; the
bundle with a tiny, tiny spot of red bunting peeping out at one corner.
It is true she had eaten, slept, dreamed red, white, and blue for
weeks, but there was no mistaking the evidence of her senses; the
idolized flag, longed for, worked for, sewed for, that flag was in the
back of Abner Simpson's wagon, and if so, what would become of the
raising?

Acting on blind impulse, she ran toward the watering-trough, calling
out in her clear treble "Mr. Simpson! Oh, Mr. Simpson, will you let me
ride a little way with you and hear all about Clara Belle? I'm going
over to the Centre on an errand." (So she was; a most important
errand,--to recover the flag of her country at present in the hands of
the foe!)

Mr. Simpson turned round in his seat and cried heartily, "Certain sure
I will!" for he liked the fair sex, young and old, and Rebecca had
always been a prime favorite with him. "Climb right in! How's
everybody? Glad to see you! The folks talk 'bout you from sun-up to
sun-down, and Clara Belle can't hardly wait for a sight of you!"

Rebecca scrambled up, trembling and pale with excitement. She did not
in the least know what was going to happen, but she was sure that the
flag, when in the enemy's country, must be at least a little safer with
the State of Maine sitting on top of it! Mr. Simpson began a long
monologue about Acreville, the house he lived in, the pond in front of
it, Mrs. Simpson's health and various items of news about the children,
varied by reports of his personal misfortunes. He put no questions, and
asked no replies, so this gave the inexperienced soldier a few seconds
to plan a campaign. There were three houses to pass; the Browns' at the
corner, the Millikens', and the Robinsons' on the brow of the hill. If
Mr. Robinson were in the front yard she might tell Mr. Simpson she
wanted to call there and ask Mr. Robinson to hold the horse's head
while she got out of the wagon. Then she might fly to the back before
Mr. Simpson could realize the situation, and dragging out the precious
bundle, sit on it hard, while Mr. Robinson settled the matter of
ownership with Mr. Simpson.

This was feasible, but it meant a quarrel between the two men, who held
an ancient grudge against each other, and Mr. Simpson was a valiant
fighter, as the various sheriffs who had attempted to arrest him could
cordially testify. It also meant that everybody in the village would
hear of the incident and poor Clara Belle be branded again as the child
of a thief.

Another idea danced into her excited brain; such a clever one she could
hardly believe it hers. She might call Mr. Robinson to the wagon, and
when he came close to the wheels she might say, suddenly: "Please take
the flag out of the back of the wagon, Mr. Robinson. We have brought it
here for you to keep overnight." Then Mr. Simpson might be so surprised
that he would give up his prize rather than be suspected of stealing.

But as they neared the Robinsons' house there was not a sign of life to
be seen; so the last plan, ingenious though it was, was perforce
abandoned.

The road now lay between thick pine woods with no dwelling in sight. It
was growing dusk and Rebecca was driving along the lonely way with a
person who was generally called Slippery Simpson.

Not a thought of fear crossed her mind, save the fear of bungling in
her diplomacy, and so losing the flag. She knew Mr. Simpson well, and a
pleasanter man was seldom to be met. She recalled an afternoon when he
came home and surprised the whole school playing the Revolutionary War
in his helter-skelter dooryard, and the way in which he had joined the
British forces and impersonated General Burgoyne had greatly endeared
him to her. The only difficulty was to find proper words for her
delicate mission, for, of course, if Mr. Simpson's anger were aroused,
he would politely push her out of the wagon and drive away with the
flag. Perhaps if she led the conversation in the right direction an
opportunity would present itself. Clearing her throat nervously, she
began:--

"Is it likely to be fair to-morrow?"

"Guess so; clear as a bell. What's on foot; a picnic?"

"No; we're to have a grand flag-raising!" ("That is," she thought, "if
we have any flag to raise!")

"That so?  Where?"

"The three villages are to club together and have a rally, and raise
the flag at the Centre. There'll be a brass band, and speakers, and the
Mayor of Portland, and the man that will be governor if he's elected,
and a dinner in the Grange Hall, and we girls are chosen to raise the
flag."

"I want to know! That'll be grand, won't it?" (Still not a sign of
consciousness on the part of Abner.)

"I hope Mrs. Fogg will take Clara Belle, for it will be splendid to
look at! Mr. Cobb is going to be Uncle Sam and drive us on the stage.
Miss Dearborn--Clara Belle's old teacher, you know is going to be
Columbia; the girls will be the States of the Union, and oh, Mr.
Simpson, I am the one to be the State of Maine!" Mr. Simpson flourished
the whipstock and gave a loud, hearty laugh. Then he turned in his seat
and regarded Rebecca curiously.

"You're kind o' small, ain't ye, for so big a state as this one?" he
asked.

"Any of us would be too small," replied Rebecca with dignity, "but the
committee asked me, and I am going to try hard to do well."

The tragic thought that there might be no occasion for anybody to do
anything, well or ill, suddenly overcame her here, and putting her hand
on Mr. Simpson's sleeve, she attacked the subject practically and
courageously.

"Oh, Mr. Simpson, dear Mr. Simpson, it's such a mortifying subject I
can't bear to say anything about it, but please give us back our flag!
Don't, don't take it over to Acreville, Mr. Simpson! We've worked so
long to make it, and it was so hard getting the money for the bunting!
Wait a minute, please; don't be angry, and don't say no just yet, till
I explain more. It'll be so dreadful for everybody to get there
to-morrow morning and find no flag to raise, and the band and the mayor
all disappointed, and the children crying, with their muslin dresses
all bought for nothing! Oh, dear Mr. Simpson, please don't take our
flag away from us!"

The apparently astonished Abner pulled his mustaches and exclaimed:
"But I don't know what you're drivin' at! Who's got yer flag? I hain't!"

Could duplicity, deceit, and infamy go any further, Rebecca wondered,
and her soul filling with righteous wrath, she cast discretion to the
winds and spoke a little more plainly, bending her great swimming eyes
on the now embarrassed Abner, who looked like an angle-worm wriggling
on a pin.

"Mr. Simpson, how can you say that, when I saw the flag in the back of
your wagon myself, when you stopped to water the horse? It's wicked of
you to take it, and I cannot bear it!" Her voice broke now, for a doubt
of Mr. Simpson's yielding suddenly darkened her mind. "If you keep it,
you'll have to keep me, for I won't be parted from it! I can't fight
like the boys, but I can pinch and scratch, and I will scratch, just
like a panther--I'll lie right down on my star and not move, if I
starve to death!" "Look here, hold your hosses 'n' don't cry till you
git something to cry for!" grumbled the outraged Abner, to whom a clue
had just come; and leaning over the wagon-back he caught hold of a
corner of white sheet and dragged up the bundle, scooping off Rebecca's
hat in the process, and almost burying her in bunting.

She caught the treasure passionately to her heart and stifled her sobs
in it, while Abner exclaimed "I declare to man, if that hain't a flag!
Well, in that case you're good 'n' welcome to it! Land! I seen that
bundle lyin' in the middle o' the road and I says to myself, that's
somebody's washin' and I'd better pick it up and leave it at the
post-office to be claimed; 'n' all the time it was a flag!"

This was a Simpsonian version of the matter, the fact being that a
white-covered bundle lying on the Meserves' front steps had attracted
his practiced eye, and slipping in at the open gate he had swiftly and
deftly removed it to his wagon on general principles; thinking if it
were clean clothes it would be extremely useful, and in any event there
was no good in passing by something flung into one's very arms, so to
speak. He had had no leisure to examine the bundle, and indeed took
little interest in it. Probably he stole it simply from force of habit,
and because there was nothing else in sight to steal, everybody's
premises being preternaturally tidy and empty, almost as if his visit
had been expected! Rebecca was a practical child, and it seemed to her
almost impossible that so heavy a bundle should fall out of Mrs.
Meserve's buggy and not be noticed; but she hoped that Mr. Simpson was
telling the truth, and she was too glad and grateful to doubt any one
at the moment.

"Thank you, thank you ever so much, Mr. Simpson. You're the nicest,
kindest, politest man I ever knew, and the girls will be so pleased you
gave us back the flag, and so will the Dorcas Society; they'll be sure
to write you a letter of thanks; they always do."

"Tell 'em not to bother 'bout any thanks," said Simpson, beaming
virtuously. "But land! I'm glad 't was me that happened to see that
bundle in the road and take the trouble to pick it up."

("Jest to think of it's bein' a flag!" he thought; "if ever there was a
pesky, wuthless thing to trade off, 't would be a great, gormin' flag
like that!")

"Can I get out now, please?" asked Rebecca. "I want to go back, for
Mrs. Meserve will be dreadfully nervous when she finds out she dropped
the flag, and it hurts her health to be nervous."

"No, you don't," objected Mr. Simpson gallantly, turning the horse. "Do
you think I'd let a little creeter like you lug that great heavy
bundle? I hain't got time to go back to Meserve's, but I'll take you to
the corner and dump you there, flag'n' all, and you can get some o' the
men-folks to carry it the rest o' the way. You'll wear it out, huggin'
it so!"

"I helped make it and I adore it!" said Rebecca, who was in a
grandiloquent mood. "Why don't you like it? It's your country's flag."

Simpson smiled an indulgent smile and looked a trifle bored at these
appeals to his extremely rusty better feelings. "I don' know's I've got
any particular int'rest in the country," he remarked languidly. "I know
I don't owe nothin' to it, nor own nothin' in it!"

"You own a star on the flag, same as everybody," argued Rebecca, who
had been feeding on patriotism for a month; "and you own a state, too,
like all the rest of us!"

"Land! I wish't I did! or even a quarter section of one!" sighed Mr.
Simpson, feeling somehow a little more poverty-stricken and discouraged
than usual.

As they approached the corner and the watering-trough where four
cross-roads met, the whole neighborhood seemed to be in evidence, and
Mr. Simpson suddenly regretted his chivalrous escort of Rebecca;
especially when, as he neared the group, an excited lady, wringing her
hands, turned out to be Mrs. Peter Meserve, accompanied by Huldah, the
Browns, Mrs. Milliken, Abijah Flagg, and Miss Dearborn. "Do you know
anything about the new flag, Rebecca?" shrieked Mrs. Meserve, too
agitated, for a moment, to notice the child's companion.

"It's right here in my lap, all safe," responded Rebecca joyously.

"You careless, meddlesome young one, to take it off my steps where I
left it just long enough to go round to the back and hunt up my
door-key! You've given me a fit of sickness with my weak heart, and
what business was it of yours? I believe you think you own the flag!
Hand it over to me this minute!"

Rebecca was climbing down during this torrent of language, but as she
turned she flashed one look of knowledge at the false Simpson, a look
that went through him from head to foot, as if it were carried by
electricity.

He saw that he had not deceived her after all, owing to the angry
chatter of Mrs. Meserve. He had been handcuffed twice in his life, but
no sheriff had ever discomfited him so thoroughly as this child. Fury
mounted to his brain, and as soon as she was safely out from between
the wheels he stood up in the wagon and flung the flag out in the road
in the midst of the excited group.

"Take it, you pious, stingy, scandal-talkin', flag-raisin' crew!" he
roared. "Rebecca never took the flag; I found it in the road, I say!"

"You never, no such a thing!" exclaimed Mrs. Meserve. "You found it on
the doorsteps in my garden!"

"Mebbe 't was your garden, but it was so chock full o' weeds I thought
't was the road," retorted Abner. "I vow I wouldn't 'a' given the old
rag back to one o' you, not if you begged me on your knees! But
Rebecca's a friend o' my folks and can do with her flag's she's a mind
to, and the rest o' ye can do what ye like an' go where ye like, for
all I care!"

So saying, he made a sharp turn, gave the gaunt white horse a lash and
disappeared in a cloud of dust, before the astonished Mr. Brown, the
only man in the party, had a thought of detaining him.

"I'm sorry I spoke so quick, Rebecca," said Mrs. Meserve, greatly
mortified at the situation. "But don't you believe a word that lyin'
critter said! He did steal it off my doorstep, and how did you come to
be ridin' and consortin' with him? I believe it would kill your Aunt
Miranda if she should hear about it!"

The little school-teacher put a sheltering arm round Rebecca as Mr.
Brown picked up the flag and dusted and folded it.

"I'm willing she should hear about it," Rebecca answered. "I didn't do
anything to be ashamed of! I saw the flag in the back of Mr. Simpson's
wagon and I just followed it. There weren't any men or any Dorcas
ladies to take care of it so it fell to me! You would n't have had me
let it out of my sight, would you, and we going to raise it to-morrow
morning?"

"Rebecca's perfectly right, Mrs. Meserve!" said Miss Dearborn proudly.
"And it's lucky there was somebody quick-witted enough to 'ride and
consort' with Mr. Simpson! I don't know what the village will think,
but seems to me the town clerk might write down in his book, 'This day
the State of Maine saved the flag!'"



V.

THE STATE O' MAINE GIRL

THE foregoing episode, if narrated in a romance, would undoubtedly have
been called "The Saving of the Colors," but at the nightly chats in
Watson's store it was alluded to as the way little Becky Randall got
the flag away from Slippery Simpson. Dramatic as it was, it passed into
the crowd of half-forgotten things in Rebecca's mind, its brief
importance submerged in the glories of the next day.

There was a painful prelude to these glories. Alice Robinson came to
spend the night with Rebecca, and when the bedroom door closed upon the
two girls, Alice announced her intention of "doing up" Rebecca's front
hair in leads and rags, and braiding the back in six tight, wetted
braids.

Rebecca demurred. Alice persisted.

"Your hair is so long and thick and dark and straight," she said, "that
you'll look like an Injun!"

"I am the State of Maine; it all belonged to the Indians once," Rebecca
remarked gloomily, for she was curiously shy about discussing her
personal appearance.

"And your wreath of little pine-cones won't set decent without crimps,"
continued Alice.

Rebecca glanced in the cracked looking-glass and met what she
considered an accusing lack of beauty, a sight that always either
saddened or enraged her according to circumstances; then she sat down
resignedly and began to help Alice in the philanthropic work of making
the State of Maine fit to be seen at the raising.

Neither of the girls was an expert hairdresser, and at the end of an
hour, when the sixth braid was tied, and Rebecca had given one last
shuddering look in the mirror, both were ready to weep with fatigue.

The candle was blown out and Alice soon went to sleep, but Rebecca
tossed on her pillow, its goose-feathered softness all dented by the
cruel lead knobs and the knots of twisted rags. She slipped out of bed
and walked to and fro, holding her aching head with both hands. Finally
she leaned on the window-sill, watching the still weather-vane on
Alice's barn and breathing in the fragrance of the ripening apples,
until her restlessness subsided under the clear starry beauty of the
night.

At six in the morning the girls were out of bed, for Alice could hardly
wait until Rebecca's hair was taken down, she was so eager to see the
result of her labors.

The leads and rags were painfully removed, together with much hair, the
operation being punctuated by a series of squeaks, squeals, and shrieks
on the part of Rebecca and a series of warnings from Alice, who wished
the preliminaries to be kept secret from the aunts, that they might the
more fully appreciate the radiant result.

Then came the unbraiding, and then--dramatic moment--the "combing out;"
a difficult, not to say impossible process, in which the hairs that had
resisted the earlier stages almost gave up the ghost.

The long front strands had been wound up from various angles and by
various methods, so that, when released, they assumed the strangest,
most obstinate, most unexpected attitudes. When the comb was dragged
through the last braid, the wild, tortured, electric hairs following,
and then rebounding from it in a bristling, snarling tangle,
Massachusetts gave one encompassing glance at the State o' Maine's
head, and announced her intention of going home to breakfast! Alice was
deeply grieved at the result of her attempted beautifying, but she felt
that meeting Miss Miranda Sawyer at the morning meal would not mend
matters in the least, so slipping out of the side door, she ran up
Guide-Board hill as fast as her feet could carry her.

The State o' Maine, deserted and somewhat unnerved, sat down before the
glass and attacked her hair doggedly and with set lips, working over it
until Miss Jane called her to breakfast; then, with a boldness born of
despair, she entered the dining-room, where her aunts were already
seated at table. There was a moment of silence after the grotesque
figure was fully taken in; then came a moan from Jane and a groan from
Miranda.

"What have you done to yourself?" asked Miranda sternly.

"Made an effort to be beautiful and failed!" jauntily replied Rebecca,
but she was too miserable to keep up the fiction. "Oh, Aunt Miranda,
don't scold, I'm so unhappy! Alice and I rolled up my hair to curl it
for the raising. She said it was so straight I looked like an Indian!"

"Mebbe you did," vigorously agreed Miranda, "but 't any rate you looked
like a Christian Injun, 'n' now you look like a heathen Injun; that's
all the difference I can see. What can we do with her, Jane, between
this and nine o'clock?"

"We'll all go out to the pump just as soon as we're through breakfast,"
answered Jane soothingly. "We can accomplish considerable with water
and force."

Rebecca nibbled her corn-cake, her tearful eyes cast on her plate and
her chin quivering.

"Don't you cry and red your eyes up," chided Miranda quite kindly; "the
minute you've eaten enough run up and get your brush and meet us at the
back door."

"I would n't care myself how bad I looked," said Rebecca, "but I can't
bear to be so homely that I shame the State of Maine!"

Oh, what an hour followed this plaint! Did any aspirant for literary or
dramatic honors ever pass to fame through such an antechamber of
horrors? Did poet of the day ever have his head so maltreated?  To be
dipped in the rain-water tub, soused again and again; to be held under
the spout and pumped on; to be rubbed furiously with rough roller
towels; to be dried with hot flannels!  And is it not well-nigh
incredible that at the close of such an hour the ends of the long hair
should still stand out straight, the braids having been turned up two
inches by Alice, and tied hard in that position with linen thread?

"Get out the skirt-board, Jane," cried Miranda, to whom opposition
served as a tonic, "and move that flat-iron on to the front o' the
stove. Rebecca, set down in that low chair beside the board, and, Jane,
you spread out her hair on it and cover it up with brown paper. Don't
cringe, Rebecca; the worst's over, and you've borne up real good! I'll
be careful not to pull your hair nor scorch you, and oh, how I'd like
to have Alice Robinson acrost my knee and a good slipper in my right
hand! There, you're all ironed out and your Aunt Jane can put on your
white dress and braid your hair up again good and tight. Perhaps you
won't be the homeliest of the States, after all; but when I see you
comin' in to breakfast I said to myself: 'I guess if Maine looked like
that, it would n't never 'a' been admitted into the Union!'"

When Uncle Sam and the stagecoach drew up to the brick house with a
grand swing and a flourish, the Goddess of Liberty and most of the
States were already in their places on the "harricane deck." Words fail
to describe the gallant bearing of the horses, their headstalls gayly
trimmed and their harnesses dotted with little flags. The stage windows
were hung in bunting, and from within beamed Columbia, looking out from
the bright frame as if proud of her freight of loyal children.
Patriotic streamers floated from whip, from dash-board and from rumble,
and the effect of the whole was something to stimulate the most
phlegmatic voter. Rebecca came out on the steps and Aunt Jane brought a
chair to assist in the ascent.  Miss Dearborn peeped from the window,
and gave a despairing look at her favorite.

What had happened to her? Who had dressed her? Had her head been put
through a wringing-machine? Why were her eyes red and swollen?  Miss
Dearborn determined to take her behind the trees in the pine grove and
give her some finishing touches; touches that her skillful fingers
fairly itched to bestow.

The stage started, and as the roadside pageant grew gayer and gayer,
Rebecca began to brighten and look prettier, for most of her
beautifying came from within. The people, walking, driving, or standing
on their doorsteps, cheered Uncle Sam's coach with its freight of
gossamer-muslined, fluttering-ribboned girls, and just behind, the
gorgeously decorated haycart, driven by Abijah Flagg, bearing the jolly
but inharmonious fife and drum corps. Was ever such a golden day; such
crystal air; such mellow sunshine; such a merry Uncle Sam!

The stage drew up at an appointed spot near a pine grove, and while the
crowd was gathering, the children waited for the hour to arrive when
they should march to the platform; the hour toward which they seemed to
have been moving since the dawn of creation. As soon as possible Miss
Dearborn whispered to Rebecca: "Come behind the trees with me; I want
to make you prettier!"

Rebecca thought she had suffered enough from that process already
during the last twelve hours, but she put out an obedient hand and the
two withdrew.

Now Miss Dearborn was, I fear, a very indifferent teacher. Her stock in
trade was small, her principal virtues being devotion to children and
ability to gain their love, and a power of evolving a schoolroom order
so natural, cheery, serene, and peaceful that it gave the beholder a
certain sense of being in a district heaven.  She was poor in
arithmetic and weak in geometry, but if you gave her a rose, a bit of
ribbon, and a seven-by-nine looking-glass she could make herself as
pretty as a pink in two minutes.

Safely sheltered behind the pines, Miss Dearborn began to practice
mysterious feminine arts.  She flew at Rebecca's tight braids, opened
the strands and rebraided them loosely; bit and tore the red, white,
and blue ribbon in two and tied the braids separately.  Then with
nimble fingers she pulled out little tendrils of hair behind the ears
and around the nape of the neck. After a glance of acute disapproval
directed at the stiff balloon skirt she knelt on the ground and gave a
strenuous embrace to Rebecca's knees, murmuring, between her hugs,
"Starch must be cheap at the brick house!"

This particular line of beauty attained, there ensued great pinchings
of ruffles; the fingers that could never hold a ferule nor snap
children's ears being incomparable fluting-irons. Next the sash was
scornfully untied, and tightened to suggest something resembling a
waist.  The chastened bows that had been squat, dowdy, spiritless, were
given tweaks, flirts, bracing little pokes and dabs, till,
acknowledging a master hand, they stood up, piquant, pert, smart, alert!

Pride of bearing was now infused into the flattened lace at the neck,
and a pin (removed at some sacrifice from her own toilette) was darned
in at the back to prevent any cowardly lapsing. The short white cotton
gloves that called attention to the tanned wrists and arms were
stripped off and put in her own pocket. Then the wreath of pine-cones
was adjusted at a heretofore unimagined angle, the hair was pulled
softly into a fluffy frame, and finally, as she met Rebecca's grateful
eyes, she gave her two approving, triumphant kisses. In a second the
sensitive face lighted into happiness; pleased dimples appeared in the
cheeks, the kissed mouth was as red as a rose, and the little fright
that had walked behind the pine-tree stepped out on the other side
Rebecca, the lovely.

As to the relative value of Miss Dearborn's accomplishments, the
decision must be left to the gentle reader; but though it is certain
that children should be properly grounded in mathematics, no heart of
flesh could bear to hear Miss Dearborn's methods vilified who had seen
her patting, pulling, squeezing Rebecca from ugliness into beauty.

Now all was ready; the moment of fate was absolutely at hand; the fife
and drum corps led the way and the States followed; but what actually
happened Rebecca never knew; she lived through the hours in a waking
dream. Every little detail was a facet of light that reflected
sparkles, and among them all she was fairly dazzled. The brass band
played inspiring strains; the mayor spoke eloquently on great themes;
the people cheered; then the rope on which so much depended was put
into the children's hands, they applied superhuman strength to their
task, and the flag mounted, mounted, smoothly and slowly, and slowly
unwound and stretched itself until its splendid size and beauty were
revealed against the maples and pines and blue New England sky.

Then after cheers upon cheers and after a patriotic chorus by the
church choirs, the State of Maine mounted the platform, vaguely
conscious that she was to recite a poem, though for the life of her she
could not remember a single word.

"Speak up loud and clear, Rebecky," whispered Uncle Sam in the front
row, but she could scarcely hear her own voice when, tremblingly, she
began her first line.  After that she gathered strength, and the poem
"said itself," while the dream went on. She saw her friend Adam Ladd
leaning against a tree; Aunt Jane and Aunt Miranda palpitating with
nervousness; Clara Belle Simpson gazing cross-eyed but adoring from a
seat on the side; and in the far, far distance, on the very outskirts
of the crowd, a tall man standing in a wagon--a tall, loose-jointed man
with red upturned mustaches, and a gaunt white horse whose head was
turned toward the Acreville road.

Loud applause greeted the State of Maine, the slender little white-clad
figure standing on the mossy boulder that had been used as the centre
of the platform. The sun came up from behind a great maple and shone
full on the star-spangled banner, making it more dazzling than ever, so
that its beauty drew all eyes upward.

Abner Simpson lifted his vagrant shifting gaze to its softly fluttering
folds and its splendid massing of colors, thinking:--

"I don't know's anybody'd ought to steal a flag, the thunderin' idjuts
seem to set such store by it, and what is it, anyway? Nothin' but a
sheet o' buntin'!'"

Nothing but a sheet of bunting? He looked curiously at the rapt faces
of the mothers, their babies asleep in their arms; the parted lips and
shining eyes of the white-clad girls; at Cap'n Lord, who had been in
Libby Prison, and Nat Strout, who had left an arm at Bull Run; at the
friendly, jostling crowd of farmers, happy, eager, absorbed, their
throats ready to burst with cheers. Then the breeze served, and he
heard Rebecca's clear voice saying:--

  "For it's your star, my star, all the stars together,
  That make our country's flag so proud
  To float in the bright fall weather!"

"Talk about stars! She's got a couple of 'em right in her head,"
thought Simpson. "If I ever seen a young one like that layin' on
anybody's doorstep I'd hook her quicker'n a wink, though I've got
plenty to home, the Lord knows! And I wouldn't swap her off
neither.--Spunky little creeter, too; settin' up in the wagon lookin'
'bout's big as a pint o' cider, but keepin' right after the flag!--I
vow I'm 'bout sick o' my job! Never with the crowd, allers jest on the
outside, 's if I wa'n't as good's they be! If it paid well, mebbe would
n't mind, but they're so thunderin' stingy round here, they don't leave
out anything decent for you to take from 'em, yet you're reskin' your
liberty 'n' reputation jest the same!--Countin' the poor pickin's 'n'
the time I lose in jail I might most's well be done with it 'n' work
out by the day, as the folks want me to; I'd make 'bout's much, n' I
don' know's it would be any harder!"

He could see Rebecca stepping down from the platform, while his own
red-headed little girl stood up on her bench, waving her hat with one
hand, her handkerchief with the other, and stamping with both feet.

Now a man sitting beside the mayor rose from his chair and Abner heard
him call:--

"Three cheers for the women who made the flag!"

"Hip, hip, hurrah!"

"Three cheers for the State of Maine!"

"Hip, hip, hurrah!"

"Three cheers for the girl who saved the flag from the hands of the
enemy!"

"Hip, hip, hurrah!"

It was the Edgewood minister, whose full, vibrant voice was of the sort
to move a crowd. His words rang out into the clear air and were carried
from lip to lip. Hands clapped, feet stamped, hats swung, while the
loud huzzahs might almost have wakened the echoes on old Mount Ossipee.

The tall, loose-jointed man sat down in the wagon suddenly and took up
the reins.

"They're gettin' a little mite personal, and I guess it's 'bout time
for you to be goin', Simpson!"

The tone was jocular, but the red mustaches drooped, and the
half-hearted cut he gave to start the white mare on her homeward
journey showed that he was not in his usual reckless mood.

"It's a lie!" he burst out in a vindictive undertone, as the mare swung
into her long gait. "It's a lie! I thought 't was somebody's wash!  I
ain't an enemy!"

While the crowd at the raising dispersed in happy family groups to
their picnics in the woods; while the Goddess of Liberty, Uncle Sam,
Columbia, and the proud States lunched grandly in the Grange Hall with
distinguished guests and scarred veterans of two wars, the lonely man
drove, and drove, and drove through silent woods and dull, sleepy
villages, never alighting to replenish his wardrobe or his stock of
swapping material.

At dusk he reached a miserable tumble-down house on the edge of a pond.

The faithful wife with the sad mouth and the habitual look of anxiety
in her faded eyes came to the door at the sound of wheels and went
doggedly to the horse-shed to help him unharness. "You did n't expect
to see me back to-night, did you?" he asked satirically; "leastwise not
with this same horse? Well, I'm here! You need n't be scairt to look
under the wagon-seat, there ain't nothin' there, not even my supper, so
I hope you're suited for once! No, I guess I ain't goin' to be an angel
right away, neither. There wa'n't nothin' but flags layin' roun' loose
down Riverboro way, 'n' whatever they say, I ain't sech a hound as to
steal a flag!"

It was natural that young Riverboro should have red, white, and blue
dreams on the night after the new flag was raised.  A stranger thing,
perhaps, is the fact that Abner Simpson should lie down on his hard bed
with the flutter of bunting before his eyes, and a whirl of
unaccustomed words in his mind.

"For it is your star, my star, all our stars together."

"I'm sick of goin' it alone," he thought; "I guess I'll try the other
road for a spell;" and with that he fell asleep.

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1907 Archibald Constable & Co. edition by David
Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





The Old Peabody Pew: A Christmas Romance of a Country Church


Dedication


To a certain handful of dear New England women of names unknown to the
world, dwelling in a certain quiet village, alike unknown:--

We have worked together to make our little corner of the great universe a
pleasanter place in which to live, and so we know, not only one another's
names, but something of one another's joys and sorrows, cares and
burdens, economies, hopes, and anxieties.

We all remember the dusty uphill road that leads to the green church
common.  We remember the white spire pointing upward against a background
of blue sky and feathery elms.  We remember the sound of the bell that
falls on the Sabbath morning stillness, calling us across the
daisy-sprinkled meadows of June, the golden hayfields of July, or the
dazzling whiteness and deep snowdrifts of December days.  The little
cabinet-organ that plays the doxology, the hymn-books from which we sing
"Praise God from whom all blessings flow," the sweet freshness of the old
meeting-house, within and without--how we have toiled to secure and
preserve these humble mercies for ourselves and our children!

There really _is_ a Dorcas Society, as you and I well know, and one not
unlike that in these pages; and you and I have lived through many
discouraging, laughable, and beautiful experiences while we emulated the
Bible Dorcas, that woman "full of good works and alms deeds."

There never was a Peabody Pew in the Tory Hill Meeting-House, and Nancy's
love story and Justin's never happened within its century-old walls; but
I have imagined only one of the many romances that have had their birth
under the shadow of that steeple, did we but realize it.

As you have sat there on open-windowed Sundays, looking across purple
clover-fields to blue distant mountains, watching the palm-leaf fans
swaying to and fro in the warm stillness before sermon time, did not the
place seem full of memories, for has not the life of two villages ebbed
and flowed beneath that ancient roof?  You heard the hum of droning bees
and followed the airy wings of butterflies fluttering over the
gravestones in the old churchyard, and underneath almost every moss-grown
tablet some humble romance lies buried and all but forgotten.

If it had not been for you, I should never have written this story, so I
give it back to you tied with a sprig from Ophelia's nosegay; a spring of
"rosemary, that's for remembrance."

K. D. W.

August, 1907




CHAPTER I


Edgewood, like all the other villages along the banks of the Saco, is
full of sunny slopes and leafy hollows.  There are little, rounded, green-
clad hillocks that might, like their scriptural sisters, "skip with joy,"
and there are grand, rocky hills tufted with gaunt pine trees--these
leading the eye to the splendid heights of a neighbour State, where snow-
crowned peaks tower in the blue distance, sweeping the horizon in a long
line of majesty.

Tory Hill holds its own among the others for peaceful beauty and fair
prospect, and on its broad, level summit sits the white-painted Orthodox
Meeting-House.  This faces a grassy common where six roads meet, as if
the early settlers had determined that no one should lack salvation
because of a difficulty in reaching its visible source.

The old church has had a dignified and fruitful past, dating from that
day in 1761 when young Paul Coffin received his call to preach at a
stipend of fifty pounds sterling a year; answering "that never having
heard of any Uneasiness among the people about his Doctrine or manner of
life, he declared himself pleased to Settle as Soon as might be Judged
Convenient."

But that was a hundred and fifty years ago, and much has happened since
those simple, strenuous old days.  The chastening hand of time has been
laid somewhat heavily on the town as well as on the church.  Some of her
sons have marched to the wars and died on the field of honour; some,
seeking better fortunes, have gone westward; others, wearying of village
life, the rocky soil, and rigours of farm-work, have become entangled in
the noise and competition, the rush and strife, of cities.  When the
sexton rings the bell nowadays, on a Sunday morning, it seems to have
lost some of its old-time militant strength, something of its hope and
courage; but it still rings, and although the Davids and Solomons, the
Matthews, Marks, and Pauls of former congregations have left few
descendants to perpetuate their labours, it will go on ringing as long as
there is a Tabitha, a Dorcas, a Lois, or a Eunice left in the community.

This sentiment had been maintained for a quarter of a century, but it was
now especially strong, as the old Tory Hill Meeting-House had been
undergoing for several years more or less extensive repairs.  In point of
fact, the still stronger word, "improvements," might be used with
impunity; though whenever the Dorcas Society, being female, and therefore
possessed of notions regarding comfort and beauty, suggested any serious
changes, the finance committees, which were inevitably male in their
composition, generally disapproved of making any impious alterations in a
tabernacle, chapel, temple, or any other building used for purposes of
worship.  The majority in these august bodies asserted that their
ancestors had prayed and sung there for a century and a quarter, and what
was good enough for their ancestors was entirely suitable for them.
Besides, the community was becoming less and less prosperous, and church-
going was growing more and more lamentably uncommon, so that even from a
business standpoint, any sums expended upon decoration by a poor and
struggling parish would be worse than wasted.

In the particular year under discussion in this story, the valiant and
progressive Mrs. Jeremiah Burbank was the president of the Dorcas
Society, and she remarked privately and publicly that if her ancestors
liked a smoky church, they had a perfect right to the enjoyment of it,
but that she didn't intend to sit through meeting on winter Sundays, with
her white ostrich feather turning grey and her eyes smarting and
watering, for the rest of her natural life.

Whereupon, this being in a business session, she then and there proposed
to her already hypnotized constituents ways of earning enough money to
build a new chimney on the other side of the church.

An awe-stricken community witnessed this beneficent act of vandalism,
and, finding that no thunderbolts of retribution descended from the
skies, greatly relished the change.  If one or two aged persons
complained that they could not sleep as sweetly during sermon-time in the
now clear atmosphere of the church, and that the parson's eye was keener
than before, why, that was a mere detail, and could not be avoided; what
was the loss of a little sleep compared with the discoloration of Mrs.
Jere Burbank's white ostrich feather and the smarting of Mrs. Jere
Burbank's eyes?

A new furnace followed the new chimney, in due course, and as a sense of
comfort grew, there was opportunity to notice the lack of beauty.  Twice
in sixty years had some well-to-do summer parishioner painted the
interior of the church at his own expense; but although the roof had been
many times reshingled, it had always persisted in leaking, so that the
ceiling and walls were disfigured by unsightly spots and stains and
streaks.  The question of shingling was tacitly felt to be outside the
feminine domain, but as there were five women to one man in the church
membership, the feminine domain was frequently obliged to extend its
limits into the hitherto unknown.  Matters of tarring and water-proofing
were discussed in and out of season, and the very school-children imbibed
knowledge concerning lapping, overlapping, and cross-lapping, and first
and second quality of cedar shingles.  Miss Lobelia Brewster, who had a
rooted distrust of anything done by mere man, created strife by remarking
that she could have stopped the leak in the belfry tower with her red
flannel petticoat better than the Milltown man with his new-fangled
rubber sheeting, and that the last shingling could have been more
thoroughly done by a "female infant babe"; whereupon the person
criticized retorted that he wished Miss Lobelia Brewster had a few infant
babes to "put on the job--he'd like to see 'em try."  Meantime several
male members of the congregation, who at one time or another had sat on
the roof during the hottest of the dog days to see that shingling
operations we're conscientiously and skilfully performed, were very
pessimistic as to any satisfactory result ever being achieved.

"The angle of the roof--what they call the 'pitch'--they say that that's
always been wrong," announced the secretary of the Dorcas in a business
session.

"Is it that kind of pitch that the Bible says you can't touch without
being defiled?  If not, I vote that we unshingle the roof and alter the
pitch!"  This proposal came from a sister named Maria Sharp, who had
valiantly offered the year before to move the smoky chimney with her own
hands, if the "men-folks" wouldn't.

But though the incendiary suggestion of altering the pitch was received
with applause at the moment, subsequent study of the situation proved
that such a proceeding was entirely beyond the modest means of the
society.  Then there arose an ingenious and militant carpenter in a
neighbouring village, who asserted that he would shingle the
meeting-house roof for such and such a sum, and agree to drink every drop
of water that would leak in afterward.  This was felt by all parties to
be a promise attended by extraordinary risks, but it was accepted
nevertheless, Miss Lobelia Brewster remarking that the rash carpenter,
being already married, could not marry a Dorcas anyway, and even if he
died, he was not a resident of Edgewood, and therefore could be more
easily spared, and that it would be rather exciting, just for a change,
to see a man drink himself to death with rain-water.  The expected
tragedy never occurred, however, and the inspired shingler fulfilled his
promise to the letter, so that before many months the Dorcas Society
proceeded, with incredible exertion, to earn more money, and the interior
of the church was neatly painted and made as fresh as a rose.  With no
smoke, no rain, no snow nor melting ice to defile it, the good old
landmark that had been pointing its finger Heavenward for over a century
would now be clean and fragrant for years to come, and the weary sisters
leaned back in their respective rocking-chairs and drew deep breaths of
satisfaction.

These breaths continued to be drawn throughout an unusually arduous
haying season; until, in fact, a visitor from a neighbouring city was
heard to remark that the Tory Hill Meeting-House would be one of the best
preserved and pleasantest churches in the whole State of Maine, if only
it were suitably carpeted.

This thought had secretly occurred to many a Dorcas in her hours of pie-
making, preserving, or cradle-rocking, but had been promptly extinguished
as flagrantly extravagant and altogether impossible.  Now that it had
been openly mentioned, the contagion of the idea spread, and in a month
every sort of honest machinery for the increase of funds had been set in
motion: harvest suppers, pie sociables, old folk's concerts, apron sales,
and, as a last resort, a subscription paper, for the church floor
measured hundreds of square yards, and the carpet committee announce that
a good ingrain could not be purchased, even with the church discount, for
less than ninety-seven cents a yard.

The Dorcases took out their pencils, and when they multiplied the surface
of the floor by the price of the carpet per yard, each Dorcas attaining a
result entirely different from all the others, there was a shriek of
dismay, especially from the secretary, who had included in her
mathematical operation certain figures in her possession representing the
cubical contents of the church and the offending pitch of the roof,
thereby obtaining a product that would have dismayed a Croesus.  Time
sped and efforts increased, but the Dorcases were at length obliged to
clip the wings of their desire and content themselves with carpeting the
pulpit and pulpit steps, the choir, and the two aisles, leaving the floor
in the pews until some future year.

How the women cut and contrived and matched that hardly-bought red
ingrain carpet, in the short December afternoons that ensued after its
purchase; so that, having failed to be ready for Thanksgiving, it could
be finished for the Christmas festivities!

They were sewing in the church, and as the last stitches were being
taken, Maria Sharp suddenly ejaculated in her impulsive fashion:--

"Wouldn't it have been just perfect if we could have had the pews
repainted before we laid the new carpet!"

"It would, indeed," the president answered; "but it will take us all
winter to pay for the present improvements, without any thought of fresh
paint.  If only we had a few more men-folks to help along!"

"Or else none at all!" was Lobelia Brewster's suggestion.  "It's havin'
so few that keeps us all stirred up.  If there wa'n't any anywheres, we'd
have women deacons and carpenters and painters, and get along first rate;
for somehow the supply o' women always holds out, same as it does with
caterpillars an' flies an' grasshoppers!"

Everybody laughed, although Maria Sharp asserted that she for one was not
willing to be called a caterpillar simply because there were too many
women in the universe.

"I never noticed before how shabby and scarred and dirty the pews are,"
said the minister's wife as she looked at them reflectively.

"I've been thinking all the afternoon of the story about the poor old
woman and the lily," and Nancy Wentworth's clear voice broke into the
discussion.  "Do you remember some one gave her a stalk of Easter lilies
and she set them in a glass pitcher on the kitchen table?  After looking
at them for a few minutes, she got up from her chair and washed the
pitcher until the glass shone.  Sitting down again, she glanced at the
little window.  It would never do; she had forgotten how dusty and
blurred it was, and she took her cloth and burnished the panes.  Then she
scoured the table, then the floor, then blackened the stove before she
sat down to her knitting.  And of course the lily had done it all, just
by showing, in its whiteness, how grimy everything else was."

The minister's wife who had been in Edgewood only a few months, looked
admiringly at Nancy's bright face, wondering that five-and-thirty years
of life, including ten of school-teaching, had done so little to mar its
serenity.  "The lily story is as true as the gospel!" she exclaimed, "and
I can see how one thing has led you to another in making the church
comfortable.  But my husband says that two coats of paint on the pews
would cost a considerable sum."

"How about cleaning them?  I don't believe they've had a good hard
washing since the flood."  The suggestion came from Deacon Miller's wife
to the president.

"They can't even be scrubbed for less than fifteen or twenty dollars, for
I thought of that and asked Mrs. Simpson yesterday, and she said twenty
cents a pew was the cheapest she could do it for."

"We've done everything else," said Nancy Wentworth, with a twitch of her
thread; "why don't we scrub the pews?  There's nothing in the orthodox
creed to forbid, is there?"

"Speakin' o' creeds," and here old Mrs. Sargent paused in her work,
"Elder Ransom from Acreville stopped with us last night, an' he tells me
they recite the Euthanasian Creed every few Sundays in the Episcopal
Church.  I didn't want him to know how ignorant I was, but I looked up
the word in the dictionary.  It means easy death, and I can't see any
sense in that, though it's a terrible long creed, the Elder says, an' if
it's any longer 'n ourn, I should think anybody _might_ easy die learnin'
it!"

"I think the word is Athanasian," ventured the minister's wife.

"Elder Ransom's always plumb full o' doctrine," asserted Miss Brewster,
pursuing the subject.  "For my part, I'm glad he preferred Acreville to
our place.  He was so busy bein' a minister, he never got round to bein'
a human creeter.  When he used to come to sociables and picnics, always
lookin' kind o' like the potato blight, I used to think how complete he'd
be if he had a foldin' pulpit under his coat tails; they make foldin'
beds nowadays, an' I s'pose they could make foldin' pulpits, if there was
a call."

"Land sakes, I hope there won't be!" exclaimed Mrs. Sargent.  "An' the
Elder never said much of anything either, though he was always preachin'!
Now your husband, Mis' Baxter, always has plenty to say after you think
he's all through.  There's water in his well when the others is all dry!"

"But how about the pews?" interrupted Mrs. Burbank.  "I think Nancy's
idea is splendid, and I want to see it carried out.  We might make it a
picnic, bring our luncheons, and work all together; let every woman in
the congregation come and scrub her own pew."

"Some are too old, others live at too great a distance," and the
minister's wife sighed a little; "indeed, most of those who once owned
the pews or sat in them seemed to be dead, or gone away to live in busier
places."

"I've no patience with 'em, gallivantin' over the earth," and here
Lobelia rose and shook the carpet threads from her lap.  "I shouldn't
want to live in a livelier place than Edgewood, seem's though!  We wash
and hang out Mondays, iron Tuesdays, cook Wednesdays, clean house and
mend Thursdays and Fridays, bake Saturdays, and go to meetin' Sundays.  I
don't hardly see how they can do any more 'n that in Chicago!"

"Never mind if we have lost members!" said the indomitable Mrs. Burbank.
"The members we still have left must work all the harder.  We'll each
clean our own pew, then take a few of our neighbours', and then hire Mrs.
Simpson to do the wainscoting and floor.  Can we scrub Friday and lay the
carpet Saturday?  My husband and Deacon Miller can help us at the end of
the week.  All in favour manifest it by the usual sign.  Contrary minded?
It is a vote."

There never were any contrary minded when Mrs. Jere Burbank was in the
chair.  Public sentiment in Edgewood was swayed by the Dorcas Society,
but Mrs. Burbank swayed the Dorcases themselves as the wind sways the
wheat.




CHAPTER II


The old Meeting House wore an animated aspect when the eventful Friday
came, a cold, brilliant, sparkling December day, with good sleighing, and
with energy in every breath that swept over the dazzling snowfields.  The
sexton had built a fire in the furnace on the way to his morning work--a
fire so economically contrived that it would last exactly the four or
five necessary hours, and not a second more.  At eleven o'clock all the
pillars of the society had assembled, having finished their own household
work and laid out on their respective kitchen tables comfortable
luncheons for the men of the family, if they were fortunate enough to
number any among their luxuries.  Water was heated upon oil-stoves set
about here and there, and there was a brave array of scrubbing-brushes,
cloths, soap, and even sand and soda, for it had been decided and
manifested-by-the-usual-sign-and-no-contrary-minded-and-it-was-a-vote
that the dirt was to come off, whether the paint came with it or not.
Each of the fifteen women present selected a block of seats, preferably
one in which her own was situated, and all fell busily to work.

"There is nobody here to clean the right-wing pews," said Nancy
Wentworth, "so I will take those for my share."

"You're not making a very wise choice, Nancy," and the minister's wife
smiled as she spoke.  "The infant class of the Sunday-school sits there,
you know, and I expect the paint has had extra wear and tear.  Families
don't seem to occupy those pews regularly nowadays."

"I can remember when every seat in the whole church was filled, wings an'
all," mused Mrs. Sargent, wringing out her wascloth in a reminiscent
mood.  "The one in front o' you, Nancy, was always called the 'deef pew'
in the old times, and all the folks that was hard o' hearin' used to
congregate there."

"The next pew hasn't been occupied since I came here," said the
minister's wife.

"No," answered Mrs. Sargent, glad of any opportunity to retail
neighbourhood news.  "'Squire Bean's folks have moved to Portland to be
with the married daughter.  Somebody has to stay with her, and her
husband won't.  The 'Squire ain't a strong man, and he's most too old to
go to meetin' now.  The youngest son has just died in New York, so I
hear."

"What ailed him?" inquired Maria Sharp.

"I guess he was completely wore out takin' care of his health," returned
Mrs. Sargent.  "He had a splendid constitution from a boy, but he was
always afraid it wouldn't last him.--The seat back o' 'Squire Bean's is
the old Peabody pew--ain't that the Peabody pew you're scrubbin', Nancy?"

"I believe so," Nancy answered, never pausing in her labours.  "It's so
long since anybody sat there, it's hard to remember."

"It is the Peabodys', I know it, because the aisle runs right up facin'
it.  I can see old Deacon Peabody settin' in this end same as if 'twas
yesterday."

"He had died before Jere and I came back here to live," said Mrs.
Burbank.  "The first I remember, Justin Peabody sat in the end seat; the
sister that died, next, and in the corner, against the wall, Mrs.
Peabody, with a crepe shawl and a palm-leaf fan.  They were a handsome
family.  You used to sit with them sometimes, Nancy; Esther was great
friends with you."

"Yes, she was," Nancy replied, lifting the tattered cushion from its
place and brushing it; "and I with her.--What is the use of scrubbing and
carpeting, when there are only twenty pew-cushions and six hassocks in
the whole church, and most of them ragged?  How can I ever mend this?"

"I shouldn't trouble myself to darn other people's cushions!"

This unchristian sentiment came in Mrs. Miller's ringing tones from the
rear of the church.

"I don't know why," argued Maria Sharp.  "I'm going to mend my Aunt
Achsa's cushion, and we haven't spoken for years; but hers is the next
pew to mine, and I'm going to have my part of the church look decent,
even if she is too stingy to do her share.  Besides, there aren't any
Peabodys left to do their own darning, and Nancy was friends with
Esther."

"Yes, it's nothing more than right," Nancy replied, with a note of relief
in her voice, "considering Esther."

"Though he don't belong to the scrubbin' sex, there is one Peabody alive,
as you know, if you stop to think, Maria; for Justin's alive, and livin'
out West somewheres.  At least, he's as much alive as ever he was; he was
as good as dead when he was twenty-one, but his mother was always too
soft-hearted to bury him."

There was considerable laughter over this sally of the outspoken Mrs.
Sargent, whose keen wit was the delight of the neighbourhood.

"I know he's alive and doing business in Detroit, for I got his address a
week or ten days ago, and wrote, asking him if he'd like to give a couple
of dollars toward repairing the old church."

Everybody looked at Mrs. Burbank with interest.

"Hasn't he answered?" asked Maria Sharp.

Nancy Wentworth held her breath, turned her face to the wall, and
silently wiped the paint of the wainscoting.  The blood that had rushed
into her cheeks at Mrs. Sargent's jeering reference to Justin Peabody
still lingered there for any one who ran to read, but fortunately nobody
ran; they were too busy scrubbing.

"Not yet.  Folks don't hurry about answering when you ask them for a
contribution," replied the president, with a cynicism common to persons
who collect funds for charitable purposes.  "George Wickham sent me
twenty-five cents from Denver.  When I wrote him a receipt, I said thank
you same as Aunt Polly did when the neighbours brought her a piece of
beef: 'Ever so much obleeged, but don't forget me when you come to kill a
pig.'--Now, Mrs. Baxter, you shan't clean James Bruce's pew, or what was
his before he turned Second Advent.  I'll do that myself, for he used to
be in my Sunday-school class."

"He's the backbone o' that congregation now," asserted Mrs. Sargent, "and
they say he's goin' to marry Mrs. Sam Peters, who sings in their choir as
soon as his year is up.  They make a perfect fool of him in that church."

"You can't make a fool of a man that nature ain't begun with," argued
Miss Brewster.  "Jim Bruce never was very strong-minded, but I declare it
seems to me that when men lose their wives, they lose their wits!  I was
sure Jim would marry Hannah Thompson that keeps house for him.  I
suspected she was lookin' out for a life job when she hired out with
him."

"Hannah Thompson may keep Jim's house, but she'll never keep Jim, that's
certain!" affirmed the president; "and I can't see that Mrs. Peters will
better herself much."

"I don't blame her, for one!" came in no uncertain tones from the left-
wing pews, and the Widow Buzzell rose from her knees and approached the
group by the pulpit.  "If there's anything duller than cookin' three
meals a day _for_ yourself, and settin' down and eatin' 'em _by_
yourself, and then gettin' up and clearin' 'em away _after_ yourself, I'd
like to know it!  I shouldn't want any good-lookin', pleasant-spoken man
to offer himself to me without he expected to be snapped up, that's all!
But if you've made out to get one husband in York County, you can thank
the Lord and not expect any more favours.  I used to think Tom was poor
comp'ny and complain I couldn't have any conversation with him, but land,
I could talk at him, and there's considerable comfort in that.  And I
could pick up after him!  Now every room in my house is clean, and every
closet and bureau drawer, too; I can't start drawin' in another rug, for
I've got all the rugs I can step foot on.  I dried so many apples last
year I shan't need to cut up any this season.  My jelly and preserves
ain't out, and there I am; and there most of us are, in this village,
without a man to take steps for and trot 'round after!  There's just
three husbands among the fifteen women scrubbin' here now, and the rest
of us is all old maids and widders.  No wonder the men-folks die, or move
away like Justin Peabody; a place with such a mess o' women-folks ain't
healthy to live in, whatever Lobelia Brewster may say."




CHAPTER III


Justin Peabody had once faithfully struggled with the practical
difficulties of life in Edgewood, or so he had thought, in those old days
of which Nancy Wentworth was thinking as she wiped the paint of the
Peabody pew.  Work in the mills did not attract him; he had no capital to
invest in a stock of goods for store-keeping; school-teaching offered him
only a pittance; there remained then only the farm, if he were to stay at
home and keep his mother company.

"Justin don't seem to take no holt of things," said the neighbours.

"Good Heavens!"  It seemed to him that there were no things to take hold
of!  That was his first thought; later he grew to think that the trouble
all lay in himself, and both thoughts bred weakness.

The farm had somehow supported the family in the old Deacon's time, but
Justin seemed unable to coax a competence from the soil.  He could, and
did, rise early and work late; till the earth, sow crops; but he could
not make the rain fall nor the sun shine at the times he needed them, and
the elements, however much they might seem to favour his neighbours,
seldom smiled on his enterprises.  The crows liked Justin's corn better
than any other in Edgewood.  It had a richness peculiar to itself, a
quality that appealed to the most jaded palate, so that it was really
worth while to fly over a mile of intervening fields and pay it the
delicate compliment of preference.

Justin could explain the attitude of caterpillars, worms, grasshoppers,
and potato-bugs toward him only by assuming that he attracted them as the
magnet in the toy boxes attracts the miniature fishes.

"Land of liberty! look at 'em congregate!" ejaculated Jabe Slocum, when
he was called in for consultation.  "Now if you'd gone in for breedin'
insecks, you could be as proud as Cuffy an' exhibit 'em at the County
Fair!  They'd give yer prizes for size an' numbers an' speed, I guess!
Why, say, they're real crowded for room--the plants ain't give 'em enough
leaves to roost on!  Have you tried 'Bug Death'?"

"It acts like a tonic on them," said Justin gloomily.

"Sho! you don't say so!  Now mine can't abide the sight nor smell of it.
What 'bout Paris green?"

"They thrive on it; it's as good as an appetizer."

"Well," said Jabe Slocum, revolving the quid of tobacco in his mouth
reflectively, "the bug that ain't got no objection to p'ison is a bug
that's got ways o' thinkin' an' feelin' an' reasonin' that I ain't able
to cope with!  P'r'aps it's all a leadin' o' Providence.  Mebbe it shows
you'd ought to quit farmin' crops an' take to raisin' live stock!"

Justin did just that, as a matter of fact, a year or two later; but stock
that has within itself the power of being "live" has also rare
qualifications for being dead when occasion suits, and it generally did
suit Justin's stock.  It proved prone not only to all the general
diseases that cattle-flesh is heir to, but was capable even of suicide.
At least, it is true that two valuable Jersey calves, tied to stakes on
the hillside, had flung themselves violently down the bank and strangled
themselves with their own ropes in a manner which seemed to show that
they found no pleasure in existence, at all events on the Peabody farm.

These were some of the little tragedies that had sickened young Justin
Peabody with life in Edgewood, and Nancy Wentworth, even then, realized
some of them and sympathized without speaking, in a girl's poor, helpless
way.

Mrs. Simpson had washed the floor in the right wing of the church and
Nancy had cleaned all the paint.  Now she sat in the old Peabody pew
darning the forlorn, faded cushion with grey carpet-thread: thread as
grey as her own life.

The scrubbing-party had moved to its labours in a far corner of the
church, and two of the women were beginning preparations for the basket
luncheons.  Nancy's needle was no busier than her memory.  Long years ago
she had often sat in the Peabody pew, sometimes at first as a girl of
sixteen when asked by Esther, and then, on coming home from school at
eighteen, "finished," she had been invited now and again by Mrs. Peabody
herself, on those Sundays when her own invalid mother had not attended
service.

Those were wonderful Sundays--Sundays of quiet, trembling peace and
maiden joy.

Justin sat beside her, and she had been sure then, but had long since
grown to doubt the evidence of her senses, that he, too, vibrated with
pleasure at the nearness.  Was there not a summer morning when his hand
touched her white lace mitt as they held the hymn-book together, and the
lines of the

   Rise, my soul, and stretch thy wings,
   Thy better portion trace,

became blurred on the page and melted into something indistinguishable
for a full minute or two afterward?  Were there not looks, and looks, and
looks?  Or had she some misleading trick of vision in those days?
Justin's dark, handsome profile rose before her: the level brows and fine
lashes; the well-cut nose and lovable mouth--the Peabody mouth and chin,
somewhat too sweet and pliant for strength, perhaps.  Then the eyes
turned to hers in the old way, just for a fleeting glance, as they had so
often done at prayer-meeting, or sociable, or Sunday service.  Was it not
a man's heart she had seen in them?  And oh, if she could only be sure
that her own woman's heart had not looked out from hers, drawn from its
maiden shelter in spite of all her wish to keep it hidden!

Then followed two dreary years of indecision and suspense, when Justin's
eyes met hers less freely; when his looks were always gloomy and anxious;
when affairs at the Peabody farm grew worse and worse; when his mother
followed her husband, the old Deacon, and her daughter Esther to the
burying-ground in the churchyard.  Then the end of all things came, the
end of the world for Nancy: Justin's departure for the West in a very
frenzy of discouragement over the narrowness and limitation and injustice
of his lot; over the rockiness and barrenness and unkindness of the New
England soil; over the general bitterness of fate and the "bludgeonings
of chance."

He was a failure, born of a family of failures.  If the world owed him a
living, he had yet to find the method by which it could be earned.  All
this he thought and uttered, and much more of the same sort.  In these
days of humbled pride self was paramount, though it was a self he
despised.  There was no time for love.  Who was he for a girl to lean
upon?--he who could not stand erect himself!

He bade a stiff good-bye to his neighbours, and to Nancy he vouchsafed
little more.  A handshake, with no thrill of love in it such as might
have furnished her palm, at least, some memories to dwell upon; a few
stilted words of leave-taking; a halting, meaningless sentence or two
about his "botch" of life--then he walked away from the Wentworth
doorstep.  But half way down the garden path, where the shrivelled
hollyhocks stood like sentinels, did a wave of something different sweep
over him--a wave of the boyish, irresponsible past when his heart had
wings and could fly without fear to its mate--a wave of the past that was
rushing through Nancy's mind, well-nigh burying her in its bitter-sweet
waters!  For he lifted his head, and suddenly retracing his steps, he
came toward her, and, taking her hand again, said forlornly: "You'll see
me back when my luck turns, Nancy."

Nancy knew that the words might mean little or much, according to the
manner in which they were uttered, but to her hurt pride and sore, shamed
woman-instinct, they were a promise, simply because there was a choking
sound in Justin's voice and tears in Justin's eyes.  "You'll see me back
when my luck turns, Nancy;" this was the phrase upon which she had lived
for more than ten years.  Nancy had once heard the old parson say, ages
ago, that the whole purpose of life was the growth of the soul; that we
eat, sleep, clothe ourselves, work, love, all to give the soul another
day, month, year, in which to develop.  She used to wonder if her soul
could be growing in the monotonous round of her dull duties and her
duller pleasures.  She did not confess it even to herself; nevertheless
she knew that she worked, ate, slept, to live until Justin's luck turned.
Her love had lain in her heart a bird without a song, year after year.
Her mother had dwelt by her side and never guessed; her father too; and
both were dead.  The neighbours also, lynx-eyed and curious, had never
suspected.  If she had suffered, no one in Edgewood was any the wiser,
for the maiden heart is not commonly worn on the sleeve in New England.
If she had been openly pledged to Justin Peabody, she could have waited
twice ten years with a decent show of self-respect, for long engagements
were viewed rather as a matter of course in that neighbourhood.  The
endless months had gone on since that grey November day when Justin had
said good-bye.  It had been just before Thanksgiving, and she went to
church with an aching and ungrateful heart.  The parson read from the
eighth chapter of St. Matthew, a most unexpected selection for that
holiday.  "If you can't find anything else to be thankful for," he cried,
"go home and be thankful you are not a leper!"

Nancy took the drastic counsel away from the church with her, and it was
many a year before she could manage to add to this slender store anything
to increase her gratitude for mercies given, though all the time she was
outwardly busy, cheerful, and helpful.

Justin had once come back to Edgewood, and it was the bitterest drop in
her cup of bitterness that she was spending that winter in Berwick
(where, so the neighbours told him, she was a great favourite in society,
and was receiving much attention from gentlemen), so that she had never
heard of his visit until the spring had come again.  Parted friends did
not keep up with one another's affairs by means of epistolary
communication, in those days, in Edgewood; it was not the custom.  Spoken
words were difficult enough to Justin Peabody, and written words were
quite impossible, especially if they were to be used to define his half-
conscious desires and his fluctuations of will, or to recount his
disappointments and discouragements and mistakes.




CHAPTER IV


It was Saturday afternoon, the twenty-fourth of December, and the weary
sisters of the Dorcas band rose from their bruised knees and removed
their little stores of carpet-tacks from their mouths.  This was a
feminine custom of long standing, and as no village dressmaker had ever
died of pins in the digestive organs, so were no symptoms of carpet-tacks
ever discovered in any Dorcas, living or dead.  Men wondered at the habit
and reviled it, but stood confounded in the presence of its indubitable
harmlessness.

The red ingrain carpet was indeed very warm, beautiful, and comforting to
the eye, and the sisters were suitably grateful to Providence, and
devoutly thankful to themselves, that they had been enabled to buy, sew,
and lay so many yards of it.  But as they stood looking at their
completed task, it was cruelly true that there was much left to do.

The aisles had been painted dark brown on each side of the red strips
leading from the doors to the pulpit, but the rest of the church floor
was "a thing of shreds and patches."  Each member of the carpet committee
had paid (as a matter of pride, however ill she could afford it) three
dollars and sixty-seven cents for sufficient carpet to lay in her own
pew; but these brilliant spots of conscientious effort only made the
stretches of bare, unpainted floor more evident.  And that was not all.
Traces of former spasmodic and individual efforts desecrated the present
ideals.  The doctor's pew had a pink and blue Brussels on it; the
lawyer's, striped stair-carpeting; the Browns from Deerwander sported
straw matting and were not abashed; while the Greens, the Whites, the
Blacks and the Greys displayed floor coverings as dissimilar as their
names.

"I never noticed it before!" exclaimed Maria Sharp, "but it ain't
Christian, that floor! it's heathenish and ungodly!"

"For mercy's sake, don't swear, Maria," said Mrs. Miller nervously.
"We've done our best, and let's hope that folks will look up and not
down.  It isn't as if they were going to set in the chandelier; they'll
have something else to think about when Nancy gets her hemlock branches
and white carnations in the pulpit vases.  This morning my Abner picked
off two pinks from the plant I've been nursing in my dining-room for
weeks, trying to make it bloom for Christmas.  I slapped his hands good,
and it's been haunting me ever since to think I had to correct him the
day before Christmas--Come, Lobelia, we must be hurrying!"

"One thing comforts me," exclaimed the Widow Buzzell, as she took her
hammer and tacks preparatory to leaving; "and that is that the Methodist
meetin'-house ain't got any carpet at all."

"Mrs. Buzzell, Mrs. Buzzell!" interrupted the minister's wife, with a
smile that took the sting from her speech.  "It will be like punishing
little Abner Miller; if we think those thoughts on Christmas Eve, we
shall surely be haunted afterward."

"And anyway," interjected Maria Sharp, who always saved the situation,
"you just wait and see if the Methodists don't say they'd rather have no
carpet at all than have one that don't go all over the floor.  I know
'em!" and she put on her hood and blanket-shawl as she gave one last fond
look at the improvements.

"I'm going home to get my supper, and come back afterward to lay the
carpet in my pew; my beans and brown bread will be just right by now, and
perhaps it will rest me a little; besides, I must feed 'Zekiel."

As Nancy Wentworth spoke, she sat in a corner of her own modest rear
seat, looking a little pale and tired.  Her waving dark hair had loosened
and fallen over her cheeks, and her eyes gleamed from under it wistfully.
Nowadays Nancy's eyes never had the sparkle of gazing into the future,
but always the liquid softness that comes from looking backward.

"The church will be real cold by then, Nancy," objected Mrs.
Burbank.--"Good-night, Mrs. Baxter."

"Oh, no!  I shall be back by half-past six, and I shall not work long.  Do
you know what I believe I'll do, Mrs. Burbank, just through the holidays?
Christmas and New Year's both coming on Sunday this year, there'll be a
great many out to church, not counting the strangers that'll come to the
special service to-morrow.  Instead of putting down my own pew carpet
that'll never be noticed here in the back, I'll lay it in the old Peabody
pew, for the red aisle-strip leads straight up to it; the ministers
always go up that side, and it does look forlorn."

"That's so!  And all the more because my pew, that's exactly opposite in
the left wing, is new carpeted and cushioned," replied the president.  "I
think it's real generous of you, Nancy, because the Riverboro folks,
knowing that you're a member of the carpet committee, will be sure to
notice, and think it's queer you haven't made an effort to carpet your
own pew."

"Never mind!" smiled Nancy wearily.  "Riverboro folks never go to bed on
Saturday nights without wondering what Edgewood is thinking about them!"

The minister's wife stood at her window watching Nancy as she passed the
parsonage.

"How wasted!  How wasted!" she sighed.  "Going home to eat her lonely
supper and feed 'Zekiel . . . I can bear it for the others, but not for
Nancy . . . Now she has lighted her lamp, now she has put fresh pine on
the fire, for new smoke comes from the chimney.  Why should I sit down
and serve my dear husband, and Nancy feed 'Zekiel?"

There was some truth in Mrs. Baxter's feeling.  Mrs. Buzzell, for
instance, had three sons; Maria Sharp was absorbed in her lame father and
her Sunday-school work; and Lobelia Brewster would not have considered
matrimony a blessing, even under the most favourable conditions.  But
Nancy was framed and planned for other things, and 'Zekiel was an
insufficient channel for her soft, womanly sympathy and her bright
activity of mind and body.

'Zekiel had lost his tail in a mowing-machine; 'Zekiel had the asthma,
and the immersion of his nose in milk made him sneeze, so he was wont to
slip his paw in and out of the dish and lick it patiently for five
minutes together.  Nancy often watched him pityingly, giving him kind and
gentle words to sustain his fainting spirit, but to-night she paid no
heed to him, although he sneezed violently to attract her attention.

She had put her supper on the lighted table by the kitchen window and was
pouring out her cup of tea, when a boy rapped at the door.  "Here's a
paper and a letter, Miss Wentworth," he said.  "It's the second this
week, and they think over to the store that that Berwick widower must be
settin' up and takin' notice!"

She had indeed received a letter the day before, an unsigned
communication, consisting only of the words, "Second Epistle of John.
Verse 12."

She had taken her Bible to look out the reference and found it to be:--

"Having many things to write unto you, I would not write with paper and
ink; but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy
may be full."

The envelope was postmarked New York, and she smiled, thinking that Mrs.
Emerson, a charming lady who had spent the summer in Edgewood, and had
sung with her in the village choir, was coming back, as she had promised,
to have a sleigh ride and see Edgewood in its winter dress.  Nancy had
almost forgotten the first letter in the excitements of her busy day, and
now here was another, from Boston this time.  She opened the envelope and
found again only a single sentence, printed, not written.  (Lest she
should guess the hand, she wondered?)

"Second Epistle of John.  Verse 5."

"And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment
unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one
another."

Was it Mrs. Emerson?  Could it be--any one else?  Was it--?  No, it might
have been, years ago; but not now; not now!--And yet; he was always so
different from other people; and once, in church, he had handed her the
hymn-book with his finger pointing to a certain verse.

She always fancied that her secret fidelity of heart rose from the fact
that Justin Peabody was "different."  From the hour of their first
acquaintance, she was ever comparing him with his companions, and always
to his advantage.  So long as a woman finds all men very much alike (as
Lobelia Brewster did, save that she allowed some to be worse!), she is in
no danger.  But the moment in which she perceives and discriminates
subtle differences, marvelling that there can be two opinions about a
man's superiority, that moment the miracle has happened.

"And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment
unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one
another."

No, it could not be from Justin.  She drank her tea, played with her
beans abstractedly, and nibbled her slice of steaming brown bread.

"Not as though I wrote a new commandment unto thee."

No, not a new one; twelve, fifteen years old, that commandment!

"That we love one another."

Who was speaking?  Who had written these words?  The first letter sounded
just like Mrs. Emerson, who had said she was a very poor correspondent,
but that she should just "drop down" on Nancy one of these days; but this
second letter never came from Mrs. Emerson.--Well, there would be an
explanation some time; a pleasant one; one to smile over, and tell
'Zekiel and repeat to the neighbours; but not an unexpected, sacred,
beautiful explanation, such a one as the heart of a woman could imagine,
if she were young enough and happy enough to hope.

She washed her cup and plate; replaced the uneaten beans in the brown
pot, and put them away with the round loaf, folded the cloth (Lobelia
Brewster said Nancy always "set out her meals as if she was entertainin'
company from Portland"), closed the stove dampers, carried the lighted
lamp to a safe corner shelf, and lifted 'Zekiel to his cushion on the
high-backed rocker, doing all with the nice precision of long habit.  Then
she wrapped herself warmly, and locking the lonely little house behind
her, set out to finish her work in the church.




CHAPTER V


At this precise moment Justin Peabody was eating his own beans and brown
bread (articles of diet of which his Detroit landlady was lamentably
ignorant) at the new tavern, not far from the meeting-house.

It would not be fair to him to say that Mrs. Burbank's letter had brought
him back to Edgewood, but it had certainly accelerated his steps.

For the first six years after Justin Peabody left home, he had drifted
about from place to place, saving every possible dollar of his uncertain
earnings in the conscious hope that he could go back to New England and
ask Nancy Wentworth to marry him.  The West was prosperous and
progressive, but how he yearned, in idle moments, for the grimmer and
more sterile soil that had given him birth!

Then came what seemed to him a brilliant chance for a lucky turn of his
savings, and he invested them in an enterprise which, wonderfully as it
promised, failed within six months and left him penniless.  At that
moment he definitely gave up all hope, and for the next few years he put
Nancy as far as possible out of his mind, in the full belief that he was
acting an honourable part in refusing to drag her into his tangled and
fruitless way of life.  If she ever did care for him,--and he could not
be sure, she was always so shy,--she must have outgrown the feeling long
since, and be living happily, or at least contentedly, in her own way.  He
was glad in spite of himself when he heard that she had never married;
but at least he hadn't it on his conscience that _he_ had kept her
single!

On the seventeenth of December, Justin, his business day over, was
walking toward the dreary house in which he ate and slept.  As he turned
the corner, he heard one woman say to another, as they watched a man
stumbling sorrowfully down the street: "Going home will be the worst of
all for him--to find nobody there!"  That was what going home had meant
for him these ten years, but he afterward felt it strange that this
thought should have struck him so forcibly on that particular day.
Entering the boarding-house, he found Mrs. Burbank's letter with its
Edgewood postmark on the hall table, and took it up to his room.  He
kindled a little fire in the air-tight stove, watching the flame creep
from shavings to kindlings, from kindlings to small pine, and from small
pine to the round, hardwood sticks; then when the result seemed certain,
he closed the stove door and sat down to read the letter.  Whereupon all
manner of strange things happened in his head and heart and flesh and
spirit as he sat there alone, his hands in his pockets, his feet braced
against the legs of the stove.

It was a cold winter night, and the snow and sleet beat against the
windows.  He looked about the ugly room: at the washstand with its square
of oilcloth in front and its detestable bowl and pitcher; at the rigours
of his white iron bedstead, with the valley in the middle of the lumpy
mattress and the darns in the rumpled pillowcases; at the dull
photographs of the landlady's hideous husband and children enshrined on
the mantelshelf; looked at the abomination of desolation surrounding him
until his soul sickened and cried out like a child's for something more
like home.  It was as if a spring thaw had melted his ice-bound heart,
and on the crest of a wave it was drifting out into the milder waters of
some unknown sea.  He could have laid his head in the kind lap of a woman
and cried: "Comfort me!  Give me companionship or I die!"

The wind howled in the chimney and rattled the loose window-sashes; the
snow, freezing as it fell, dashed against the glass with hard, cutting
little blows; at least, that is the way in which the wind and snow
flattered themselves they were making existence disagreeable to Justin
Peabody when he read the letter; but never were elements more mistaken.

It was a June Sunday in the boarding-house bedroom; and for that matter
it was not the boarding-house bedroom at all: it was the old Orthodox
church on Tory Hill in Edgewood.

The windows were wide open, and the smell of the purple clover and the
humming of the bees were drifting into the sweet, wide spaces within.
Justin was sitting in the end of the Peabody pew, and Nancy Wentworth was
beside him; Nancy, cool and restful in her white dress; dark-haired Nancy
under the shadow of her shirred muslin hat.

   Rise, my soul, and stretch thy wings,
   Thy better portion trace.

The melodeon gave the tune, and Nancy and he stood to sing, taking the
book between them.  His hand touched hers, and as the music of the hymn
rose and fell, the future unrolled itself before his eyes; a future in
which Nancy was his wedded wife; and the happy years stretched on and on
in front of them until there was a row of little heads in the old Peabody
pew, and mother and father could look proudly along the line at the young
things they were bringing into the house of the Lord.

The recalling of that vision worked like magic in Justin's blood.  His
soul rose and stretched its wings and "traced its better portion"
vividly, as he sprang to his feet and walked up and down the bedroom
floor.  He would get a few days' leave and go back to Edgewood for
Christmas, to join, with all the old neighbours, in the service at the
meeting-house; and in pursuance of this resolve, he shook his fist in the
face of the landlady's husband on the mantelpiece and dared him to
prevent.

He had a salary of fifty dollars a month, with some very slight prospect
of an increase after January.  He did not see how two persons could eat,
and drink, and lodge, and dress on it in Detroit, but he proposed to give
Nancy Wentworth the refusal of that magnificent future, that brilliant
and tempting offer.  He had exactly one hundred dollars in the bank, and
sixty or seventy of them would be spent in the journeys, counting two
happy, blessed fares back from Edgewood to Detroit; and if he paid only
his own fare back, he would throw the price of the other into the pond
behind the Wentworth house.  He would drop another ten dollars into the
plate on Christmas Day toward the repairs on the church; if he starved,
he would do that.  He was a failure.  Everything his hand touched turned
to naught.  He looked himself full in the face, recognizing his weakness,
and in this supremest moment of recognition he was a stronger man than he
had been an hour before.  His drooping shoulders had straightened; the
restless look had gone from his eyes; his sombre face had something of
repose in it, the repose of a settled purpose.  He was a failure, but
perhaps if he took the risks (and if Nancy would take them--but that was
the trouble, women were so unselfish, they were always willing to take
risks, and one ought not to let them!), perhaps he might do better in
trying to make a living for two than he had in working for himself alone.
He would go home, tell Nancy that he was an unlucky good-for-naught, and
ask her if she would try her hand at making him over.




CHAPTER VI


These were the reasons that had brought Justin Peabody to Edgewood on the
Saturday afternoon before Christmas, and had taken him to the new tavern
on Tory Hill, near the Meeting-House.

Nobody recognized him at the station or noticed him at the tavern, and
after his supper he put on his overcoat and started out for a walk,
aimlessly hoping that he might meet a friend, or failing that, intending
to call on some of his old neighbours, with the view of hearing the
village news and securing some information which might help him to decide
when he had better lay himself and his misfortunes at Nancy Wentworth's
feet.  They were pretty feet!  He remembered that fact well enough under
the magical influence of familiar sights and sounds and odours.  He was
restless, miserable, anxious, homesick--not for Detroit, but for some
heretofore unimagined good; yet, like Bunyan's shepherd boy in the Valley
of Humiliation, he carried "the herb called Hearts-ease in his bosom,"
for he was at last loving consciously.

How white the old church looked, and how green the blinds!  It must have
been painted very lately: that meant that the parish was fairly
prosperous.  There were new shutters in the belfry tower, too; he
remembered the former open space and the rusty bell, and he liked the
change.  Did the chimney use to be in that corner?  No; but his father
had always said it would have drawn better if it had been put there in
the beginning.  New shingles within a year: that was evident to a
practised eye.  He wondered if anything had been done to the inside of
the building, but he must wait until the morrow to see, for, of course,
the doors would be locked.  No; the one at the right side was ajar.  He
opened it softly and stepped into the tiny square entry that he recalled
so well--the one through which the Sunday-school children ran out to the
steps from their catechism, apparently enjoying the sunshine after a
spell of orthodoxy; the little entry where the village girls congregated
while waiting for the last bell to ring--they made a soft blur of pink
and blue and buff, a little flutter of curls and braids and fans and
sunshades, in his mind's eye, as he closed the outer door behind him and
gently opened the inner one.  The church was flooded with moonlight and
snowlight, and there was one lamp burning at the back of the pulpit; a
candle, too, on the pulpit steps.  There was the tip-tap-tip of a tack-
hammer going on in a distant corner.  Was somebody hanging Christmas
garlands?  The new red carpet attracted his notice, and as he grew
accustomed to the dim light, it carried his eye along the aisle he had
trod so many years of Sundays, to the old familiar pew.  The sound of the
hammer ceased and a woman rose from her knees.  A stranger was doing for
the family honour what he ought himself to have done.  The woman turned
to shake her skirt, and it was Nancy Wentworth.  He might have known it.
Women were always faithful; they always remembered old landmarks, old
days, old friends, old duties.  His father and mother and Esther were all
gone; who but dear Nancy would have made the old Peabody pew right and
tidy for the Christmas festival?  Bless her kind womanly heart!

She looked just the same to him as when he last saw her.  Mercifully he
seemed to have held in remembrance all these years not so much her
youthful bloom as her general qualities of mind and heart: her
cheeriness, her spirit, her unflagging zeal, her bright womanliness.  Her
grey dress was turned up in front over a crimson moreen petticoat.  She
had on a cosy jacket, a fur turban of some sort with a redbreast in it,
and her cheeks were flushed from exertion.  "Sweet records, and promises
as sweet," had always met in Nancy's face, and either he had forgotten
how pretty she was, or else she had absolutely grown prettier during his
absence.

Nancy would have chosen the supreme moment of meeting very differently,
but she might well have chosen worse.  She unpinned her skirt and brushed
the threads off, smoothed the pew cushions carefully, and took a last
stitch in the ragged hassock.  She then lifted the Bible and the hymn-
book from the rack, and putting down a bit of flannel on the pulpit
steps, took a flatiron from an oil-stove, and opening the ancient books,
pressed out the well-thumbed leaves one by one with infinite care.  After
replacing the volumes in their accustomed place, she first extinguished
the flame of her stove, which she tucked out of sight, and then blew out
the lamp and the candle.  The church was still light enough for objects
to be seen in a shadowy way, like the objects in a dream, and Justin did
not realize that he was a man in the flesh, looking at a woman; spying,
it might be, upon her privacy.  He was one part of a dream and she
another, and he stood as if waiting, and fearing, to be awakened.

Nancy, having done all, came out of the pew, and standing in the aisle,
looked back at the scene of her labours with pride and content.  And as
she looked, some desire to stay a little longer in the dear old place
must have come over her, or some dread of going back to her lonely
cottage, for she sat down in Justin's corner of the pew with folded
hands, her eyes fixed dreamily on the pulpit and her ears hearing: "Not
as though I wrote a new commandment unto thee, but that which we had from
the beginning."

Justin's grasp on the latch tightened as he prepared to close the door
and leave the place, but his instinct did not warn him quickly enough,
after all, for, obeying some uncontrollable impulse, Nancy suddenly fell
on her knees in the pew and buried her face in the cushions.

The dream broke, and in an instant Justin was a man--worse than that, he
was an eavesdropper, ashamed of his unsuspected presence.  He felt
himself standing, with covered head and feet shod, in the holy temple of
a woman's heart.

But his involuntary irreverence brought abundant grace with it.  The
glimpse and the revelation wrought their miracles silently and
irresistibly, not by the slow processes of growth which Nature demands
for her enterprises, but with the sudden swiftness of the spirit.  In an
instant changes had taken place in Justin's soul which his so-called
"experiencing religion" twenty-five years back had been powerless to
effect.  He had indeed been baptized then, but the recording angel could
have borne witness that this second baptism fructified the first, and
became the real herald of the new birth and the new creature.




CHAPTER VII


Justin Peabody silently closed the inner door, and stood in the entry
with his head bent and his heart in a whirl until he should hear Nancy
rise to her feet.  He must take this Heaven-sent chance of telling her
all, but how do it without alarming her?

A moment, and her step sounded in the stillness of the empty church.

Obeying the first impulse, he passed through the outer door, and standing
on the step, knocked once, twice, three times; then, opening it a little
and speaking through the chink, he called, "Is Miss Nancy Wentworth
here?"

"I'm here!" in a moment came Nancy's answer, and then, with a little
wondering tremor in her voice, as if a hint of the truth had already
dawned: "What's wanted?"

"You're wanted, Nancy, wanted badly, by Justin Peabody, come back from
the West."

The door opened wide, and Justin faced Nancy standing half-way down the
aisle, her eyes brilliant, her lips parted.  A week ago Justin's
apparition confronting her in the empty Meeting-House after nightfall,
even had she been prepared for it as now, by his voice, would have
terrified her beyond measure.  Now it seemed almost natural and
inevitable.  She had spent these last days in the church where both of
them had been young and happy together; the two letters had brought him
vividly to mind, and her labour in the old Peabody pew had been one long
excursion into the past in which he was the most prominent and the best-
loved figure.

"I said I'd come back to you when my luck turned, Nancy."

These were so precisely the words she expected him to say, should she
ever see him again face to face, that for an additional moment they but
heightened her sense of unreality.

"Well, the luck hasn't turned, after all, but I couldn't wait any longer.
Have you given a thought to me all these years, Nancy?"

"More than one, Justin"; for the very look upon his face, the tenderness
of his voice, the attitude of his body, outran his words and told her
what he had come home to say, told her that her years of waiting were
over at last.

"You ought to despise me for coming back again with only myself and my
empty hands to offer you."

How easy it was to speak his heart out in this dim and quiet place!  How
tongue-tied he would have been, sitting on the black haircloth sofa in
the Wentworth parlour and gazing at the open soapstone stove!

"Oh, men are such fools!" cried Nancy, smiles and tears struggling
together in her speech, as she sat down suddenly in her own pew and put
her hands over her face.

"They are," agreed Justin humbly, "but I've never stopped loving you,
whenever I've had time for thinking or loving.  And I wasn't sure that
you really cared anything about me; and how could I have asked you when I
hadn't a dollar in the world?"

"There are other things to give a woman besides dollars, Justin."

"Are there?  Well, you shall have them all, every one of them, Nancy, if
you can make up your mind to do without the dollars; for dollars seem to
be just what I can't manage."

Her hand was in his by this time, and they were sitting side by side in
the cushionless, carpetless Wentworth pew.  The door stood open; the
winter moon shone in upon them.  That it was beginning to grow cold in
the church passed unnoticed.  The grasp of the woman's hand seemed to
give the man new hope and courage, and Justin's warm, confiding, pleading
pressure brought balm to Nancy, balm and healing for the wounds her pride
had suffered; joy, too, half-conscious still, that her life need not be
lived to the end in unfruitful solitude.  She had waited, "as some grey
lake lies, full and smooth, awaiting the star below the twilight."  Justin
Peabody might have been no other woman's star, but he was Nancy's!

"Just you sitting beside me here makes me feel as if I'd been asleep or
dead all these years, and just born over again," said Justin.  "I've led
a respectable, hard-working, honest life, Nancy," he continued, "and I
don't owe any man a cent; the trouble is that no man owes me one.  I've
got enough money to pay two fares back to Detroit on Monday, although I
was terribly afraid you wouldn't let me do it.  It'll need a good deal of
thinking and planning, Nancy, for we shall be very poor."

Nancy had been storing up fidelity and affection deep, deep in the hive
of her heart all these years, and now the honey of her helpfulness stood
ready to be gathered.

"Could I keep hens in Detroit?" she asked.  "I can always make them pay."

"Hens--in three rooms, Nancy?"

Her face fell.  "And no yard?"

"No yard."

A moment's pause, and then the smile came.  "Oh, well, I've had yards and
hens for thirty-five years.  Doing without them will be a change.  I can
take in sewing."

"No, you can't, Nancy.  I need your backbone and wits and pluck and
ingenuity, but if I can't ask you to sit with your hands folded for the
rest of your life, as I'd like to, you shan't use them for other people.
You're marrying me to make a man of me, but I'm not marrying you to make
you a drudge."

His voice rang clear and true in the silence, and Nancy's heart vibrated
at the sound.

"Oh, Justin, Justin!" she whispered.  "There's something wrong somewhere,
but we'll find it out together, you and I, and make it right.  You're not
like a failure.  You don't even _look_ poor, Justin; there isn't a man in
Edgewood to compare with you, or I should be washing his dishes and
darning his stockings this minute.  And I am not a pauper!  There'll be
the rent of my little house and a carload of my furniture, so you can put
the three-room idea out of your mind, and your firm will offer you a
larger salary when you tell them you have a wife to take care of.  Oh, I
see it all, and it is as easy and bright and happy as can be!"

Justin put his arm around her and drew her close, with such a throb of
gratitude for her belief and trust that it moved him almost to tears.

There was a long pause: then he said:--

"Now I shall call for you to-morrow morning after the last bell has
stopped ringing, and we will walk up the aisle together and sit in the
old Peabody pew.  We shall be a nine-days' wonder anyway, but this will
be equal to an announcement, especially if you take my arm.  We don't
either of us like to be stared at, but this will show without a word what
we think of each other and what we've promised to be to each other, and
it's the only thing that will make me feel sure of you and settled in my
mind after all these mistaken years.  Have you got the courage, Nancy?"

"I shouldn't wonder!  I guess if I've had courage enough to wait for you,
I've got courage enough to walk up the aisle with you and marry you
besides!" said Nancy.--"Now it is too late for us to stay here any
longer, and you must see me only as far as my gate, for perhaps you
haven't forgotten yet how interested the Brewsters are in their
neighbours."

They stood at the little Wentworth gate for a moment, hand close clasped
in hand.  The night was clear, the air was cold and sparkling, but with
nothing of bitterness in it; the sky was steely blue and the evening star
glowed and burned like a tiny sun.  Nancy remembered the shepherd's song
she had taught the Sunday-school children, and repeated softly:--

   For I my sheep was watching
   Beneath the silent skies,
   When sudden, far to eastward,
   I saw a star arise;
   Then all the peaceful heavens
   With sweetest music rang,
   And glory, glory, glory!
   The happy angels sang.

   So I this night am joyful,
   Though I can scarce tell why,
   It seemeth me that glory
   Hath met us very nigh;
   And we, though poor and humble,
   Have part in heavenly plan,
   For, born to-night, the Prince of Peace
   Shall rule the heart of man.

Justin's heart melted within him like wax to the woman's vision and the
woman's touch.

"Oh, Nancy, Nancy!" he whispered.  "If I had brought my bad luck to you
long, long ago, would you have taken me then, and have I lost years of
such happiness as this?"

"There are some things it is not best for a man to be certain about,"
said Nancy, with a wise smile and a last good-night.




CHAPTER VIII


   "Ring out, sweet bells,
   O'er woods and dells
   Your lovely strains repeat,
   While happy throngs
   With joyous songs
   Each accent gladly greet."

Christmas morning in the old Tory Hill Meeting-House was felt by all of
the persons who were present in that particular year to be a most
exciting and memorable occasion.

The old sexton quite outdid himself, for although he had rung the bell
for more than thirty years, he had never felt greater pride or joy in his
task.  Was not his son John home for Christmas, and John's wife, and a
grandchild newly named Nathaniel for himself?  Were there not spareribs
and turkeys and cranberries and mince pies on the pantry shelves, and
barrels of rosy Baldwins in the cellar and bottles of mother's root beer
just waiting to give a holiday pop?  The bell itself forgot its age and
the suspicion of a crack that dulled its voice on a damp day, and,
inspired by the bright, frosty air, the sexton's inspiring pull, and the
Christmas spirit, gave out nothing but joyous tones.

Ding-dong!  Ding-dong!  It fired the ambitions of star scholars about to
recite hymns and sing solos.  It thrilled little girls expecting dolls
before night.  It excited beyond bearing dozens of little boys being
buttoned into refractory overcoats.  Ding-dong!  Ding-dong!  Mothers'
fingers trembled when they heard it, and mothers' voices cried: "If that
is the second bell, the children will never be ready in time!  Where are
the overshoes?  Where are the mittens?  Hurry, Jack!  Hurry, Jennie!"
Ding-dong!  Ding-dong!  "Where's Sally's muff?  Where's father's fur cap?
Is the sleigh at the door?  Are the hot soapstones in?  Have all of you
your money for the contribution box?"

Ding-dong!  Ding-dong!  It was a blithe bell, a sweet, true bell, a holy
bell, and to Justin, pacing his tavern room, as to Nancy, trembling in
her maiden chamber, it rang a Christmas message:--

   Awake, glad heart!  Arise and sing;
   It is the birthday of thy King!

The congregation filled every seat in the old Meeting-House.

As Maria Sharp had prophesied, there was one ill-natured spinster from a
rival village who declared that the church floor looked like Joseph's
coat laid out smooth; but in the general chorus of admiration, approval,
and good will, this envious speech, though repeated from mouth to mouth,
left no sting.

Another item of interest long recalled was the fact that on that august
and unapproachable day the pulpit vases stood erect and empty, though
Nancy Wentworth had filled them every Sunday since any one could
remember.  This instance, though felt at the time to be of mysterious
significance if the cause were ever revealed, paled into nothingness
when, after the ringing of the last bell, Nancy Wentworth walked up the
aisle on Justin Peabody's arm, and they took their seats side by side in
the old family pew.

("And consid'able close, too, though there was plenty o' room!")

("And no one that I ever heard of so much as suspicioned that they had
ever kept company!")

("And do you s'pose she knew Justin was expected back when she scrubbed
his pew a-Friday?")

("And this explains the empty pulpit vases!")

("And I always said that Nancy would make a real handsome couple if she
ever got anybody to couple with!")

During the unexpected and solemn procession of the two up the aisle the
soprano of the village choir stopped short in the middle of the Doxology,
and the three other voices carried it to the end without any treble.
Also, among those present there were some who could not remember
afterward the precise petitions wafted upward in the opening prayer.

And could it be explained otherwise than by cheerfully acknowledging the
bounty of an overruling Providence that Nancy Wentworth should have had a
new winter dress for the first time in five years--a winter dress of dark
brown cloth to match her beaver muff and victorine?  The existence of
this toilette had been known and discussed in Edgewood for a month past,
and it was thought to be nothing more than a proper token of respect from
a member of the carpet committee to the general magnificence of the
church on the occasion of its reopening after repairs.  Indeed, you could
have identified every member of the Dorcas Society that Sunday morning by
the freshness of her apparel.  The brown dress, then, was generally
expected; but why the white cashmere waist with collar and cuffs of point
lace, devised only and suitable only for the minister's wedding, where it
first saw the light?

"The white waist can only be explained as showing distinct hope!"
whispered the minister's wife during the reading of the church notices.

"To me it shows more than hope; I am very sure that Nancy would never
take any wear out of that lace for hope; it means certainty!" answered
Maria, who was always strong in the prophetic line.

By sermon time Justin's identity had dawned upon most of the
congregation.  A stranger to all but one or two at first, his presence in
the Peabody pew brought his face and figure back, little by little, to
the minds of the old parishioners.

When the contribution plate was passed, the sexton always began at the
right-wing pews, as all the sextons before him had done for a hundred
years.  Every eye in the church was already turned upon Justin and Nancy,
and it was with almost a gasp that those in the vicinity saw a ten dollar
bill fall in the plate.  The sexton reeled, or, if that is too
intemperate a word for a pillar of the church, the good man tottered, but
caught hold of the pew rail with one hand, and, putting the thumb of his
other over the bill, proceeded quickly to the next pew, lest the stranger
should think better of his gift, or demand change, as had occasionally
been done in the olden time.

Nancy never fluttered an eyelash, but sat quietly by Justin's side with
her bosom rising and falling under the beaver fur and her cold hands
clasped tight in the little brown muff.  Far from grudging this
appreciable part of their slender resources, she thrilled with pride to
see Justin's offering fall in the plate.

Justin was too absorbed in his own thoughts to notice anything, but his
munificent contribution had a most unexpected effect upon his reputation,
after all; for on that day, and on many another later one, when his
sudden marriage and departure with Nancy Wentworth were under discussion,
the neighbours said to one another:--

"Justin must be making money fast out West!  He put ten dollars in the
contribution plate a-Sunday, and paid the minister ten more next day for
marryin' him to Nancy; so the Peabody luck has turned at last!" which, as
a matter of fact, it had.

"And all the time," said the chairman of the carpet committee to the
treasurer of the Dorcas Society--"all the time, little as she realized
it, Nancy was laying the carpet in her own pew.  Now she's married to
Justin she'll be the makin' of him, or I miss my guess.  You can't do a
thing with men folks without they're right alongside where you can keep
your eye and hand on 'em.  Justin's handsome and good and stiddy; all he
need is some nice woman to put starch into him.  The Edgewood Peabodys
never had a mite o' stiffenin' in 'em,--limp as dishrags, every blessed
one!  Nancy Wentworth fairly rustles with starch.  Justin hadn't been
engaged to her but a few hours when they walked up the aisle together,
but did you notice the way he carried his head?  I declare I thought 't
would fall off behind!  I shouldn't wonder a mite but they prospered and
come back every summer to set in the old Peabody Pew."

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1902 Gay and Bird edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk

{Book cover: cover.jpg}





THE DIARY OF A GOOSE GIRL


BY
KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY
CLAUDE A. SHEPPERSON

GAY AND BIRD
22 BEDFORD STREET, STRAND
LONDON
1902

{I looked about me with what Stevenson calls a 'fine dizzy, muddle-headed
job': p01.jpg}

TO THE HENS, DUCKS, AND GEESE
WHO SO KINDLY GAVE ME
SITTINGS FOR THESE
SKETCHES THE BOOK
IS GRATEFULLY
INSCRIBED




CHAPTER I.


{Thornycroft House: p1a.jpg}

THORNYCROFT FARM, near Barbury Green, July 1, 190-.

{Picture of woman and goose: p1b.jpg}

In alluding to myself as a Goose Girl, I am using only the most modest of
my titles; for I am also a poultry-maid, a tender of Belgian hares and
rabbits, and a shepherdess; but I particularly fancy the role of Goose
Girl, because it recalls the German fairy tales of my early youth, when I
always yearned, but never hoped, to be precisely what I now am.

As I was jolting along these charming Sussex roads the other day, a fat
buff pony and a tippy cart being my manner of progression, I chanced upon
the village of Barbury Green.

One glance was enough for any woman, who, having eyes to see, could see
with them; but I made assurance doubly sure by driving about a little,
struggling to conceal my new-born passion from the stable-boy who was my
escort.  Then, it being high noon of a cloudless day, I descended from
the trap and said to the astonished yokel: "You may go back to the
Hydropathic; I am spending a month or two here.  Wait a moment--I'll send
a message, please!"

I then scribbled a word or two to those having me in custody.

"I am very tired of people," the note ran, "and want to rest myself by
living a while with things.  Address me (if you must) at Barbury Green
post-office, or at all events send me a box of simple clothing
there--nothing but shirts and skirts, please.  I cannot forget that I am
only twenty miles from Oxenbridge (though it might be one hundred and
twenty, which is the reason I adore it), but I rely upon you to keep an
honourable distance yourselves, and not to divulge my place of retreat to
others, especially to--you know whom!  Do not pursue me.  I will never be
taken alive!"

Having cut, thus, the cable that bound me to civilisation, and having
seen the buff pony and the dazed yokel disappear in a cloud of dust, I
looked about me with what Stevenson calls a "fine, dizzy, muddle-headed
joy," the joy of a successful rebel or a liberated serf.  Plenty of money
in my purse--that was unromantic, of course, but it simplified
matters--and nine hours of daylight remaining in which to find a lodging.

{Life converges there, just at the public duck-pond: p3.jpg}

The village is one of the oldest, and I am sure it must be one of the
quaintest, in England.  It is too small to be printed on the map (an
honour that has spoiled more than one Arcadia), so pray do not look
there, but just believe in it, and some day you may be rewarded by
driving into it by chance, as I did, and feel the same Columbus thrill
running, like an electric current, through your veins.  I withhold
specific geographical information in order that you may not miss that
Columbus thrill, which comes too seldom in a world of railroads.

The Green is in the very centre of Barbury village, and all civic,
political, family, and social life converges there, just at the public
duck-pond--a wee, sleepy lake with a slope of grass-covered stones by
which the ducks descend for their swim.

The houses are set about the Green like those in a toy village.  They are
of old brick, with crumpled, up-and-down roofs of deep-toned red, and
tufts of stonecrop growing from the eaves.  Diamond-paned windows, half
open, admit the sweet summer air; and as for the gardens in front, it
would seem as if the inhabitants had nothing to do but work in them,
there is such a riotous profusion of colour and bloom.  To add to the
effect, there are always pots of flowers hanging from the trees, blue
flax and yellow myrtle; and cages of Java sparrows and canaries singing
joyously, as well they may in such a paradise.

{The houses are set about the Green: p5.jpg}

The shops are idyllic, too, as if Nature had seized even the man of trade
and made him subservient to her designs.  The general draper's, where I
fitted myself out for a day or two quite easily, is set back in a tangle
of poppies and sweet peas, Madonna lilies and Canterbury bells.  The shop
itself has a gay awning, and what do you think the draper has suspended
from it, just as a picturesque suggestion to the passer-by?  Suggestion I
call it, because I should blush to use the word advertisement in
describing anything so dainty and decorative.  Well, then, garlands of
shoes, if you please!  Baby bootlets of bronze; tiny ankle-ties in
yellow, blue, and scarlet kid; glossy patent-leather pumps shining in the
sun, with festoons of slippers at the corners, flowery slippers in
imitation Berlin wool-work.  If you make this picture in your mind's-eye,
just add a window above the awning, and over the fringe of marigolds in
the window-box put the draper's wife dancing a rosy-cheeked baby.  Alas!
my words are only black and white, I fear, and this picture needs a
palette drenched in primary colours.

Along the street, a short distance, is the old watchmaker's.  Set in the
hedge at the gate is a glass case with _Multum in Parvo_ painted on the
woodwork.  Within, a little stand of trinkets revolves slowly; as slowly,
I imagine, as the current of business in that quiet street.  The house
stands a trifle back and is covered thickly with ivy, while over the
entrance-door of the shop is a great round clock set in a green frame of
clustering vine.  The hands pointed to one when I passed the watchmaker's
garden with its thicket of fragrant lavender and its murmuring bees; so I
went in to the sign of the "Strong i' the Arm" for some cold luncheon,
determining to patronise "The Running Footman" at the very next
opportunity.  Neither of these inns is starred by Baedeker, and this fact
adds the last touch of enchantment to the picture.

The landlady at the "Strong i' the Arm" stabbed me in the heart by
telling me that there were no apartments to let in the village, and that
she had no private sitting-room in the inn; but she speedily healed the
wound by saying that I might be accommodated at one of the farm-houses in
the vicinity.  Did I object to a farm-'ouse?  Then she could cheerfully
recommend the Evan's farm, only 'alf a mile away.  She 'ad understood
from Miss Phoebe Evan, who sold her poultry, that they would take one
lady lodger if she didn't wish much waiting upon.

In my present mood I was in search of the strenuous life, and eager to
wait, rather than to be waited upon; so I walked along the edge of the
Green, wishing that some mentally unbalanced householder would take a
sudden fancy to me and ask me to come in and lodge awhile.  I suppose
these families live under their roofs of peach-blow tiles, in the midst
of their blooming gardens, for a guinea a week or thereabouts; yet if
they "undertook" me (to use their own phrase), the bill for my humble
meals and bed would be at least double that.  I don't know that I blame
them; one should have proper compensation for admitting a world-stained
lodger into such an Eden.

When I was searching for rooms a week ago, I chanced upon a pretty
cottage where the woman had sometimes let apartments.  She showed me the
premises and asked me if I would mind taking my meals in her own dining-
room, where I could be served privately at certain hours: and, since she
had but the one sitting-room, would I allow her to go on using it
occasionally? also, if I had no special preference, would I take the
second-sized bedroom and leave her in possession of the largest one,
which permitted her to have the baby's crib by her bedside?  She thought
I should be quite as comfortable, and it was her opinion that in making
arrangements with lodgers, it was a good plan not to "bryke up the 'ome
any more than was necessary."

"Bryke up the 'ome!"  That is seemingly the malignant purpose with which
I entered Barbury Green.




CHAPTER II


July 4th.

Enter the family of Thornycroft Farm, of which I am already a member in
good and regular standing.

I introduce Mrs. Heaven first, for she is a self-saturated person who
would never forgive the insult should she receive any lower place.

She welcomed me with the statement: "We do not take lodgers here, nor
boarders; no lodgers, nor boarders, but we do occasionally admit paying
guests, those who look as if they would appreciate the quietude of the
plyce and be willing as you might say to remunerate according."

{Mrs. Heaven: p10.jpg}

I did not mind at this particular juncture what I was called, so long as
the epithet was comparatively unobjectionable, so I am a paying guest,
therefore, and I expect to pay handsomely for the handsome appellation.
Mrs. Heaven is short and fat; she fills her dress as a pin-cushion fills
its cover; she wears a cap and apron, and she is so full of platitudes
that she would have burst had I not appeared as a providential outlet for
them.  Her accent is not of the farm, but of the town, and smacks wholly
of the marts of trade.  She is repetitious, too, as well as
platitudinous.  "I 'ope if there's anythink you require you will let us
know, let us know," she says several times each day; and whenever she
enters my sitting-room she prefaces her conversation with the remark: "I
trust you are finding it quiet here, miss?  It's the quietude of the
plyce that is its charm, yes, the quietude.  And yet" (she dribbles on)
"it wears on a body after a while, miss.  I often go into Woodmucket to
visit one of my sons just for the noise, simply for the noise, miss, for
nothink else in the world but the noise.  There's nothink like noise for
soothing nerves that is worn threadbare with the quietude, miss, or at
least that's my experience; and yet to a strynger the quietude of the
plyce is its charm, undoubtedly its chief charm; and that is what our
paying guests always say, although our charges are somewhat higher than
other plyces.  If there's anythink you require, miss, I 'ope you'll
mention it.  There is not a commodious assortment in Barbury Green, but
we can always send the pony to Woodmucket in case of urgency.  Our paying
guest last summer was a Mrs. Pollock, and she was by way of having sudden
fancies.  Young and unmarried though you are, miss, I think you will tyke
my meaning without my speaking plyner?  Well, at six o'clock of a rainy
afternoon, she was seized with an unaccountable desire for vegetable
marrows, and Mr. 'Eaven put the pony in the cart and went to Woodmucket
for them, which is a great advantage to be so near a town and yet 'ave
the quietude."

{Mr. Heaven: p11.jpg}

Mr. Heaven is merged, like Mr. Jellyby, in the more shining qualities of
his wife.  A line of description is too long for him.  Indeed, I can
think of no single word brief enough, at least in English.  The Latin
"nil" will do, since no language is rich in words of less than three
letters.  He is nice, kind, bald, timid, thin, and so colourless that he
can scarcely be discerned save in a strong light.  When Mrs. Heaven goes
out into the orchard in search of him, I can hardly help calling from my
window, "Bear a trifle to the right, Mrs. Heaven--now to the left--just
in front of you now--if you put out your hands you will touch him."

Phoebe, aged seventeen, is the daughter of the house.  She is virtuous,
industrious, conscientious, and singularly destitute of physical charm.
She is more than plain; she looks as if she had been planned without any
definite purpose in view, made of the wrong materials, been badly put
together, and never properly finished off; but "plain" after all is a
relative word.  Many a plain girl has been married for her beauty; and
now and then a beauty, falling under a cold eye, has been thought plain.

Phoebe has her compensations, for she is beloved by, and reciprocates the
passion of, the Woodmancote carrier, Woodmucket being the English manner
of pronouncing the place of his abode.  If he "carries" as energetically
for the great public as he fetches for Phoebe, then he must be a rising
and a prosperous man.  He brings her daily, wild strawberries, cherries,
birds' nests, peacock feathers, sea-shells, green hazel-nuts, samples of
hens' food, or bouquets of wilted field flowers tied together tightly and
held with a large, moist, loving hand.  He has fine curly hair of sandy
hue, which forms an aureole on his brow, and a reddish beard, which makes
another inverted aureole to match, round his chin.  One cannot look at
him, especially when the sun shines through him, without thinking how
lovely he would be if stuffed and set on wheels, with a little string to
drag him about.

{The Woodmancote carrier: p13.jpg}

Phoebe confided to me that she was on the eve of loving the postman when
the carrier came across her horizon.

"It doesn't do to be too hysty, does it, miss?" she asked me as we were
weeding the onion bed.  "I was to give the postman his answer on the
Monday night, and it was on the Monday morning that Mr. Gladwish made his
first trip here as carrier.  I may say I never wyvered from that moment,
and no more did he.  When I think how near I came to promising the
postman it gives me a turn."  (I can understand that, for I once met the
man I nearly promised years before to marry, and we both experienced such
a sense of relief at being free instead of bound that we came near
falling in love for sheer joy.)

{Picture of toy on wheels: p14.jpg}

The last and most important member of the household is the Square Baby.
His name is Albert Edward, and he is really five years old and no baby at
all; but his appearance on this planet was in the nature of a complete
surprise to all parties concerned, and he is spoiled accordingly.  He has
a square head and jaw, square shoulders, square hands and feet.  He is
red and white and solid and stolid and slow-witted, as the young of his
class commonly are, and will make a bulwark of the nation in course of
time, I should think; for England has to produce a few thousand such
square babies every year for use in the colonies and in the standing
army.  Albert Edward has already a military gait, and when he has
acquired a habit of obedience at all comparable with his power of
command, he will be able to take up the white man's burden with
distinguished success.  Meantime I can never look at him without
marvelling how the English climate can transmute bacon and eggs, tea and
the solid household loaf into such radiant roses and lilies as bloom upon
his cheeks and lips.




CHAPTER III


July 8th.

Thornycroft is by way of being a small poultry farm.

In reaching it from Barbury Green, you take the first left-hand road, go
till you drop, and there you are.

It reminds me of my "grandmother's farm at Older."  Did you know the song
when you were a child?--

   My grandmother had a very fine farm
      'Way down in the fields of Older.
         With a cluck-cluck here,
         And a cluck-cluck there,
         Here and there a cluck-cluck,
         Cluck-cluck here and there,
      Down in the fields at Older.

It goes on for ever by the simple subterfuge of changing a few words in
each verse.

   My grandmother had a very fine farm
      'Way down in the fields of Older.
         With a quack-quack here,
         And a quack-quack there,
         Here and there a quack-quack,
         Quack-quack here and there,
      Down in the fields at Older.

This is followed by the gobble-gobble, moo-moo, baa-baa, etc., as long as
the laureate's imagination and the infant's breath hold good.  The tune
is pretty, and I do not know, or did not, when I was young, a more
fascinating lyric.

{The sitting hens: p17.jpg}

Thornycroft House must have belonged to a country gentleman once upon a
time, or to more than one; men who built on a bit here and there once in
a hundred years, until finally we have this charmingly irregular and
dilapidated whole.  You go up three steps into Mrs. Heaven's room, down
two into mine, while Phoebe's is up in a sort of turret with long, narrow
lattices opening into the creepers.  There are crooked little
stair-cases, passages that branch off into other passages and lead
nowhere in particular; I can't think of a better house in which to play
hide and seek on a wet day.  In front, what was once, doubtless, a green,
is cut up into greens; to wit, a vegetable garden, where the onions,
turnips, and potatoes grow cosily up to the very door-sill; the
utilitarian aspect of it all being varied by some scarlet-runners and a
scattering of poppies on either side of the path.

The Belgian hares have their habitation in a corner fifty feet distant;
one large enclosure for poultry lies just outside the sweetbrier hedge;
the others, with all the houses and coops, are in the meadow at the back,
where also our tumbler pigeons are kept.

Phoebe attends to the poultry; it is her department.  Mr. Heaven has
neither the force nor the _finesse_ required, and the gentle reader who
thinks these qualities unneeded in so humble a calling has only to spend
a few days at Thornycroft to be convinced.  Mrs. Heaven would be of use,
but she is dressing the Square Baby in the morning and putting him to bed
at night just at the hours when the feathered young things are undergoing
the same operation.

A Goose Girl, like a poet, is sometimes born, sometimes otherwise.  I am
of the born variety.  No training was necessary; I put my head on my
pillow as a complicated product of modern civilisation on a Tuesday
night, and on a Wednesday morning I awoke as a Goose Girl.

{Hens . . . go to bed at a virtuous hour: p19.jpg}

My destiny slumbered during the day, but at eight o'clock I heard a
terrific squawking in the direction of the duck-ponds, and, aimlessly
drifting in that direction, I came upon Phoebe trying to induce ducks and
drakes, geese and ganders, to retire for the night.  They have to be
driven into enclosures behind fences of wire netting, fastened into
little rat-proof boxes, or shut into separate coops, so as to be safe
from their natural enemies, the rats and foxes; which, obeying, I
suppose, the law of supply and demand, abound in this neighbourhood.  The
old ganders are allowed their liberty, being of such age, discretion,
sagacity, and pugnacity that they can be trusted to fight their own
battles.

{Ducks and geese . . . would roam the streets till morning: p20.jpg}

The intelligence of hens, though modest, is of such an order that it
prompts them to go to bed at a virtuous hour of their own accord; but
ducks and geese have to be materially assisted, or I believe they would
roam till morning.  Never did small boy detest and resist being carried
off to his nursery as these dullards, young and old, detest and resist
being driven to theirs.  Whether they suffer from insomnia, or nightmare,
or whether they simply prefer the sweet air of liberty (and death) to the
odour of captivity and the coop, I have no means of knowing.

{The pole was not long enough: p21.jpg}

Phoebe stood by one of the duck-ponds, a long pole in her hand, and a
helpless expression in that doughlike countenance of hers, where aimless
contours and features unite to make a kind of facial blur.  (What does
the carrier see in it?)  The pole was not long enough to reach the ducks,
and Phoebe's method lacked spirit and adroitness, so that it was natural,
perhaps, that they refused to leave the water, the evening being warm,
with an uncommon fine sunset.

{They . . . waddle under the wrong fence: p22.jpg}

I saw the situation at once and ran to meet it with a glow of interest
and anticipation.  If there is anything in the world I enjoy, it is
making somebody do something that he doesn't want to do; and if, when
victory perches upon my banner, the somebody can be brought to say that
he ought to have done it without my making him, that adds the
unforgettable touch to pleasure, though seldom, alas! does it happen.
Then ensued the delightful and stimulating hour that has now become a
feature of the day; an hour in which the remembrance of the table-d'hote
dinner at the Hydro, going on at identically the same time, only stirs me
to a keener joy and gratitude.

{Honking and hissing like a bewildered orchestra: p23.jpg}

{Harried and pecked by the big geese: p24.jpg}

The ducks swim round in circles, hide under the willows, and attempt to
creep into the rat-holes in the banks, a stupidity so crass that it
merits instant death, which it somehow always escapes.  Then they come
out in couples and waddle under the wrong fence into the lower meadow,
fly madly under the tool-house, pitch blindly in with the sitting hens,
and out again in short order, all the time quacking and squawking,
honking and hissing like a bewildered orchestra.  By dint of splashing
the water with poles, throwing pebbles, beating the shrubs at the pond's
edges, "shooing" frantically with our skirts, crawling beneath bars to
head them off, and prodding them from under bushes to urge them on, we
finally get the older ones out of the water and the younger ones into
some sort of relation to their various retreats; but, owing to their lack
of geography, hatred of home, and general recalcitrancy, they none of
them turn up in the right place and have to be sorted out.  We uncover
the top of the little house, or the enclosure as it may be, or reach in
at the door, and, seizing the struggling victim, drag him forth and take
him where he should have had the wit to go in the first instance.  The
weak ones get in with the strong and are in danger of being trampled; two
May goslings that look almost full-grown have run into a house with a
brood of ducklings a week old.  There are twenty-seven crowded into one
coop, five in another, nineteen in another; the gosling with one leg has
to come out, and the duckling threatened with the gapes; their place is
with the "invaleeds," as Phoebe calls them, but they never learn the
location of the hospital, nor have the slightest scruple about spreading
contagious diseases.

{In solitary splendour: p25.jpg}

Finally, when we have separated and sorted exhaustively, an operation in
which Phoebe shows a delicacy of discrimination and a fearlessness of
attack amounting to genius, we count the entire number and find several
missing.  Searching for their animate or inanimate bodies, we "scoop" one
from under the tool-house, chance upon two more who are being harried and
pecked by the big geese in the lower meadow, and discover one sailing by
himself in solitary splendour in the middle of the deserted pond, a look
of evil triumph in his bead-like eye.  Still we lack one young duckling,
and he at length is found dead by the hedge.  A rat has evidently seized
him and choked him at a single throttle, but in such haste that he has
not had time to carry away the tiny body.

"Poor think!" says Phoebe tearfully; "it looks as if it was 'it with some
kind of a wepping.  I don't know whatever to do with the rats, they're
gettin' that fearocious!"

Before I was admitted into daily contact with the living goose (my
previous intercourse with him having been carried on when gravy and
stuffing obscured his true personality), I thought him a very Dreyfus
among fowls, a sorely slandered bird, to whom justice had never been
done; for even the gentle Darwin is hard upon him.  My opinion is
undergoing some slight modifications, but I withhold judgment at present,
hoping that some of the follies, faults, vagaries, and limitations that I
observe in Phoebe's geese may be due to Phoebe's educational methods,
which were, before my advent, those of the darkest ages.




CHAPTER IV


{Dryshod warnings which are never heeded: p27.jpg}

July 9th.

By the time the ducks and geese are incarcerated for the night, the
reasonable, sensible, practical-minded hens--especially those whose
mentality is increased and whose virtue is heightened by the
responsibilities of motherhood--have gone into their own particular rat-
proof boxes, where they are waiting in a semi-somnolent state to have the
wire doors closed, the bricks set against them, and the bits of sacking
flung over the tops to keep out the draught.  We have a great many young
families, both ducklings and chicks, but we have no duck mothers at
present.  The variety of bird which Phoebe seems to have bred during the
past year may be called the New Duck, with certain radical ideas about
woman's sphere.  What will happen to Thornycroft if we develop a New Hen
and a New Cow, my imagination fails to conceive.  There does not seem to
be the slightest danger for the moment, however, and our hens lay and sit
and sit and lay as if laying and sitting were the twin purposes of life.

{The mother goes off to bed: p28.jpg}

The nature of the hen seems to broaden with the duties of maternity, but
I think myself that we presume a little upon her amiability and natural
motherliness.  It is one thing to desire a family of one's own, to lay
eggs with that idea in view, to sit upon them three long weeks and hatch
out and bring up a nice brood of chicks.  It must be quite another to
have one's eggs abstracted day by day and eaten by a callous public, the
nest filled with deceitful substitutes, and at the end of a dull and
weary period of hatching to bring into the world another person's
children--children, too, of the wrong size, the wrong kind of bills and
feet, and, still more subtle grievance, the wrong kind of instincts,
leading them to a dangerous aquatic career, one which the mother may not
enter to guide, guard, and teach; one on the brink of which she must ever
stand, uttering dryshod warnings which are never heeded.  They grow used
to this strange order of things after a bit, it is true, and are less
anxious and excited.  When the duck-brood returns safely again and again
from what the hen-mother thinks will prove a watery grave, she becomes
accustomed to the situation, I suppose.  I find that at night she stands
by the pond for what she considers a decent, self-respecting length of
time, calling the ducklings out of the water; then, if they refuse to
come, the mother goes off to bed and leaves them to Providence, or Phoebe.

{Cornelia and the web-footed Gracchi: p29.jpg}

The brown hen that we have named Cornelia is the best mother, the one who
waits longest and most patiently for the web-footed Gracchi to finish
their swim.

When a chick is taken out of the incubytor (as Phoebe calls it) and
refused by all the other hens, Cornelia generally accepts it, though she
had twelve of her own when we began using her as an orphan asylum.  "Wings
are made to stretch," she seems to say cheerfully, and with a kind glance
of her round eye she welcomes the wanderer and the outcast.  She even
tended for a time the offspring of an absent-minded, light-headed
pheasant who flew over a four-foot wall and left her young behind her to
starve; it was not a New Pheasant, either; for the most conservative and
old-fashioned of her tribe occasionally commits domestic solecisms of
this sort.

{An orphan asylum: p30.jpg}

There is no telling when, where, or how the maternal instinct will assert
itself.  Among our Thornycroft cats is a certain Mrs. Greyskin.  She had
not been seen for many days, and Mrs. Heaven concluded that she had
hidden herself somewhere with a family of kittens; but as the supply of
that article with us more than equals the demand, we had not searched for
her with especial zeal.

{Phoebe and I followed her stealthily: p31.jpg}

The other day Mrs. Greyskin appeared at the dairy door, and when she had
been fed Phoebe and I followed her stealthily, from a distance.  She
walked slowly about as if her mind were quite free from harassing care,
and finally approached a deserted cow-house where there was a great mound
of straw.  At this moment she caught sight of us and turned in another
direction to throw us off the scent.  We persevered in our intention of
going into her probable retreat, and were cautiously looking for some
sign of life in the haymow, when we heard a soft cackle and a ruffling of
plumage.  Coming closer to the sound we saw a black hen brooding a nest,
her bright bead eyes turning nervously from side to side; and, coaxed out
from her protecting wings by youthful curiosity, came four kittens, eyes
wide open, warm, happy, ready for sport!

The sight was irresistible, and Phoebe ran for Mr. and Mrs. Heaven and
the Square Baby.  Mother Hen was not to be embarrassed or daunted, even
if her most sacred feelings were regarded in the light of a cheap
entertainment.  She held her ground while one of the kits slid up and
down her glossy back, and two others, more timid, crept underneath her
breast, only daring to put out their pink noses!  We retired then for
very shame and met Mrs. Greyskin in the doorway.  This should have
thickened the plot, but there is apparently no rivalry nor animosity
between the co-mothers.  We watch them every day now, through a window in
the roof.  Mother Greyskin visits the kittens frequently, lies down
beside the home nest, and gives them their dinner.  While this is going
on Mother Blackwing goes modestly away for a bite, a sup, and a little
exercise, returning to the kittens when the cat leaves them.  It is
pretty to see her settle down over the four, fat, furry dumplings, and
they seem to know no difference in warmth or comfort, whichever mother is
brooding them; while, as their eyes have been open for a week, it can no
longer be called a blind error on their part.

{Coaxed out . . . by youthful curiosity: p33.jpg}

When we have closed all our small hen-nurseries for the night, there is
still the large house inhabited by the thirty-two full-grown chickens
which Phoebe calls the broilers.  I cannot endure the term, and will not
use it.  "Now for the April chicks," I say every evening.

"Do you mean the broilers?" asks Phoebe.

"I mean the big April chicks," say I.

"Yes, them are the broilers," says she.

But is it not disagreeable enough to be a broiler when one's time comes,
without having the gridiron waved in one's face for weeks beforehand?

{Nine huddle together: p34.jpg}

The April chicks are all lively and desirous of seeing the world as
thoroughly as possible before going to roost or broil.  As a general
thing, we find in the large house sixteen young fowls of the
contemplative, flavourless, resigned-to-the-inevitable variety; three
more (the same three every night) perch on the roof and are driven down;
four (always the same four) cling to the edge of the open door, waiting
to fly off, but not in, when you attempt to close it; nine huddle
together on a place in the grass about forty feet distant, where a small
coop formerly stood in the prehistoric ages.  This small coop was one in
which they lodged for a fortnight when they were younger, and when those
absolutely indelible impressions are formed of which we read in
educational maxims.  It was taken away long since, but the nine loyal (or
stupid) Casabiancas cling to the sacred spot where its foundations
rested; they accordingly have to be caught and deposited bodily in the
house, and this requires strategy, as they note our approach from a
considerable distance.

{Of a wandering mind: p35.jpg}

Finally all are housed but two, the little white cock and the black
pullet, who are still impish and of a wandering mind.  Though headed off
in every direction, they fly into the hedges and hide in the underbrush.
We beat the hedge on the other side, but with no avail.  We dive into the
thicket of wild roses, sweetbrier, and thistles on our hands and knees,
coming out with tangled hair, scratched noses, and no hens.  Then, when
all has been done that human ingenuity can suggest, Phoebe goes to her
late supper and I do sentry-work.  I stroll to a safe distance, and,
sitting on one of the rat-proof boxes, watch the bushes with an eagle
eye.  Five minutes go by, ten, fifteen; and then out steps the white
cock, stealthily tiptoeing toward the home into which he refused to go at
our instigation.  In a moment out creeps the obstinate little beast of a
black pullet from the opposite clump.  The wayward pair meet at their own
door, which I have left open a few inches.  When all is still I walk
gently down the field, and, warned by previous experiences, approach the
house from behind.  I draw the door to softly and quickly; but not so
quickly that the evil-minded and suspicious black pullet hasn't time to
spring out, with a make-believe squawk of fright--that induces three
other blameless chickens to fly down from their perches and set the whole
flock in a flutter.  Then I fall from grace and call her a Broiler; and
when, after some minutes of hot pursuit, I catch her by falling over her
in the corner by the goose-pen, I address her as a fat, juicy Broiler
with parsley butter and a bit of bacon.

{With tangled hair, scratched noses, and no hens: p36.jpg}




CHAPTER V


July 10th.

At ten thirty or so in the morning the cackling begins.  I wonder exactly
what it means!  Have the forest-lovers who listen so respectfully to, and
interpret so exquisitely, the notes of birds--have none of them made
psychological investigations of the hen cackle?  Can it be simple
elation?  One could believe that of the first few eggs, but a hen who has
laid two or three hundred can hardly feel the same exuberant pride and
joy daily.  Can it be the excitement incident to successful achievement?
Hardly, because the task is so extremely simple.  Eggs are more or less
alike; a little larger or smaller, a trifle whiter or browner; and almost
sure to be quite right as to details; that is, the big end never gets
confused with the little end, they are always ovoid and never spherical,
and the yolk is always inside of the white.  As for a soft-shelled egg,
it is so rare an occurrence that the fear of laying one could not set the
whole race of hens in a panic; so there really cannot be any intellectual
or emotional agitation in producing a thing that might be made by a
machine.  Can it be simply "fussiness"; since the people who have the
least to do commonly make the most flutter about doing it?

Perhaps it is merely conversation.  "_Cut-cut-cut-cut-cut_-DAH_cut_! . . .
I have finished my strictly fresh egg, have you laid yours?  Make
haste, then, for the cock has found a gap in the wire-fence and wants us
to wander in the strawberry-bed. . . . Cut-cut-cut-cut-cut-DAH_cut_ . . .
Every moment is precious, for the Goose Girl will find us, when she
gathers the strawberries for her luncheon . . . Cut-cut-cut-cut!  On the
way out we can find sweet places to steal nests . . . Cut-cut-cut! . . .
I am so glad I am not sitting this heavenly morning; it _is_ a dull
life."

A Lancashire poultryman drifted into Barbury Green yesterday.  He is an
old acquaintance of Mr. Heaven, and spent the night and part of the next
day at Thornycroft Farm.  He possessed a deal of fowl philosophy, and
tells many a good hen story, which, like fish stories, draw rather
largely on the credulity of the audience.  We were sitting in the
rickyard talking comfortably about laying and cackling and kindred
matters when he took his pipe from his mouth and told us the following
tale--not a bad one if you can translate the dialect:--

'Aw were once towd as, if yo' could only get th' hen's egg away afooar
she hed sin it, th' hen 'ud think it hed med a mistek an' sit deawn
ageean an' lay another.

"An' it seemed to me it were a varra sensible way o' lukkin' at it.  Sooa
aw set to wark to mek a nest as 'ud tek a rise eawt o' th' hens.  An' aw
dud it too.  Aw med a nest wi' a fause bottom, th' idea bein' as when a
hen hed laid, th' egg 'ud drop through into a box underneyth.

"Aw felt varra preawd o' that nest, too, aw con tell yo', an' aw remember
aw felt quite excited when aw see an awd black Minorca, th' best layer as
aw hed, gooa an' settle hersel deawn i' th' nest an' get ready for wark.
Th' hen seemed quite comfortable enough, aw were glad to see, an' geet
through th' operation beawt ony seemin' trouble.

"Well, aw darsay yo' know heaw a hen carries on as soon as it's laid a
egg.  It starts "chuckin'" away like a showman's racket, an' after
tekkin' a good Ink at th' egg to see whether it's a big 'un or a little
'un, gooas eawt an' tells all t'other hens abeawt it.

"Neaw, this black Minorca, as aw sed, were a owdish bird, an' maybe knew
mooar than aw thowt.  Happen it hed laid on a nest wi' a fause bottom
afooar, an' were up to th' trick, but whether or not, aw never see a hen
luk mooar disgusted i' mi life when it lukked i' th' nest an' see as it
hed hed all that trouble fer nowt.

"It woked reawnd th' nest as if it couldn't believe its own eyes.

"But it dudn't do as aw expected.  Aw expected as it 'ud sit deawn ageean
an' lay another.

"But it just gi'e one wonderin' sooart o' chuck, an then, after a long
stare reawnd th' hen-coyt, it woked eawt, as mad a hen as aw've ever sin.
Aw fun' eawt after, what th' long stare meant.  It were tekkin' farewell!
For if yo'll believe me that hen never laid another egg i' ony o' my
nests.

"Varra like it laid away in a spot wheear it could hev summat to luk at
when it hed done wark for th' day.

"Sooa aw lost mi best layer through mi actin', an' aw've never invented
owt sen."




CHAPTER VI


One learns to be modest by living on a poultry farm, for there are
constant expositions of the most deplorable vanity among the cocks.  We
have a couple of pea-fowl who certainly are an addition to the landscape,
as they step mincingly along the square of turf we dignify by the name of
lawn.  The head of the house has a most languid and self-conscious strut,
and his microscopic mind is fixed entirely on his splendid trailing tail.
If I could only master his language sufficiently to tell him how
hideously ugly the back view of this gorgeous fan is, when he spreads it
for the edification of the observer in front of him, he would of course
retort that there is a "congregation side" to everything, but I should at
least force him into a defence of his tail and a confession of its
limitations.  This would be new and unpleasant, I fancy; and if it
produced no perceptible effect upon his super-arrogant demeanour, I might
remind him that he is likely to be used, eventually, for a feather
duster, unless, indeed, the Heavens are superstitious and prefer to throw
his tail away, rather than bring ill luck and the evil eye into the
house.

{More pride of bearing, and less to be proud of: p43.jpg}

The longer I study the cock, whether Black Spanish, White Leghorn,
Dorking, or the common barnyard fowl, the more intimately I am acquainted
with him, the less I am impressed with his character.  He has more pride
of bearing, and less to be proud of, than any bird I know.  He is
indolent, though he struts pompously over the grass as if the day were
all too short for his onerous duties.  He calls the hens about him when I
throw corn from the basket, but many a time I have seen him swallow
hurriedly, and in private, some dainty titbit he has found unexpectedly.
He has no particular chivalry.  He gives no special encouragement to his
hen when he becomes a prospective father, and renders little assistance
when the responsibilities become actualities.  His only personal message
or contribution to the world is his raucous cock-a-doodle-doo, which,
being uttered most frequently at dawn, is the most ill-timed and
offensive of all musical notes.  It is so unnecessary too, as if the day
didn't come soon enough without his warning; but I suppose he is anxious
to waken his hens and get them at their daily task, and so he disturbs
the entire community.  In short, I dislike him; his swagger, his
autocratic strut, his greed, his irritating self-consciousness, his
endless parading of himself up and down in a procession of one.

Of course his character is largely the result of polygamy.  His
weaknesses are only what might be expected; and as for the hens, I have
considerable respect for the patience, sobriety, and dignity with which
they endure an institution particularly offensive to all women.  In their
case they do not even have the sustaining thought of its being an article
of religion, so they are to be complimented the more.

There is nothing on earth so feminine as a hen--not womanly, simply
feminine.  Those men of insight who write the Woman's Page in the Sunday
newspapers study hens more than women, I sometimes think; at any rate,
their favourite types are all present on this poultry farm.

Some families of White Leghorns spend most of their time in the rickyard,
where they look extremely pretty, their slender white shapes and red
combs and wattles well set off by the background of golden hayricks.
There is a great oak-tree in one corner, with a tall ladder leaning
against its trunk, and a capital roosting-place on a long branch running
at right angles with the ladder.  I try to spend a quarter of an hour
there every night before supper, just for the pleasure of seeing the
feathered "women-folks" mount that ladder.

A dozen of them surround the foot, waiting restlessly for their turn.  One
little white lady flutters up on the lowest round and perches there until
she reviews the past, faces the present, and forecasts the future; during
which time she is gathering courage for the next jump.  She cackles,
takes up one foot and then the other, tilts back and forth, holds up her
skirts and drops them again, cocks her head nervously to see whether they
are all staring at her below, gives half a dozen preliminary springs
which mean nothing, declares she can't and won't go up any faster, unties
her bonnet strings and pushes back her hair, pulls down her dress to
cover her toes, and finally alights on the next round, swaying to and fro
until she gains her equilibrium, when she proceeds to enact the same
scene over again.

All this time the hens at the foot of the ladder are criticising her
methods and exclaiming at the length of time she requires in mounting;
while the cocks stroll about the yard keeping one eye on the ladder,
picking up a seed here and there, and giving a masculine sneer now and
then at the too-familiar scene.  They approach the party at intervals,
but only to remark that it always makes a man laugh to see a woman go up
a ladder.  The next hen, stirred to the depths by this speech, flies up
entirely too fast, loses her head, tumbles off the top round, and has to
make the ascent over again.  Thus it goes on and on, this _petite comedie
humaine_, and I could enjoy it with my whole heart if Mr. Heaven did not
insist on sharing the spectacle with me.  He is so inexpressibly dull, so
destitute of humour, that I did not think it likely he would see in the
performance anything more than a flock of hens going up a ladder to
roost.  But he did; for there is no man so blind that he cannot see the
follies of women; and, when he forgot himself so far as to utter a few
genial, silly, well-worn reflections upon femininity at large, I turned
upon him and revealed to him some of the characteristics of his own sex,
gained from an exhaustive study of the barnyard fowl of the masculine
gender.  He went into the house discomfited, though chuckling a little at
my vehemence; but at least I have made it for ever impossible for him to
watch his hens without an occasional glance at the cocks.

{Mr. Heaven discomfited: p46.jpg}




CHAPTER VII


July 12th.

O the pathos of a poultry farm!  Catherine of Aragon, the black Spanish
hen that stole her nest, brought out nine chicks this morning, and the
business-like and marble-hearted Phoebe has taken them away and given
them to another hen who has only seven.  Two mothers cannot be wasted on
these small families--it would not be profitable; and the older mother,
having been tried and found faithful over seven, has been given the other
nine and accepted them.  What of the bereft one?  She is miserable and
stands about moping and forlorn, but it is no use fighting against the
inevitable; hens' hearts must obey the same laws that govern the rotation
of crops.  Catherine of Aragon feels her lot a bitter one just now, but
in time she will succumb, and lay, which is more to the point.

We have had a very busy evening, beginning with the rats' supper--delicate
sandwiches of bread-and-butter spread with Paris green.

We have a new brood of seventeen ducklings just hatched this afternoon.
When we came to the nest the yellow and brown bunches of down and fluff
were peeping out from under the hen's wings in the prettiest fashion in
the world.

"It's a noble hen!" I said to Phoebe.

"She ain't so nowble as she looks," Phoebe answered grimly.  "It was
another 'en that brooded these eggs for near on three weeks and then this
big one come along with a fancy she'd like a family 'erself if she could
steal one without too much trouble; so she drove the rightful 'en off the
nest, finished up the last few days, and 'ere she is in possession of the
ducklings!"

"Why don't you take them away from her and give them back to the first
hen, who did most of the work?" I asked, with some spirit.

"Like as not she wouldn't tyke them now," said Phoebe, as she lifted the
hen off the broken egg-shells and moved her gently into a clean box, on a
bed of fresh hay.  We put food and drink within reach of the family, and
very proud and handsome that highway robber of a hen looked, as she
stretched her wings over the seventeen easily-earned ducklings.

Going back to the old nesting-box, I found one egg forgotten among the
shells.  It was still warm, and I took it up to run across the field with
it to Phoebe.  It was heavy, and the carrying of it was a queer
sensation, inasmuch as it squirmed and "yipped" vociferously in transit,
threatening so unmistakably to hatch in my hand that I was decidedly
nervous.  The intrepid little youngster burst his shell as he touched
Phoebe's apron, and has become the strongest and handsomest of the brood.

All this tending of downy young things, this feeding and putting to bed,
this petting and nursing and rearing, is such pretty, comforting woman's
work.  I am sure Phoebe will make a better wife to the carrier for having
been a poultry-maid, and though good enough for most practical purposes
when I came here, I am an infinitely better woman now.  I am afraid I was
not particularly nice the last few days at the Hydro.  Such a lot of
dull, prosy, inquisitive, bothering old tabbies!  Aunt Margaret
furnishing imaginary symptoms enough to keep a fond husband and two
trained nurses distracted; a man I had never encouraged in my life coming
to stay in the neighbourhood and turning up daily for rejection; another
man taking rooms at the very hotel with the avowed purpose of making my
life a burden; and on the heels of both, a widow of thirty-five in full
chase!  Small wonder I thought it more dignified to retire than to
compete, and so I did.

I need not, however, have cut the threads that bound me to Oxenbridge
with such particularly sharp scissors, nor given them such a vicious
snap; for, so far as I can observe, the little world of which I imagined
myself the sun continues to revolve, and, probably, about some other
centre.  I can well imagine who has taken up that delightful but somewhat
exposed and responsible position--it would be just like her!

{Threatened . . . to hatch in my hand: p51.jpg}

I am perfectly happy where I am; it is not that; but it seems so strange
that they can be perfectly happy without me, after all that they--after
all that was said on the subject not many days ago.  Nothing turns out as
one expects.  There have been no hot pursuits, no rewards offered, no
bills posted, no printed placards issued describing the beauty and charms
of a young person who supposed herself the cynosure of every eye.  Heigh-
ho!  What does it matter, after all?  One can always be a Goose Girl!

* * * * *

I wonder if the hen mother is quite, quite satisfied with her ducklings!
Do you suppose the fact of hatching and brooding them breaks down all the
sense of difference?  Does she not sometimes reflect that if her children
were the ordinary sort, and not these changelings, she would be enjoying
certain pretty little attentions dear to a mother's heart?  The chicks
would be pecking the food off her broad beak with their tiny ones, and
jumping on her back to slide down her glossy feathers.  They would be far
nicer to cuddle, too, so small and graceful and light; the changelings
are a trifle solid and brawny.  And personally, just as a matter of
taste, would she not prefer wee, round, glancing heads, and pointed
beaks, peeping from under her wings, to these teaspoon-shaped things
larger than her own?  I wonder!

We are training fourteen large young chickens to sit on the perches in
their new house, instead of huddling together on the floor as has been
their habit, because we discover rat-holes under the wire flooring
occasionally, and fear that toes may be bitten.  At nine o'clock Phoebe
and I lift the chickens one by one, and, as it were, glue them to their
perches, squawking.  Three nights have we gone patiently through with
this performance, but they have not learned the lesson.  The ducks and
geese are, however, greatly improved by the application of advanced
educational methods, and the _regime_ of perfect order and system
instituted by Me begins to show results.

{One can always be a Goose Girl: p53.jpg}

There is no more violent splashing and pebbling, racing, chasing,
separating.  The pole, indeed, still has to be produced, but at the first
majestic wave of my hand they scuttle toward the shore.  The geese turn
to the right, cross the rickyard, and go to their pen; the May ducks turn
to the left for their coops, the June ducks follow the hens to the top
meadow, and even the idiot gosling has an inspiration now and then and
stumbles on his own habitation.

{The geese . . . cross the rickyard: p54.jpg}

Mrs. Heaven has no reverence for the principles of Comenius, Pestalozzi,
or Herbert Spencer as applied to poultry, and when the ducks and geese
came out of the pond badly the other night and went waddling and tumbling
and hissing all over creation, did not approve of my sending them back
into the pond to start afresh.

"I consider it a great waste of time, of good time, miss," she said;
"and, after all, do you consider that educated poultry will be any better
eating, or that it will lay more than one egg a day, miss?"

I have given the matter some attention, and I fear Mrs. Heaven is right.
A duck, a goose, or a hen in which I have developed a larger brain,
implanted a sense of duty, or instilled an idea of self-government, is
likely, on the whole, to be leaner, not fatter.  There is nothing like
obeying the voice of conscience for taking the flesh off one's bones;
and, speaking of conscience, Phoebe, whose metaphysics are of the farm
farmy, says that hers "felt like a hunlaid hegg for dyes" after she had
jilted the postman.

As to the eggs, I am sure the birds will go on laying one a day for 'tis
their nature to.  Whether the product of the intelligent, conscious,
logical fowl, will be as rich in quality as that of the uneducated and
barbaric bird, I cannot say; but it ought at least to be equal to the
Denmark egg eaten now by all Londoners; and if, perchance, left uneaten,
it is certain to be a very superior wife and mother.

While we are discussing the subject of educating poultry, I confess that
the case of Cannibal Ann gives me much anxiety.  Twice in her short
career has she been under suspicion of eating her own eggs, but Phoebe
has never succeeded in catching her _in flagrante delicto_.  That eminent
detective service was reserved for me, and I have been haunted by the
picture ever since.  It is an awful sight to witness a hen gulp her own
newly-laid fresh egg, yolk, white, shell, and all; to realise that you
have fed, sheltered, chased, and occasionally run in, a being possessed
of no moral sense, a being likely to set a bad example, inculcate vicious
habits among her innocent sisters, and lower the standard of an entire
poultry-yard.  _The Young Poultry Keeper's Friend_ gives us no advice on
this topic, and we do not know whether to treat Cannibal Ann as the
victim of a disease, or as a confirmed criminal; whether to administer
remedies or cut her off in the flower of her youth.

{Poor little chap, . . . 'e never was a fyvorite: p56.jpg}

We have had a sad scene to-night.  A chick has been ailing all day, and
when we shut up the brood we found him dead in a corner.

Phoebe put him on the ground while she busied herself about the coop.  The
other chicks came out and walked about the dead one again and again,
eyeing him curiously.

"Poor little chap!" said Phoebe.  "'E's never 'ad a mother!  'E was an
incubytor chicken, and wherever I took 'im 'e was picked at.  There was
somethink wrong with 'im; 'e never was a fyvorite!"

I put the fluffy body into a hole in the turf, and strewed a handful of
grass over him.  "Sad little epitaph!" I thought.  "He never was a
fyvorite!"




CHAPTER VIII


July 13th.

I like to watch the Belgian hares eating their trifolium or pea-pods or
grass; graceful, gentle things they are, crowding about Mr. Heaven, and
standing prettily, not greedily, on their hind legs, to reach for the
clover, their delicate nostrils and whiskers all a-quiver with
excitement.

As I look out of my window in the dusk I can see one of the mothers
galloping across the enclosure, the soft white lining of her tail acting
as a beacon-light to the eight infant hares following her, a quaint
procession of eight white spots in it glancing line.  In the darkest
night those baby creatures could follow their mother through grass or
hedge or thicket, and she would need no warning note to show them where
to flee in case of danger.  "All you have to do is to follow the white
night-light that I keep in the lining of my tail," she says, when she is
giving her first maternal lectures; and it seems a beneficent provision
of Nature.  To be sure, Mr. Heaven took his gun and went out to shoot
wild rabbits to-day, and I noted that he marked them by those same self-
betraying tails, as they scuttled toward their holes or leaped toward the
protecting cover of the hedge; so it does not appear whether Nature is on
the side of the farmer or the rabbit . . .

{Mr. Heaven . . . went out to shoot wild rabbits: p59.jpg}

There is as much comedy and as much tragedy in poultry life as anywhere,
and already I see rifts within lutes.  We have in a cage a French
gentleman partridge married to a Hungarian lady of defective sight.  He
paces back and forth in the pen restlessly, anything but content with the
domestic fireside.  One can see plainly that he is devoted to the
Boulevards, and that if left to his own inclinations he would never have
chosen any spouse but a thorough Parisienne.

The Hungarian lady is blind of one eye, from some stray shot, I suppose.
She is melancholy at all times, and occasionally goes so far as to beat
her head against the wire netting.  If liberated, Mr. Heaven says that
her blindness would only expose her to death at the hands of the first
sportsman, and it always seems to me as if she knows this, and is ever
trying to decide whether a loveless marriage is any better than the tomb.

Then, again, the great, grey gander is, for some mysterious reason, out
of favour with the entire family.  He is a noble and amiable bird, by far
the best all-round character in the flock, for dignity of mien and large-
minded common-sense.  What is the treatment vouchsafed to this blameless
husband and father?  One that puts anybody out of sorts with virtue and
its scant rewards.  To begin with, the others will not allow him to go
into the pond.  There is an organised cabal against it, and he sits
solitary on the bank, calm and resigned, but, naturally, a trifle hurt.
His favourite retreat is a tiny sort of island on the edge of the pool
under the alders, where with his bent head, and red-rimmed philosophic
eyes he regards his own breast and dreams of happier days.  When the
others walk into the country twenty-three of them keep together, and Burd
Alane (as I have named him from the old ballad) walks by himself.  The
lack of harmony is so evident here, and the slight so intentional and
direct, that it almost moves me to tears.  The others walk soberly,
always in couples, but even Burd Alane's rightful spouse is on the side
of the majority, and avoids her consort.

{Out of favour with the entire family: p61.jpg}

What is the nature of his offence?  There can be no connubial jealousies,
I judge, as geese are strictly monogamous, and having chosen a partner of
their joys and sorrows they cleave to each other until death or some
other inexorable circumstance does them part.  If they are ever mistaken
in their choice, and think they might have done better, the world is none
the wiser.  Burd Alane looks in good condition, but Phoebe thinks he is
not quite himself, and that some day when he is in greater strength he
will turn on his foes and rend them, regaining thus his lost prestige,
for formerly he was king of the flock.

* * * * *

Phoebe has not a vestige of sentiment.  She just asked me if I would have
a duckling or a gosling for dinner; that there were two quite ready--the
brown and yellow duckling, that is the last to leave the water at night,
and the white gosling that never knows his own 'ouse.  Which would I
'ave, and would I 'ave it with sage and onion?

Now, had I found a duckling on the table at dinner I should have eaten it
without thinking at all, or with the thought that it had come from
Barbury Green.  But eat a duckling that I have stoned out of the pond,
pursued up the bank, chased behind the wire netting, caught, screaming,
in a corner, and carried struggling to his bed?  Feed upon an idiot
gosling that I have found in nine different coops on nine successive
nights--in with the newly-hatched chicks, the half-grown pullets, the
setting hen, the "invaleed goose," the drake with the gapes, the old
ducks in the pen?--Eat a gosling that I have caught and put in with his
brothers and sisters (whom he never recognises) so frequently and
regularly that I am familiar with every joint in his body?

In the first place, with my own small bump of locality and lack of
geography, I would never willingly consume a creature who might, by some
strange process of assimilation, make me worse in this respect; in the
second place, I should have to be ravenous indeed to sit down
deliberately and make a meal of an intimate friend, no matter if I had
not a high opinion of his intelligence.  I should as soon think of eating
the Square Baby, stuffed with sage and onion and garnished with green
apple-sauce, as the yellow duckling or the idiot gosling.

Mrs. Heaven has just called me into her sitting-room, ostensibly to ask
me to order breakfast, but really for the pleasure of conversation.  Why
she should inquire whether I would relish some gammon of bacon with eggs,
when she knows that there has not been, is not now, and never will be,
anything but gammon of bacon with eggs, is more than I can explain.

"Would you like to see my flowers, miss?" she asks, folding her plump
hands over her white apron.  "They are looking beautiful this morning.  I
am so fond of potted plants, of plants in pots.  Look at these geraniums!
Now, I consider that pink one a perfect bloom; yes, a perfect bloom.  This
is a fine red one, is it not, miss?  Especially fine, don't you think?
The trouble with the red variety is that they're apt to get "bobby" and
have to be washed regularly; quite bobby they do get indeed, I assure
you.  That white one has just gone out of blossom, and it was really
wonderful.  You could 'ardly have told it from a paper flower, miss, not
from a white paper flower.  My plants are my children nowadays, since
Albert Edward is my only care.  I have been the mother of eleven
children, miss, all of them living, so far as I know; I know nothing to
the contrary.  I 'ope you are not wearying of this solitary place, miss?
It will grow upon you, I am sure, as it did upon Mrs. Pollock, with all
her peculiar fancies, and as it 'as grown upon us.--We formerly had a
butcher's shop in Buffington, and it was naturally a great
responsibility.  Mr. Heaven's nerves are not strong, and at last he
wanted a life of more quietude, more quietude was what he craved.  The
life of a retail butcher is a most exciting and wearying one.  Nobody
satisfied with their meat; as if it mattered in a world of change!
Everybody complaining of too much bone or too little fat; nobody wishing
tough chops or cutlets, but always seeking after fine joints, when it's
against reason and nature that all joints should be juicy and all cutlets
tender; always complaining if livers are not sent with every fowl, always
asking you to remember the trimmin's, always wanting their beef well
'ung, and then if you 'ang it a minute too long, it's left on your 'ands!
I often used to say to Mr. Heaven, yes many's the time I've said it, that
if people would think more of the great 'ereafter and less about their
own little stomachs, it would be a deal better for them, yes, a deal
better, and make it much more comfortable for the butchers!"

{The life . . . is a most exciting and wearying one: p65.jpg}

* * * * *

Burd Alane has had a good quarter of an hour to-day.

{His spouse took a brief promenade with him: p66.jpg}

His spouse took a brief promenade with him.  To be sure, it was during an
absence of the flock on the other side of the hedge so that the moral
effect of her spasm of wifely loyalty was quite lost upon them.  I
strongly suspect that she would not have granted anything but a secret
interview.  What a petty, weak, ignoble character!  I really don't like
to think so badly of any fellow-creature as I am forced to think of that
politic, time-serving, pusillanimous goose.  I believe she laid the egg
that produced the idiot gosling!




CHAPTER IX


Here follows the true story of Sir Muscovy Drake, the Lady Blanche, and
Miss Malardina Crippletoes.

Phoebe's flock consisted at first mostly of Brown Mallards, but a friend
gave her a sitting of eggs warranted to produce a most beautiful variety
of white ducks.  They were hatched in due time, but proved hard to raise,
till at length there was only one survivor, of such uncommon grace and
beauty that we called her the Lady Blanche.  Presently a neighbour sold
Phoebe his favourite Muscovy drake, and these two splendid creatures by
"natural selection" disdained to notice the rest of the flock, but
forming a close friendship, wandered in the pleasant paths of duckdom
together, swimming and eating quite apart from the others.

In the brown flock there was one unfortunate, misshapen from the egg,
quite lame, and with no smoothness of plumage; but on that very account,
apparently, or because she was too weak to resist them, the others
treated her cruelly, biting her and pushing her away from the food.

One day it happened that the two ducks--Sir Muscovy and Lady Blanche--had
come up from the water before the others, and having taken their repast
were sitting together under the shade of a flowering currant-bush, when
they chanced to see poor Miss Crippletoes very badly used and crowded
away from the dish.  Sir Muscovy rose to his feet; a few rapid words
seemed to pass between him and his mate, and then he fell upon the other
drake and the heartless minions who had persecuted the helpless one,
drove them far away out of sight, and, returning, went to the corner
where the victim was cowering, her face to the wall.  He seemed to
whisper to her, or in some way to convey to her a sense of protection;
for after a few moments she tremblingly went with him to the dish, and
hurriedly ate her dinner while he stood by, repulsing the advances of the
few brown ducks who remained near and seemed inclined to attack her.

When she had eaten enough Lady Blanche joined them, and they went down
the hill together to their favourite swimming-place.  After that Miss
Crippletoes always followed a little behind her protectors, and thus
shielded and fed she grew stronger and well-feathered, though she was
always smaller than she should have been and had a lowly manner, keeping
a few steps in the rear of her superiors and sitting at some distance
from their noon resting-place.

Phoebe noticed after a while that Lady Blanche was seldom to be seen, and
Sir Muscovy and Miss Crippletoes often came to their meals without her.
The would-be mother refused to inhabit the house Phoebe had given her,
and for a long time the place she had chosen for her sitting could not be
found.  At length the Square Baby discovered her in a most ideal spot.  A
large boulder had dropped years ago into the brook that fills our duck-
pond; dropped and split in halves with the two smooth walls leaning away
from each other.  A grassy bank towered behind, and on either side of the
opening, tall bushes made a miniature forest where the romantic mother
could brood her treasures while her two guardians enjoyed the water close
by her retreat.

All this happened before my coming to Thornycroft Farm, but it was I who
named the hero and heroines of the romance when Phoebe had told me all
the particulars.  Yesterday morning I was sitting by my open window.  It
was warm, sunny, and still, but in the country sounds travel far, and I
could hear fowl conversation in various parts of the poultry-yard as well
as in all the outlying bits of territory occupied by our feathered
friends.  Hens have only three words and a scream in their language, but
ducks, having more thoughts to express, converse quite fluently, so
fluently, in fact, that it reminds me of dinner at the Hydropathic Hotel.
I fancy I have learned to distinguish seven separate sounds, each varied
by degrees of intensity, and with upward or downward inflections like the
Chinese tongue.

In the distance, then, I heard the faint voice of a duck calling as if
breathless and excited.  While I wondered what was happening, I saw Miss
Crippletoes struggling up the steep bank above the duck-pond.  It was the
quickest way from the water to the house, but difficult for the little
lame webbed feet.  When she reached the level grass sward she sank down a
moment, exhausted; but when she could speak again she cried out, a sharp
staccato call, and ran forward.

Instantly she was answered from a distant knoll, where for some reason
Sir Muscovy loved to retire for meditation.  The cries grew lower and
softer as the birds approached each other, and they met at the corner
just under my window.  Instantly they put their two bills together and
the loud cries changed to confiding murmurs.  Evidently some hurried
questions and answers passed between them, and then Sir Muscovy waddled
rapidly by the quickest path, Miss Crippletoes following him at a slower
pace, and both passed out of sight, using their wings to help their feet
down the steep declivity.  The next morning, when I wakened early, my
first thought was to look out, and there on the sunny greensward where
they were accustomed to be fed, Sir Muscovy, Lady Blanche, and their
humble maid, Malardina Crippletoes, were scattering their own breakfast
before the bills of twelve beautiful golden balls of ducklings.  The
little creatures could never have climbed the bank, but must have started
from their nest at dawn, coming round by the brook to the level at the
foot of the garden, and so by slow degrees up to the house.

Judging from what I heard and knew of their habits, I am sure the
excitement of the previous morning was occasioned by the hatching of the
eggs, and that Lady Blanche had hastily sent her friend to call Sir
Muscovy, the family remaining together until they could bring the babies
with them and display their beauty to Phoebe and me.




CHAPTER X


July 14th.

We are not wholly without the pleasures of the town in Barbury Green.
Once or twice in a summer, late on a Saturday afternoon, a procession of
red and yellow vans drives into a field near the centre of the village.
By the time the vans are unpacked all the children in the community are
surrounding the gate of entrance.  There is rifle-shooting, there is
fortune-telling, there are games of pitch and toss, and swings, and
French bagatelle; and, to crown all, a wonderful orchestrion that goes by
steam.  The water is boiled for the public's tea, and at the same time
thrilling strains of melody are flung into the air.  There is at present
only one tune in the orchestrion's repertory, but it is a very good tune;
though after hearing it three hundred and seven times in a single
afternoon, it pursues one, sleeping and waking, for the next week.  Phoebe
and I took the Square Baby and went in to this diversified entertainment.
There was a small crowd of children at the entrance, but as none of them
seemed to be provided with pennies, and I felt in a fairy godmother mood,
I offered them the freedom of the place at my expense.

I never purchased more radiant good-will for less money, but the combined
effect of the well-boiled tea and the boiling orchestrion produced many
village nightmares, so the mothers told me at chapel next morning.

* * * * *

I have many friends in Barbury Green, and often have a pleasant chat with
the draper, and the watchmaker, and the chemist.

{The freedom of the place at my expense: p74.jpg}

The last house on the principal street is rather an ugly one, with
especially nice window curtains.  As I was taking my daily walk to the
post-office (an entirely unfruitful expedition thus far, as nobody has
taken the pains to write to me) I saw a nursemaid coming out of the gate,
wheeling a baby in a perambulator.  She was going placidly away from the
Green when, far in the distance, she espied a man walking rapidly toward
us, a heavy Gladstone bag in one hand.  She gazed fixedly for a moment,
her eyes brightening and her cheeks flushing with pleasure,--whoever it
was, it was an unexpected arrival;--then she retraced her steps and,
running up the garden-path, opened the front door and held an excited
colloquy with somebody; a slender somebody in a nice print gown and
neatly-dressed hair, who came to the gate and peeped beyond the hedge
several times, drawing back between peeps with smiles and heightened
colour.  She did not run down the road, even when she had satisfied
herself of the identity of the traveller; perhaps that would not have
been good form in an English village, for there were houses on the
opposite side of the way.  She waited until he opened the gate, the
nursemaid took the bag and looked discreetly into the hedge, then the
mistress slipped her hand through the traveller's arm and walked up the
path as if she had nothing else in the world to wish for.  The nurse had
a part in the joy, for she lifted the baby out of the perambulator and
showed proudly how much he had grown.

It was a dear little scene, and I, a passer-by, had shared in it and felt
better for it.  I think their content was no less because part of it had
enriched my life, for happiness, like mercy, is twice blessed; it blesses
those who are most intimately associated in it, and it blesses all those
who see it, hear it, feel it, touch it, or breathe the same atmosphere.  A
laughing, crowing baby in a house, one cheerful woman singing about her
work, a boy whistling at the plough, a romance just suspected, with its
miracle of two hearts melting into one--the wind's always in the west
when you have any of these wonder-workers in your neighbourhood.

I have talks too, sometimes, with the old parson, who lives in a quaint
house with "_Parva Domus Magna Quies_" cut into the stone over the
doorway.  He is not a preaching parson, but a retired one, almost the
nicest kind, I often think.

He has been married thirty years, he tells me; thirty years, spent in the
one little house with the bricks painted red and grey alternately, and
the scarlet holly-hocks growing under the windows.  I am sure they have
been sweet, true, kind years, and that his heart must be a quiet,
peaceful place just like his house and garden.

"I was only eleven years old when I fell in love with my wife," he told
me as we sat on the seat under the lime-tree; he puffing cosily at his
pipe, I plaiting grasses for a hatband.

{Puffing cosily at his pipe: p77.jpg}

"It was just before Sunday-school.  Her mother had dressed her all in
white muslin like a fairy, but she had stepped on the edge of a puddle,
and some of the muddy water had bespattered her frock.  A circle of
children had surrounded her, and some of the motherly little girls were
on their knees rubbing at the spots anxiously, while one of them wiped
away the tears that were running down her pretty cheeks.  I looked!  It
was fatal!  I did not look again, but I was smitten to the very heart!  I
did not speak to her for six years, but when I did, it was all right with
both of us, thank God! and I've been in love with her ever since, when
she behaves herself!"

That is the way they speak of love in Barbury Green, and oh! how much
sweeter and more wholesome it is than the language of the town!  Who
would not be a Goose Girl, "to win the secret of the weed's plain heart"?
It seems to me that in society we are always gazing at magic-lantern
shows, but here we rest our tired eyes with looking at the stars.




CHAPTER XI


{A Hen Conference: p79.jpg}

July 16th.

Phoebe and I have been to a Hen Conference at Buffington.  It was for the
purpose of raising the standard of the British Hen, and our local
Countess, who is much interested in poultry, was in the chair.

It was a very learned body, but Phoebe had coached me so well that at the
noon recess I could talk confidently with the members, discussing the
various advantages of True and Crossed Minorcas, Feverels, Andalusians,
Cochin Chinas, Shanghais, and the White Leghorn.  (Phoebe, when she
pronounces this word, leaves out the "h" and bears down heavily on the
last syllable, so that it rhymes with begone!)

As I was sitting under the trees waiting for Phoebe to finish some
shopping in the village, a travelling poultry-dealer came along and
offered to sell me a silver Wyandotte pullet and cockerel.  This was a
new breed to me and I asked the price, which proved to be more than I
should pay for a hat in Bond Street.  I hesitated, thinking meantime what
a delightful parting gift they would be for Phoebe; I mean if we ever
should part, which seems more and more unlikely, as I shall never leave
Thornycroft until somebody comes properly to fetch me; indeed, unless the
"fetching" is done somewhat speedily I may decline to go under any
circumstances.  My indecision as to the purchase was finally banished
when the poultryman asserted that the fowls had clear open centres all
over, black lacing entirely round the white centres, were free from white
edging, and each had a cherry-red eye.  This catalogue of charms inflamed
my imagination, though it gave me no mental picture of a silver Wyandotte
fowl, and I paid the money while the dealer crammed the chicks, squawking
into my five-o'clock tea-basket.

{Arguing questions of diet: p81.jpg}

The afternoon session of the conference was most exciting, for we reached
the subject of imported eggs, an industry that is assuming terrifying
proportions.  The London hotel egg comes from Denmark, it seems,--I
should think by sailing vessel, not steamer, but I may be wrong.  After
we had settled that the British Hen should be protected and encouraged,
and agreed solemnly to abstain from Danish eggs in any form, and made a
resolution stating that our loyalty to Queen Alexandra would remain
undiminished, we argued the subject of hen diet.  There was a great
difference of opinion here and the discussion was heated; the honorary
treasurer standing for pulped mangold and flint grit, the chair insisting
on barley meal and randans, while one eloquent young woman declared, to
loud cries of "'Ear, 'ear!" that rice pudding and bone chips produce more
eggs to the square hen than any other sort of food.  Impassioned orators
arose here and there in the audience demanding recognition for beef
scraps, charcoal, round corn or buckwheat.  Foods were regarded from
various standpoints: as general invigorators, growth assisters, and egg
producers.  A very handsome young farmer carried off final honours, and
proved to the satisfaction of all the feminine poultry-raisers that green
young hog bones fresh cut in the Banner Bone Breaker (of which he was the
agent) possessed a nutritive value not to be expressed in human language.

{The afternoon session was most exciting: p82.jpg}

Phoebe was distinctly nervous when I rose to say a few words on poultry
breeding, announcing as my topic "Mothers, Stepmothers, Foster-Mothers,
and Incubators."  Protected by the consciousness that no one in the
assemblage could possibly know me, I made a distinct success in my maiden
speech; indeed, I somewhat overshot the mark, for the Countess in the
chair sent me a note asking me to dine with her that evening.  I
suppressed the note and took Phoebe away before the proceedings were
finished, vanishing from the scene of my triumphs like a veiled prophet.

Just as we were passing out the door we paused to hear the report of a
special committee whose chairman read the following resolutions:--

_Whereas_,--It has pleased the Almighty to remove from our midst our
greatest Rose Comb Buff Orpington fancier and esteemed friend, Albert
Edward Sheridain; therefore be it

_Resolved_,--That the next edition of our catalogue contain an
illustrated memorial page in his honour and

_Resolved_,--That the Rose Comb Buff Orpington Club extend to the
bereaved family their heartfelt sympathy.

{Not asked to the Conference: p84.jpg}

The handsome young farmer followed us out to our trap, invited us to
attend the next meeting of the R. C. B. O. Club, of which he was the
secretary, and asked if I were intending to "show."  I introduced Phoebe
as the senior partner, and she concealed the fact that we possessed but
one Buff Orpington, and he was a sad "invaleed" not suitable for
exhibition.  The farmer's expression as he looked at me was almost lover-
like, and when he pressed a bit of paper into my hand I was sure it must
be an offer of marriage.  It was in fact only a circular describing the
Banner Bone Breaker.  It closed with an appeal to Buff Orpington breeders
to raise and ever raise the standard, bidding them remember, in the midst
of a low-minded and sordid civilisation, that the rose comb should be
small and neat, firmly set on, with good working, a nice spike at the
back lying well down to head, and never, under any circumstances, never
sticking up.  This adjuration somewhat alarmed us as Phoebe and I had
been giving our Buff Orpington cockerel the most drastic remedies for his
languid and prostrate comb.

{Coming home: p85.jpg}

Coming home we alighted from the trap to gather hogweed for the rabbits.
I sat by the wayside lazily and let Phoebe gather the appetising weed,
which grows along the thorniest hedges in close proximity to nettles and
thistles.

Workmen were trudging along with their luncheon-baskets of woven
bulrushes slung over their shoulders.  Fields of ripening grain lay on
either hand, the sun shining on their every shade of green and yellow,
bronze and orange, while the breeze stirred the bearded barley into a
rippling golden sea.

Phoebe asked me if the people I had left behind at the Hydropathic were
my relatives.

"Some of them are of remote consanguinity," I responded evasively, and
the next question was hushed upon her awe-stricken tongue, as I intended.

"They are obeying my wish to be let alone, there's no doubt of that," I
was thinking.  "For my part, I like a little more spirit, and a little
less 'letter'!"

{Workmen were trudging home: p87.jpg}

As the word "letter" flitted through my thoughts, I pulled one from my
pocket and glanced through it carelessly.  It arrived, somewhat tardily,
only last night, or I should not have had it with me.  I wore the same
dress to the post-office yesterday that I wore to the Hen Conference to-
day, and so it chanced to be still in the pocket.  If it had been
anything I valued, of course I should have lost or destroyed it by
mistake; it is only silly, worthless little things like this that keep
turning up and turning up after one has forgotten their existence.

   "You are a mystery!" [it ran.]  "I can apprehend, but not comprehend
   you.  I know you in part.  I understand various bits of your nature;
   but my knowledge is always fragmentary and disconnected, and when I
   attempt to make a whole of the mosaics I merely get a kaleidoscopic
   effect.  Do you know those geographical dissected puzzles that they
   give to children?  You remind me of one of them.

   "I have spent many charming (and dangerous) hours trying to 'put you
   together'; but I find, when I examine my picture closely, that after
   all I've made a purple mountain grow out of a green tree; that my
   river is running up a steep hillside; and that the pretty milkmaid,
   who should be wandering in the forest, is standing on her head with
   her pail in the air

   "Do you understand yourself clearly?  Or is it just possible that when
   you dive to the depths of your own consciousness, you sometimes find
   the pretty milkmaid standing on her head?  I wonder!" . . .

Ah, well, it is no wonder that he wonders!   So do I, for that matter!




CHAPTER XII


{Along the highway: p89.jpg}

July 17th.

Thornycroft Farm seems to be the musical centre of the universe.

When I wake very early in the morning I lie in a drowsy sort of dream,
trying to disentangle, one from the other, the various bird notes,
trills, coos, croons, chirps, chirrups, and warbles.  Suddenly there
falls on the air a delicious, liquid, finished song; so pure, so mellow,
so joyous, that I go to the window and look out at the morning world,
half awakened, like myself.

There is I know not what charm in a window that does not push up, but
opens its lattices out into the greenness.  And mine is like a little
jewelled door, for the sun is shining from behind the chimneys and
lighting the tiny diamond panes with amber flashes.

A faint delicate haze lies over the meadow, and rising out of it, and
soaring toward the blue is the lark, flinging out that matchless matin
song, so rich, so thrilling, so lavish!  As the blithe melody fades away,
I hear the plaintive ballad-fragments of the robin on a curtsying branch
near my window; and there is always the liquid pipe of the thrush, who
must quaff a fairy goblet of dew between his songs, I should think, so
fresh and eternally young is his note.

There is another beautiful song that I follow whenever I hear it,
straining my eyes to the treetops, yet never finding a bird that I can
identify as the singer.  Can it be the--

   "Ousel-cock so black of hue,
   With orange-tawny bill"?

He is called the poet-laureate of the primrose time, but I don't know
whether he sings in midsummer, and I have not seen him hereabouts.  I
must write and ask my dear Man of the North.  The Man of the North, I
sometimes think, had a Fairy Grandmother who was a robin; and perhaps she
made a nest of fresh moss and put him in the green wood when he was a wee
bairnie, so that he waxed wise in bird-lore without knowing it.  At all
events, describe to him the cock of a head, the glance of an eye, the tip-
up of a tail, or the sheen of a feather, and he will name you the bird.
Near-sighted he is, too, the Man of the North, but that is only for
people.

The Square Baby and I have a new game.

I bought a doll's table and china tea-set in Buffington.  We put it under
an apple-tree in the side garden, where the scarlet lightning grows so
tall and the Madonna lilies stand so white against the flaming
background.  We built a little fence around it, and every afternoon at
tea-time we sprinkle seeds and crumbs in the dishes, water in the tiny
cups, drop a cherry in each of the fruit-plates, and have a _the
chantant_ for the birdies.  We sometimes invite an "invaleed" duckling,
or one of the baby rabbits, or the peacock, in which case the cards
read:--

   _Thornycroft Farm_.
   The pleasure of your company is requested
   at a
   _The Chantant_
   Under the Apple Tree.
   Music at five.

It is a charming game, as I say, but I'd far rather play it with the Man
of the North; he is so much younger than the Square Baby, and so much
more responsive, too.

{The scent of the hay: p92.jpg}

Thornycroft Farm is a sweet place, too, of odours as well as sounds.  The
scent of the hay is for ever in the nostrils, the hedges are thick with
wild honeysuckle, so deliciously fragrant, the last of the June roses are
lingering to do their share, and blackberry blossoms and ripening fruit
as well.

I have never known a place in which it is so easy to be good.  I have not
said a word, nor scarcely harboured a thought, that was not lovely and
virtuous since I entered these gates, and yet there are those who think
me fantastic, difficult, hard to please, unreasonable!

{The last of June: p93.jpg}

I believe the saints must have lived in the country mostly (I am certain
they never tried Hydropathic hotels), and why anybody with a black heart
and natural love of wickedness should not simply buy a poultry farm and
become an angel, I cannot understand.

{A place in which it is so easy to be good: p94.jpg}

Living with animals is really a very improving and wholesome kind of
life, to the person who will allow himself to be influenced by their
sensible and high-minded ideals.  When you come to think about it, man is
really the only animal that ever makes a fool of himself; the others are
highly civilised, and never make mistakes.  I am going to mention this
when I write to somebody, sometime; I mean if I ever do.  To be sure, our
human life is much more complicated than theirs, and I believe when the
other animals notice our errors of judgment they make allowances.  The
bee is as busy as a bee, and the beaver works like a beaver, but there
their responsibility ends.  The bee doesn't have to go about seeing that
other bees are not crowded into unsanitary tenements or victimised by the
sweating system.  When the beaver's day of toil is over he doesn't have
to discuss the sphere, the rights, or the voting privileges of
beaveresses; all he has to do is to work like a beaver, and that is
comparatively simple.




CHAPTER XIII


{Not particularly attracted by the poultry: p96.jpg}

I have been studying _The Young Poultry Keeper's Friend_ of late.  If
there is anything I dislike and deplore, it is the possession of
knowledge which I cannot put to practical use.  Having discovered an
interesting disease called Scaly Leg in the July number, I took the
magazine out into the poultry-yard and identified the malady on three
hens and a cock.  Phoebe joined me in the diagnosis and we treated the
victims with a carbolic lotion and scrubbed them with vaseline.

{Leaned languidly against the netting: p97.jpg}

As Phoebe and I grow wise in medical lore the case of Cannibal Ann
assumes a different aspect.  As the bibulous man quaffs more and more
flagons of beer and wine when his daily food is ham, salt fish, and
cabbage, so does the hen avenge her wrongs of diet and woes of
environment.  Cannibal Ann, herself, has, so far as we know, been raised
in a Christian manner and enjoyed all the advantages of modern methods;
but her maternal parent may have lived in some heathen poultry-yard which
was asphalted or bricked or flagged, so that she was debarred from
scratching in Mother Earth and was forced to eat her own shells in self-
defence.

* * * * *

The Square Baby is not particularly attracted by the poultry as a whole,
save when it is boiled with bacon or roasted with bread-sauce; but he is
much interested in the "invaleeds."  Whenever Phoebe and I start for the
hospital with the tobacco-pills, the tin of paraffin, and the bottle of
oil, he is very much in evidence.  Perhaps he has a natural leaning
toward the medical profession; at any rate, when pain and anguish wring
the brow, he is in close attendance upon the ministering angels.

{Staggered and reeled: p98.jpg}

Now it is necessary for the physician to have practice as well as theory,
so the Square Baby, being left to himself this afternoon, proceeded to
perfect himself in some of the healing arts used by country
practitioners.

{Caught her son red-handed: p99.jpg}

When discovered, he was seated in front of the wire-covered "run"
attached to a coop occupied by the youngest goslings.  A couple of
bottles and a box stood by his side, and I should think he had
administered a cup of sweet oil, a pint of paraffin, and a quarter of a
pound of tobacco during his clinic.  He had used the remedies
impartially, sometimes giving the paraffin internally and rubbing the
patient's head with tobacco or oil, sometimes the reverse.

Several goslings leaned languidly against the netting, or supported
themselves by the edge of the water-dish, while others staggered and
reeled about with eyes half closed.

{He was treated summarily and smartly: p100.jpg}

It was Mrs. Heaven who caught her son red-handed, so to speak.  She was
dressed in her best, and just driving off to Woodmucket to spend a day or
two with her married daughter, and soothe her nerves with the uproar
incident to a town of six hundred inhabitants.  She delayed her journey a
half-hour--long enough, in fact, to change her black silk waist for a
loose sacque which would give her arms full and comfortable play.  The
joy and astonishment that greeted the Square Baby on his advent, five
years ago, was forgotten for the first time in his brief life, and he was
treated precisely as any ordinary wrongdoer would have been treated under
the same circumstances, summarily and smartly; the "wepping," as Phoebe
would say, being Mrs. Heaven's hand.

All but one of the goslings lived, like thousands of others who recover
in spite of the doctors, but the Square Baby's interest in the healing
art is now perceptibly lessened.




CHAPTER XIV


July 18th.

The day was Friday; Phoebe's day to go to Buffington with eggs and
chickens and rabbits; her day to solicit orders for ducklings and
goslings.  The village cart was ready in the stable; Mr. and Mrs. Heaven
were in Woodmucket; I was eating my breakfast (which I remember was an
egg and a rasher) when Phoebe came in, a figure of woe.

The Square Baby was ill, very ill, and would not permit her to leave him
and go to market.  Would I look at him?  For he must have dowsed 'imself
as well as the goslings yesterday; anyways he was strong of paraffin and
tobacco, though he 'ad 'ad a good barth.

I prescribed for Albert Edward, who was as uncomfortable and feverish as
any little sinner in the county of Sussex, and I then promptly proposed
going to Buffington in Phoebe's place.

She did not think it at all proper, and said that, notwithstanding my
cotton gown and sailor hat, I looked quite, quite the lydy, and it would
never do.

"I cannot get any new orders," said I, "but I can certainly leave the
rabbits and eggs at the customary places.  I know Argent's Dining
Parlours, and Songhurst's Tea Rooms, and the Six Bells Inn, as well as
you do."

{The Six Bells found the last poultry somewhat tough: p103.jpg}

So, donning a pair of Phoebe's large white cotton gloves with open-work
wrists (than which I always fancy there is no one article that so
disguises the perfect lydy), I set out upon my travels, upborne by a
lively sense of amusement that was at least equal to my feeling that I
was doing Phoebe Heaven a good turn.

Prices in dressed poultry were fluctuating, but I had a copy of _The
Trade Review_, issued that very day, and was able to get some idea of
values and the state of the market as I jogged along.  The general
movement, I learned, was moderate and of a "selective" character.  Choice
large capons and ducks were in steady demand, but I blushed for my
profession when I read that roasting chickens were running coarse,
staggy, and of irregular value.  Old hens were held firmly at sixpence,
and it is my experience that they always have to be, at whatever price.
Geese were plenty, dull, and weak.  Old cocks,--why don't they say
roosters?--declined to threepence ha'penny on Thursday in sympathy with
fowls,--and who shall say that chivalry is dead?  Turkeys were a trifle
steadier, and there was a speculative movement in limed eggs.  All this
was illuminating, and I only wished I were quite certain whether the
sympathetic old roosters were threepence ha'penny apiece, or a pound.

{The gadabout hen: p105.jpg}

Everything happened as it should, on this first business journey of my
life, which is equivalent to saying that nothing happened at all.
Songhurst's Tea Rooms took five dozen eggs and told me to bring six dozen
the next week.  Argent's Dining Parlours purchased three pairs of
chickens and four rabbits.  The Six Bells found the last poultry somewhat
tough and tasteless; whereupon I said that our orders were more than we
could possibly fill, still I hoped we could go on "selling them," as we
never liked to part with old customers, no matter how many new ones there
were.  Privately, I understood the complaint only too well, for I knew
the fowls in question very intimately.  Two of them were the runaway
rooster and the gadabout hen that never wanted to go to bed with the
others.  The third was Cannibal Ann.  I should have expected them to be
tough, but I cannot believe they were lacking in flavour.

The only troublesome feature of the trip was that Mrs. Sowerbutt's
lodgers had suddenly left for London and she was unable to take the four
rabbits as she had hoped; but as an offset to that piece of ill-fortune
the Coke and Coal Yard and the Bicycle Repairing Rooms came out into the
street, and, stepping up to the trap, requested regular weekly deliveries
of eggs and chickens, and hoped that I would be able to bring them
myself.  And so, in a happy frame of mind, I turned out of the Buffington
main street, and was jogging along homeward, when a very startling thing
happened; namely, a whole verse of the Bailiff's Daughter of Islington:--

   "And as she went along the high road,
   The weather being hot and dry,
   She sat her down upon a green bank,
   And her true love came riding by."

That true lovers are given to riding by, in ballads, I know very well,
but I hardly supposed they did so in real life, especially when every
precaution had been taken to avert such a catastrophe.  I had told the
Barbury Green postmistress, on the morning of my arrival, not to give the
Thornycroft address to anybody whatsoever, but finding, as the days
passed, that no one was bold enough or sensible enough to ask for it, I
haughtily withdrew my prohibition.  About this time I began sending
envelopes, carefully addressed in a feigned hand, to a certain person at
the Oxenbridge Hydro.  These envelopes contained no word of writing, but
held, on one day, only a bit of down from a hen's breast, on another, a
goose-quill, on another, a glossy tail-feather, on another, a grain of
corn, and so on.  These trifles were regarded by me not as degrading or
unmaidenly hints and suggestions, but simply as tests of intelligence.
Could a man receive tokens of this sort and fail to put two and two
together?  I feel that I might possibly support life with a domineering
and autocratic husband,--and there is every prospect that I shall be
called upon to do so,--but not with a stupid one.  Suppose one were
linked for ever to a man capable of asking,--"Did _you_ send those
feathers? . . . How was I to guess? . . . How was a fellow to know they
came from you? . . . What on earth could I suppose they meant? . . . What
clue did they offer me as to your whereabouts? . . . Am I a Sherlock
Holmes?"--No, better eternal celibacy than marriage with such a being!

{She was unable to take the four rabbits: p107.jpg}

These were the thoughts that had been coursing through my goose-girl mind
while I had been selling dressed poultry, but in some way they had not
prepared me for the appearance of the aforesaid true love.

To see the very person whom one has left civilisation to avoid is always
more or less surprising, and to make the meeting less likely, Buffington
is even farther from Oxenbridge than Barbury Green.  The creature was
well mounted (ominous, when he came to override my caprice!) and he
looked bigger, and, yes, handsomer, though that doesn't signify, and
still more determined than when I saw him last; although goodness knows
that timidity and feebleness of purpose were not in striking evidence on
that memorable occasion.  I had drawn up under the shade of a tree
ostensibly to eat some cherries, thinking that if I turned my face away I
might pass unrecognised.  It was a stupid plan, for if I had whipped up
the mare and driven on, he of course, would have had to follow, and he
has too much dignity and self-respect to shriek recriminations into a
woman's ear from a distance.

{The creature was well mounted: p109.jpg}

He approached with deliberation, reined in his horse, and lifted his hat
ceremoniously.  He has an extremely shapely head, but I did not show that
the sight of it melted in the least the ice of my resolve; whereupon we
talked, not very freely at first,--men are so stiff when they consider
themselves injured.  However, silence is even more embarrassing than
conversation, so at length I begin:--

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"It is a lovely day."

_True Love_.--"Yes, but the drought is getting rather oppressive, don't
you think?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"The crops certainly need rain, and the feed is
becoming scarce."

_True Love_.--"Are you a farmer's wife?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Oh no! that is a promotion to look forward to; I
am now only a Goose Girl."

_True Love_.--"Indeed!  If I wished to be severe I might remark: that I
am sure you have found at last your true vocation!"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"It was certainly through no desire to please
_you_ that I chose it."

_True Love_.--"I am quite sure of that!  Are you staying in this part?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Oh no!  I live many miles distant, over an
extremely rough road.  And you?"

_True Love_.--"I am still at the Hydropathic; or at least my luggage is
there."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"It must be very pleasant to attract you so long."

_True Love_.--"Not so pleasant as it was."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"No?  A new proprietor, I suppose."

_True Love_.--"No; same proprietor; but the house is empty."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (yawning purposely).--"That is strange; the hotels
are usually so full at this season.  Why did so many leave?"

_True Love_.--"As a matter of fact, only one left.  'Full' and 'empty'
are purely relative terms.  I call a hotel full when it has you in it,
empty when it hasn't."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (dying to laugh, but concealing her feelings).--"I
trust my bulk does not make the same impression on the general public!
Well, I won't detain you longer; good afternoon; I must go home to my
evening work."

_True Love_.--"I will accompany you."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"If you are a gentleman you will remain where you
are."

_True Love_.--"In the road?  Perhaps; but if I am a man I shall follow
you; they always do, I notice.  What are those foolish bundles in the
back of that silly cart?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Feed for the pony, please, sir; fish for dinner;
randans and barley meal for the poultry; and four unsold rabbits.
Wouldn't you like them?  Only one and sixpence apiece.  Shot at three
o'clock this morning."

_True Love_.--"Thanks; I don't like mine shot so early."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Oh, well! doubtless I shall be able to dispose of
them on my way home, though times is 'ard!"

_True Love_.--"Do you mean that you will "peddle" them along the road?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"You understand me better than usual,--in fact to
perfection."

He dismounts and strides to the back of the cart, lifts the covers,
seizes the rabbits, flings some silver contemptuously into the basket,
and looks about him for a place to bury his bargain.  A small boy
approaching in the far distance will probably bag the game.

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (modestly).--"Thanks for your trade, sir, rather
ungraciously bestowed, and we 'opes for a continuance of your past
fyvors."

_True Love_ (leaning on the wheel of the trap).--"Let us stop this
nonsense.  What did you hope to gain by running away?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Distance and absence."

_True Love_.--"You knew you couldn't prevent my offering myself to you
sometime or other."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Perhaps not; but I could at least defer it,
couldn't I?"

_True Love_.--"Why postpone the inevitable?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Doubtless I shrank from giving you the pain of a
refusal."

_True Love_.--"Perhaps; but do you know what I suspect?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"I'm not a suspicious person, thank goodness!"

_True Love_.--"That, on the contrary, you are wilfully withholding from
me the joy of acceptance."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"If I intended to accept you, why did I run away?"

_True Love_.--"To make yourself more desirable and precious, I suppose."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (with the most confident coquetry).--"Did I
succeed?"

_True Love_.--"No; you failed utterly."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (secretly piqued).--"Then I am glad I tried it."

_True Love_.--"You couldn't succeed because you were superlatively
desirable and precious already; but you should never have experimented.
Don't you know that Love is a high explosive?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Is it?  Then it ought always to be labelled
'dangerous,' oughtn't it?  But who thought of suggesting matches?  I'm
sure I didn't!"

_True Love_.--"No such luck; I wish you would."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"According to your theory, if you apply a match to
Love it is likely to 'go off.'"

_True Love_.--"I wish you would try it on mine and await the result.  Come
now, you'll have to marry somebody, sometime."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"I confess I don't see the necessity."

_True Love_ (morosely).--"You're the sort of woman men won't leave in
undisturbed spinsterhood; they'll keep on badgering you."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Oh, I don't mind the badgering of a number of
men; it's rather nice.  It's the one badger I find obnoxious."

_True Love_ (impatiently).--"That's just the perversity of things.  I
could put a stop to the protestations of the many; I should like nothing
better--but the pertinacity of the one!  Ah, well!  I can't drop that
without putting an end to my existence."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (politely).--"I shouldn't think of suggesting
anything so extreme."

_True Love_ (quoting).--"'Mrs. Hauksbee proceeded to take the conceit out
of Pluffles as you remove the ribs of an umbrella before re-covering.'
However, you couldn't ask me anything seriously that I wouldn't do, dear
Mistress Perversity."

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (yielding a point).--"I'll put that boldly to the
proof.  Say you don't love me!"

_True Love_ (seizing his advantage).--"I don't!  It's imbecile and
besotted devotion!  Tell me, when may I come to take you away?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_ (sighing).--"It's like asking me to leave Heaven."

{Phoebe and Gladwish: p115.jpg}

_True Love_.--"I know it; she told me where to find you,--Thornycroft is
the seventh poultry-farm I've visited,--but you could never leave Heaven,
you can't be happy without poultry, why that is a wish easily gratified.
I'll get you a farm to-morrow; no, it's Saturday, and the real estate
offices close at noon, but on Monday, without fail.  Your ducks and
geese, always carrying it along with you.  All you would have to do is to
admit me; Heaven is full of twos.  If you shall swim on a crystal
lake--Phoebe told me what a genius you have for getting them out of the
muddy pond; she was sitting beside it when I called, her hand in that of
a straw-coloured person named Gladwish, and the ground in her vicinity
completely strewn with votive offerings.  You shall splash your silver
sea with an ivory wand; your hens shall have suburban cottages, each with
its garden; their perches shall be of satin-wood and their water dishes
of mother-of-pearl.  You shall be the Goose Girl and I will be the Swan
Herd--simply to be near you--for I hate live poultry.  Dost like the
picture?  It's a little like Claude Melnotte's, I confess.  The fact is I
am not quite sane; talking with you after a fortnight of the tabbies at
the Hydro is like quaffing inebriating vodka after Miffin's Food!  May I
come to-morrow?"

_Bailiffs Daughter_ (hedging).--"I shall be rather busy; the Crossed
Minorca hen comes off to-morrow."

_True Love_.--"Oh, never mind!  I'll take her off to-night when I escort
you to the farm; then she'll get a day's advantage."

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"And rob fourteen prospective chicks of a mother;
nay, lose the chicks themselves?  Never!"

_True Love_.--"So long as you are a Goose Girl, does it make any
difference whose you are?  Is it any more agreeable to be Mrs. Heaven's
Goose Girl than mine?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"Ah! but in one case the term of service is
limited; in the other, permanent."

_True Love_.--"But in the one case you are the slave of the employer, in
the other the employer of the slave.  Why did you run away?"

_Bailiff's Daughter_.--"A man's mind is too dull an instrument to measure
a woman's reason; even my own fails sometimes to deal with all its
delicate shades; but I think I must have run away chiefly to taste the
pleasure of being pursued and brought back.  If it is necessary to your
happiness that you should explore all the Bluebeard chambers of my being,
I will confess further that it has taken you nearly three weeks to
accomplish what I supposed you would do in three days!"

_True Love_ (after a well-spent interval).--"To-morrow, then; shall we
say before breakfast?  All, do!  Why not?  Well, then, immediately after
breakfast, and I breakfast at seven nowadays, and sometimes earlier.  Do
take off those ugly cotton gloves, dear; they are five sizes too large
for you, and so rough and baggy to the touch!"

========================================
