========================================

GLINDA OF OZ


by

L. Frank Baum




  In which are related the Exciting Experiences of Princess
     Ozma of Oz, and Dorothy, in their hazardous journey
        to the home of the Flatheads, and to the Magic
           Isle of the Skeezers, and how they were
                rescued from dire peril by the
                    sorcery of Glinda the
                             Good

                        by L. FRANK BAUM
                     "Royal Historian of Oz"




  This Book
  is Dedicated to
  My Son
  Robert Stanton Baum




LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1  The Call to Duty
   2  Ozma and Dorothy
   3  The Mist Maidens
   4  The Magic Tent
   5  The Magic Stairway
   6  Flathead Mountain
   7  The Magic Isle
   8  Queen Coo-ee-oh
   9  Lady Aurex
  10  Under Water
  11  The Conquest of the Skeezers
  12  The Diamond Swan
  13  The Alarm Bell
  14  Ozma's Counsellors
  15  The Great Sorceress
  16  The Enchanted Fishes
  17  Under the Great Dome
  18  The Cleverness of Ervic
  19  Red Reera, the Yookoohoo
  20  A Puzzling Problem
  21  The Three Adepts
  22  The Sunken Island
  23  The Magic Words
  24  Glinda's Triumph




Chapter One

The Call to Duty


Glinda, the good Sorceress of Oz, sat in the grand court of her palace,
surrounded by her maids of honor--a hundred of the most beautiful girls
of the Fairyland of Oz. The palace court was built of rare marbles,
exquisitely polished. Fountains tinkled musically here and there; the
vast colonnade, open to the south, allowed the maidens, as they raised
their heads from their embroideries, to gaze upon a vista of rose-hued
fields and groves of trees bearing fruits or laden with sweet-scented
flowers. At times one of the girls would start a song, the others
joining in the chorus, or one would rise and dance, gracefully swaying
to the music of a harp played by a companion. And then Glinda smiled,
glad to see her maids mixing play with work.

Presently among the fields an object was seen moving, threading the
broad path that led to the castle gate. Some of the girls looked upon
this object enviously; the Sorceress merely gave it a glance and nodded
her stately head as if pleased, for it meant the coming of her friend
and mistress--the only one in all the land that Glinda bowed to.

Then up the path trotted a wooden animal attached to a red wagon, and
as the quaint steed halted at the gate there descended from the wagon
two young girls, Ozma, Ruler of Oz, and her companion, Princess
Dorothy. Both were dressed in simple white muslin gowns, and as they
ran up the marble steps of the palace they laughed and chatted as gaily
as if they were not the most important persons in the world's loveliest
fairyland.

The maids of honor had risen and stood with bowed heads to greet the
royal Ozma, while Glinda came forward with outstretched arms to greet
her guests.

"We've just come on a visit, you know," said Ozma. "Both Dorothy and I
were wondering how we should pass the day when we happened to think
we'd not been to your Quadling Country for weeks, so we took the
Sawhorse and rode straight here."

"And we came so fast," added Dorothy, "that our hair is blown all
fuzzy, for the Sawhorse makes a wind of his own. Usually it's a day's
journey from the Em'rald City, but I don't s'pose we were two hours on
the way."

"You are most welcome," said Glinda the Sorceress, and led them through
the court to her magnificent reception hall. Ozma took the arm of her
hostess, but Dorothy lagged behind, kissing some of the maids she knew
best, talking with others, and making them all feel that she was their
friend. When at last she joined Glinda and Ozma in the reception hall,
she found them talking earnestly about the condition of the people, and
how to make them more happy and contented--although they were already
the happiest and most contented folks in all the world.

This interested Ozma, of course, but it didn't interest Dorothy very
much, so the little girl ran over to a big table on which was lying
open Glinda's Great Book of Records.

This Book is one of the greatest treasures in Oz, and the Sorceress
prizes it more highly than any of her magical possessions. That is the
reason it is firmly attached to the big marble table by means of golden
chains, and whenever Glinda leaves home she locks the Great Book
together with five jeweled padlocks, and carries the keys safely hidden
in her bosom.

I do not suppose there is any magical thing in any fairyland to compare
with the Record Book, on the pages of which are constantly being
printed a record of every event that happens in any part of the world,
at exactly the moment it happens.  And the records are always truthful,
although sometimes they do not give as many details as one could wish.
But then, lots of things happen, and so the records have to be brief or
even Glinda's Great Book could not hold them all.

Glinda looked at the records several times each day, and Dorothy,
whenever she visited the Sorceress, loved to look in the Book and see
what was happening everywhere. Not much was recorded about the Land of
Oz, which is usually peaceful and uneventful, but today Dorothy found
something which interested her. Indeed, the printed letters were
appearing on the page even while she looked.

"This is funny!" she exclaimed. "Did you know, Ozma, that there were
people in your Land of Oz called Skeezers?"

"Yes," replied Ozma, coming to her side, "I know that on Professor
Wogglebug's Map of the Land of Oz there is a place marked 'Skeezer,'
but what the Skeezers are like I do not know. No one I know has ever
seen them or heard of them. The Skeezer Country is 'way at the upper
edge of the Gillikin Country, with the sandy, impassable desert on one
side and the mountains of Oogaboo on another side. That is a part of
the Land of Oz of which I know very little."

"I guess no one else knows much about it either, unless it's the
Skeezers themselves," remarked Dorothy. "But the Book says: 'The
Skeezers of Oz have declared war on the Flatheads of Oz, and there is
likely to be fighting and much trouble as the result.'"

"Is that all the Book says?" asked Ozma.

"Every word," said Dorothy, and Ozma and Glinda both looked at the
Record and seemed surprised and perplexed.

"Tell me, Glinda," said Ozma, "who are the Flatheads?"

"I cannot, your Majesty," confessed the Sorceress. "Until now I never
have heard of them, nor have I ever heard the Skeezers mentioned. In
the faraway corners of Oz are hidden many curious tribes of people, and
those who never leave their own countries and never are visited by
those from our favored part of Oz, naturally are unknown to me.
However, if you so desire, I can learn through my arts of sorcery
something of the Skeezers and the Flatheads."

"I wish you would," answered Ozma seriously. "You see, Glinda, if these
are Oz people they are my subjects and I cannot allow any wars or
troubles in the Land I rule, if I can possibly help it."

"Very well, your Majesty," said the Sorceress, "I will try to get some
information to guide you. Please excuse me for a time, while I retire
to my Room of Magic and Sorcery."

"May I go with you?" asked Dorothy, eagerly.

"No, Princess," was the reply. "It would spoil the charm to have anyone
present."

So Glinda locked herself in her own Room of Magic and Dorothy and Ozma
waited patiently for her to come out again.

In about an hour Glinda appeared, looking grave and thoughtful.

"Your Majesty," she said to Ozma, "the Skeezers live on a Magic Isle in
a great lake. For that reason--because the Skeezers deal in magic--I
can learn little about them."

"Why, I didn't know there was a lake in that part of Oz," exclaimed
Ozma. "The map shows a river running through the Skeezer Country, but
no lake."

"That is because the person who made the map never had visited that
part of the country," explained the Sorceress. "The lake surely is
there, and in the lake is an island--a Magic Isle--and on that island
live the people called the Skeezers."

"What are they like?" inquired the Ruler of Oz.

"My magic cannot tell me that," confessed Glinda, "for the magic of the
Skeezers prevents anyone outside of their domain knowing anything about
them."

"The Flatheads must know, if they're going to fight the Skeezers,"
suggested Dorothy.

"Perhaps so," Glinda replied, "but I can get little information
concerning the Flatheads, either. They are people who inhabit a
mountain just south of the Lake of the Skeezers. The mountain has steep
sides and a broad, hollow top, like a basin, and in this basin the
Flatheads have their dwellings. They also are magic-workers and usually
keep to themselves and allow no one from outside to visit them. I have
learned that the Flatheads number about one hundred people--men, women
and children--while the Skeezers number just one hundred and one."

"What did they quarrel about, and why do they wish to fight one
another?" was Ozma's next question.

"I cannot tell your Majesty that," said Glinda.

"But see here!" cried Dorothy, "it's against the law for anyone but
Glinda and the Wizard to work magic in the Land of Oz, so if these two
strange people are magic-makers they are breaking the law and ought to
be punished!" Ozma smiled upon her little friend.

"Those who do not know me or my laws," she said, "cannot be expected to
obey my laws. If we know nothing of the Skeezers or the Flatheads, it
is likely that they know nothing of us."

"But they ought to know, Ozma, and we ought to know. Who's going to
tell them, and how are we going to make them behave?"

"That," returned Ozma, "is what I am now considering. What would you
advise, Glinda?"

The Sorceress took a little time to consider this question, before she
made reply. Then she said: "Had you not learned of the existence of the
Flatheads and the Skeezers, through my Book of Records, you would never
have worried about them or their quarrels. So, if you pay no attention
to these peoples, you may never hear of them again."

"But that wouldn't be right," declared Ozma. "I am Ruler of all the
Land of Oz, which includes the Gillikin Country, the Quadling Country,
the Winkie Country and the Munchkin Country, as well as the Emerald
City, and being the Princess of this fairyland it is my duty to make
all my people--wherever they may be--happy and content and to settle
their disputes and keep them from quarreling. So, while the Skeezers
and Flatheads may not know me or that I am their lawful Ruler, I now
know that they inhabit my kingdom and are my subjects, so I would not
be doing my duty if I kept away from them and allowed them to fight."

"That's  a  fact,  Ozma,"  commented  Dorothy. "You've got to go up to
the Gillikin Country and make these people behave themselves and make
up their quarrels. But how are you going to do it?"

"That is what is puzzling me also, your Majesty," said the Sorceress.
"It may be dangerous for you to go into those strange countries, where
the people are possibly fierce and warlike."

"I am not afraid," said Ozma, with a smile.

"'Tisn't a question of being 'fraid," argued Dorothy. "Of course we
know you're a fairy, and can't be killed or hurt, and we know you've a
lot of magic of your own to help you. But, Ozma dear, in spite of all
this you've been in trouble before, on account of wicked enemies, and
it isn't right for the Ruler of all Oz to put herself in danger."

"Perhaps I shall be in no danger at all," returned Ozma, with a little
laugh. "You mustn't imagine danger, Dorothy, for one should only
imagine nice things, and we do not know that the Skeezers and Flatheads
are wicked people or my enemies. Perhaps they would be good and listen
to reason."

"Dorothy is right, your Majesty," asserted the Sorceress. "It is true
we know nothing of these faraway subjects, except that they intend to
fight one another, and have a certain amount of magic power at their
command. Such folks do not like to submit to interference and they are
more likely to resent your coming among them than to receive you kindly
and graciously, as is your due."

"If you had an army to take with you," added Dorothy, "it wouldn't be
so bad; but there isn't such a thing as an army in all Oz."

"I have one soldier," said Ozma.

"Yes, the soldier with the green whiskers; but he's dreadful 'fraid of
his gun and never loads it. I'm sure he'd run rather than fight. And
one soldier, even if he were brave, couldn't do much against two
hundred and one Flatheads and Skeezers."

"What then, my friends, would you suggest?" inquired Ozma.

"I advise you to send the Wizard of Oz to them, and let him inform them
that it is against the laws of Oz to fight, and that you command them
to settle their differences and become friends," proposed Glinda. "Let
the Wizard tell them they will be punished if they refuse to obey the
commands of the Princess of all the Land of Oz."

Ozma shook her head, to indicate that the advice was not to her
satisfaction.

"If they refuse, what then?" she asked. "I should be obliged to carry
out my threat and punish them, and that would be an unpleasant and
difficult thing to do. I am sure it would be better for me to go
peacefully, without an army and armed only with my authority as Ruler,
and plead with them to obey me. Then, if they prove obstinate I could
resort to other means to win their obedience."

"It's a ticklish thing, anyhow you look at it," sighed Dorothy. "I'm
sorry now that I noticed the Record in the Great Book."

"But can't you realize, my dear, that I must do my duty, now that I am
aware of this trouble?" asked Ozma. "I am fully determined to go at
once to the Magic Isle of the Skeezers and to the enchanted mountain of
the Flatheads, and prevent war and strife between their inhabitants.
The only question to decide is whether it is better for me to go alone,
or to assemble a party of my friends and loyal supporters to accompany
me."

"If you go I want to go, too," declared Dorothy. "Whatever happens it's
going to be fun--'cause all excitement is fun--and I wouldn't miss it
for the world!"

Neither Ozma nor Glinda paid any attention to this statement, for they
were gravely considering the serious aspect of this proposed adventure.

"There are plenty of friends who would like to go with you," said the
Sorceress, "but none of them would afford your Majesty any protection
in case you were in danger. You are yourself the most powerful fairy in
Oz, although both I and the Wizard have more varied arts of magic at
our command. However, you have one art that no other in all the world
can equal--the art of winning hearts and making people love to bow to
your gracious presence. For that reason I believe you can accomplish
more good alone than with a large number of subjects in your train."

"I believe that also," agreed the Princess. "I shall be quite able to
take care of myself, you know, but might not be able to protect others
so well. I do not look for opposition, however. I shall speak to these
people in kindly words and settle their dispute--whatever it may be--in
a just manner."

"Aren't you going to take me?" pleaded Dorothy. "You'll need some
companion, Ozma."

The Princess smiled upon her little friend.

"I see no reason why you should not accompany me," was her reply. "Two
girls are not very warlike and they will not suspect us of being on any
errand but a kindly and peaceful one. But, in order to prevent war and
strife between these angry peoples, we must go to them at once. Let us
return immediately to the Emerald City and prepare to start on our
journey early tomorrow morning."

Glinda was not quite satisfied with this plan, but could not think of
any better way to meet the problem. She knew that Ozma, with all her
gentleness and sweet disposition, was accustomed to abide by any
decision she had made and could not easily be turned from her purpose.
Moreover she could see no great danger to the fairy Ruler of Oz in the
undertaking, even though the unknown people she was to visit proved
obstinate. But Dorothy was not a fairy; she was a little girl who had
come from Kansas to live in the Land of Oz. Dorothy might encounter
dangers that to Ozma would be as nothing but to an "Earth child" would
be very serious.

The very fact that Dorothy lived in Oz, and had been made a Princess by
her friend Ozma, prevented her from being killed or suffering any great
bodily pain as long as she lived in that fairyland. She could not grow
big, either, and would always remain the same little girl who had come
to Oz, unless in some way she left that fairyland or was spirited away
from it. But Dorothy was a mortal, nevertheless, and might possibly be
destroyed, or hidden where none of her friends could ever find her. She
could, for instance be cut into pieces, and the pieces, while still
alive and free from pain, could be widely scattered; or she might be
buried deep underground or "destroyed" in other ways by evil magicians,
were she not properly protected. These facts Glinda was considering
while she paced with stately tread her marble hall.

Finally the good Sorceress paused and drew a ring from her finger,
handing it to Dorothy.

"Wear this ring constantly until your return," she said to the girl.
"If serious danger threatens you, turn the ring around on your finger
once to the right and another turn to the left. That will ring the
alarm bell in my palace and I will at once come to your rescue. But do
not use the ring unless you are actually in danger of destruction.
While you remain with Princess Ozma I believe she will be able to
protect you from all lesser ills."

"Thank you, Glinda," responded Dorothy gratefully, as she placed the
ring on her finger. "I'm going to wear my Magic Belt which I took from
the Nome King, too, so I guess I'll be safe from anything the Skeezers
and Flatheads try to do to me."

Ozma had many arrangements to make before she could leave her throne
and her palace in the Emerald City, even for a trip of a few days, so
she bade goodbye to Glinda and with Dorothy climbed into the Red Wagon.
A word to the wooden Sawhorse started that astonishing creature on the
return journey, and so swiftly did he run that Dorothy was unable to
talk or do anything but hold tight to her seat all the way back to the
Emerald City.




Chapter Two

Ozma and Dorothy


Residing in Ozma's palace at this time was a live Scarecrow, a most
remarkable and intelligent creature who had once ruled the Land of Oz
for a brief period and was much loved and respected by all the people.
Once a Munchkin farmer had stuffed an old suit of clothes with straw
and put stuffed boots on the feet and used a pair of stuffed cotton
gloves for hands. The head of the Scarecrow was a stuffed sack fastened
to the body, with eyes, nose, mouth and ears painted on the sack. When
a hat had been put on the head, the thing was a good imitation of a
man. The farmer placed the Scarecrow on a pole in his cornfield and it
came to life in a curious manner. Dorothy, who was passing by the
field, was hailed by the live Scarecrow and lifted him off his pole. He
then went with her to the Emerald City, where the Wizard of Oz gave him
some excellent brains, and the Scarecrow soon became an important
personage.

Ozma considered the Scarecrow one of her best friends and most loyal
subjects, so the morning after her visit to Glinda she asked him to
take her place as Ruler of the Land of Oz while she was absent on a
journey, and the Scarecrow at once consented without asking any
questions.

Ozma had warned Dorothy to keep their journey a secret and say nothing
to anyone about the Skeezers and Flatheads until their return, and
Dorothy promised to obey. She longed to tell her girl friends, tiny
Trot and Betsy Bobbin, of the adventure they were undertaking, but
refrained from saying a word on the subject although both these girls
lived with her in Ozma's palace.

Indeed, only Glinda the Sorceress knew they were going, until after
they had gone, and even the Sorceress didn't know what their errand
might be.

Princess Ozma took the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon, although she was not
sure there was a wagon road all the way to the Lake of the Skeezers.
The Land of Oz is a pretty big place, surrounded on all sides by a
Deadly Desert which it is impossible to cross, and the Skeezer Country,
according to the map, was in the farthest northwestern part of Oz,
bordering on the north desert. As the Emerald City was exactly in the
center of Oz, it was no small journey from there to the Skeezers.

Around the Emerald City the country is thickly settled in every
direction, but the farther away you get from the city the fewer people
there are, until those parts that border on the desert have small
populations. Also those faraway sections are little known to the Oz
people, except in the south, where Glinda lives and where Dorothy has
often wandered on trips of exploration.

The least known of all is the Gillikin Country, which harbors many
strange bands of people among its mountains and valleys and forests and
streams, and Ozma was now bound for the most distant part of the
Gillikin Country.

"I am really sorry," said Ozma to Dorothy, as they rode away in the Red
Wagon, "not to know more about the wonderful Land I rule. It is my duty
to be acquainted with every tribe of people and every strange and
hidden country in all Oz, but I am kept so busy at my palace making
laws and planning for the comforts of those who live near the Emerald
City, that I do not often find time to make long journeys."

"Well," replied Dorothy, "we'll prob'bly find out a lot on this trip,
and we'll learn all about the Skeezers and Flatheads, anyhow. Time
doesn't make much diff'rence in the Land of Oz, 'cause we don't grow
up, or get old, or become sick and die, as they do other places; so, if
we explore one place at a time, we'll by-an'-by know all about every
nook and corner in Oz."

Dorothy wore around her waist the Nome King's Magic Belt, which
protected her from harm, and the Magic Ring which Glinda had given her
was on her finger. Ozma had merely slipped a small silver wand into the
bosom of her gown, for fairies do not use chemicals and herbs and the
tools of wizards and sorcerers to perform their magic. The Silver Wand
was Ozma's one weapon of offense and defense and by its use she could
accomplish many things.

They had left the Emerald City just at sunrise and the Sawhorse
traveled very swiftly over the roads towards the north, but in a few
hours the wooden animal had to slacken his pace because the farm houses
had become few and far between and often there were no paths at all in
the direction they wished to follow. At such times they crossed the
fields, avoiding groups of trees and fording the streams and rivulets
whenever they came to them. But finally they reached a broad hillside
closely covered with scrubby brush, through which the wagon could not
pass.

"It will be difficult even for you and me to get through without
tearing our dresses," said Ozma, "so we must leave the Sawhorse and the
Wagon here until our return."

"That's all right," Dorothy replied, "I'm tired riding, anyhow. Do you
s'pose, Ozma, we're anywhere near the Skeezer Country?"

"I cannot tell, Dorothy dear, but I know we've been going in the right
direction, so we are sure to find it in time."

The scrubby brush was almost like a grove of small trees, for it
reached as high as the heads of the two girls, neither of whom was very
tall. They were obliged to thread their way in and out, until Dorothy
was afraid they would get lost, and finally they were halted by a
curious thing that barred their further progress. It was a huge web--as
if woven by gigantic spiders--and the delicate, lacy film was fastened
stoutly to the branches of the bushes and continued to the right and
left in the form of a half circle. The threads of this web were of a
brilliant purple color and woven into numerous artistic patterns, but
it reached from the ground to branches above the heads of the girls and
formed a sort of fence that hedged them in.

"It doesn't look very strong, though," said Dorothy. "I wonder if we
couldn't break through." She tried but found the web stronger than it
seemed. All her efforts could not break a single thread.

"We must go back, I think, and try to get around this peculiar web,"
Ozma decided.

So they turned to the right and, following the web found that it seemed
to spread in a regular circle. On and on they went until finally Ozma
said they had returned to the exact spot from which they had started.
"Here is a handkerchief you dropped when we were here before," she said
to Dorothy.

"In that case, they must have built the web behind us, after we walked
into the trap," exclaimed the little girl.

"True," agreed Ozma, "an enemy has tried to imprison us."

"And they did it, too," said Dorothy. "I wonder who it was."

"It's a spider-web, I'm quite sure," returned Ozma, "but it must be the
work of enormous spiders."

"Quite right!" cried a voice behind them. Turning quickly around they
beheld a huge purple spider sitting not two yards away and regarding
them with its small bright eyes.

Then there crawled from the bushes a dozen more great purple spiders,
which saluted the first one and said:

"The web is finished, O King, and the strangers are our prisoners."

Dorothy did not like the looks of these spiders at all. They had big
heads, sharp claws, small eyes and fuzzy hair all over their purple
bodies.

"They look wicked," she whispered to Ozma. "What shall we do?"

Ozma gazed upon the spiders with a serious face.

"What is your object in making us prisoners?" she inquired.

"We need someone to keep house for us," answered the Spider King.
"There is sweeping and dusting to be done, and polishing and washing of
dishes, and that is work my people dislike to do. So we decided that if
any strangers came our way we would capture them and make them our
servants."

"I am Princess Ozma, Ruler of all Oz," said the girl with dignity.

"Well, I am King of all Spiders," was the reply, "and that makes me
your master. Come with me to my palace and I will instruct you in your
work."

"I won't," said Dorothy indignantly. "We won't have anything to do with
you."

"We'll see about that," returned the Spider in a severe tone, and the
next instant he made a dive straight at Dorothy, opening the claws in
his legs as if to grab and pinch her with the sharp points. But the
girl was wearing her Magic Belt and was not harmed. The Spider King
could not even touch her. He turned swiftly and made a dash at Ozma,
but she held her Magic Wand over his head and the monster recoiled as
if it had been struck.

"You'd better let us go," Dorothy advised him, "for you see you can't
hurt us."

"So I see," returned the Spider King angrily. "Your magic is greater
than mine. But I'll not help you to escape. If you can break the magic
web my people have woven you may go; if not you must stay here and
starve." With that the Spider King uttered a peculiar whistle and all
the spiders disappeared.

"There is more magic in my fairyland than I dreamed of," remarked the
beautiful Ozma, with a sigh of regret. "It seems that my laws have not
been obeyed, for even these monstrous spiders defy me by means of
Magic."

"Never mind that now," said Dorothy; "let's see what we can do to get
out of this trap."

They now examined the web with great care and were amazed at its
strength. Although finer than the finest silken hairs, it resisted all
their efforts to work through, even though both girls threw all their
weight against it.

"We must find some instrument which will cut the threads of the web,"
said Ozma, finally. "Let us look about for such a tool."

So they wandered among the bushes and finally came to a shallow pool of
water, formed by a small bubbling spring. Dorothy stooped to get a
drink and discovered in the water a green crab, about as big as her
hand. The crab had two big, sharp claws, and as soon as Dorothy saw
them she had an idea that those claws could save them.

"Come out of the water," she called to the crab; "I want to talk to
you."

Rather lazily the crab rose to the surface and caught hold of a bit of
rock. With his head above the water he said in a cross voice:

"What do you want?"

"We want you to cut the web of the purple spiders with your claws, so
we can get through it," answered Dorothy. "You can do that, can't you?"

"I suppose so," replied the crab. "But if I do what will you give me?"

"What do you wish?" Ozma inquired.

"I wish to be white, instead of green," said the crab. "Green crabs are
very common, and white ones are rare; besides the purple spiders, which
infest this hillside, are afraid of white crabs. Could you make me
white if I should agree to cut the web for you?"

"Yes," said Ozma, "I can do that easily. And, so you may know I am
speaking the truth, I will change your color now."

She waved her silver wand over the pool and the crab instantly became
snow-white--all except his eyes, which remained black. The creature saw
his reflection in the water and was so delighted that he at once
climbed out of the pool and began moving slowly toward the web, by
backing away from the pool. He moved so very slowly that Dorothy cried
out impatiently: "Dear me, this will never do!" Caching the crab in her
hands she ran with him to the web.

She had to hold him up even then, so he could reach with his claws
strand after strand of the filmy purple web, which he was able to sever
with one nip.

When enough of the web had been cut to allow them to pass, Dorothy ran
back to the pool and placed the white crab in the water, after which
she rejoined Ozma. They were just in time to escape through the web,
for several of the purple spiders now appeared, having discovered that
their web had been cut, and had the girls not rushed through the
opening the spiders would have quickly repaired the cuts and again
imprisoned them.

Ozma and Dorothy ran as fast as they could and although the angry
spiders threw a number of strands of web after them, hoping to lasso
them or entangle them in the coils, they managed to escape and clamber
to the top of the hill.




Chapter Three

The Mist Maidens


From the top of the hill Ozma and Dorothy looked down into the valley
beyond and were surprised to find it filled with a floating mist that
was as dense as smoke. Nothing in the valley was visible except these
rolling waves of mist, but beyond, on the other side, rose a grassy
hill that appeared quite beautiful.

"Well," said Dorothy, "what are we to do, Ozma? Walk down into that
thick fog, an' prob'bly get lost in it, or wait till it clears away?"

"I'm not sure it will clear away, however long we wait," replied Ozma,
doubtfully. "If we wish to get on, I think we must venture into the
mist."

"But we can't see where we're going, or what we're stepping on,"
protested Dorothy.  "There may be dreadful things mixed up in that fog,
an' I'm scared just to think of wading into it."

Even Ozma seemed to hesitate. She was silent and thoughtful for a
little while, looking at the rolling drifts that were so gray and
forbidding. Finally she said:

"I believe this is a Mist Valley, where these moist clouds always
remain, for even the sunshine above does not drive them away. Therefore
the Mist Maids must live here, and they are fairies and should answer
my call."

She placed her two hands before her mouth, forming a hollow with them,
and uttered a clear, thrilling, bird-like cry. It floated far out over
the mist waves and presently was answered by a similar sound, as of a
far-off echo.

Dorothy was much impressed. She had seen many strange things since
coming to this fairy country, but here was a new experience. At
ordinary times Ozma was just like any little girl one might chance to
meet--simple, merry, lovable as could be--yet with a certain reserve
that lent her dignity in her most joyous moods. There were times,
however, when seated on her throne and commanding her subjects, or when
her fairy powers were called into use, when Dorothy and all others
about her stood in awe of their lovely girl Ruler and realized her
superiority.

Ozma waited. Presently out from the billows rose beautiful forms,
clothed in fleecy, trailing garments of gray that could scarcely be
distinguished from the mist. Their hair was mist-color, too; only their
gleaming arms and sweet, pallid faces proved they were living,
intelligent creatures answering the call of a sister fairy.

Like sea nymphs they rested on the bosom of the clouds, their eyes
turned questioningly upon the two girls who stood upon the bank. One
came quite near and to her Ozma said:

"Will you please take us to the opposite hillside? We are afraid to
venture into the mist. I am Princess Ozma of Oz, and this is my friend
Dorothy, a Princess of Oz."

The Mist Maids came nearer, holding out their arms. Without hesitation
Ozma advanced and allowed them to embrace her and Dorothy plucked up
courage to follow. Very gently the Mist Maids held them. Dorothy
thought the arms were cold and misty--they didn't seem real at all--yet
they supported the two girls above the surface of the billows and
floated with them so swiftly to the green hillside opposite that the
girls were astonished to find themselves set upon the grass before they
realized they had fairly started.

"Thank you!" said Ozma gratefully, and Dorothy also added her thanks
for the service.

The Mist Maids made no answer, but they smiled and waved their hands in
good-bye as again they floated out into the mist and disappeared from
view.




Chapter Four

The Magic Tent


"Well," said Dorothy with a laugh, "that was easier than I expected.
It's worth while, sometimes, to be a real fairy. But I wouldn't like to
be that kind, and live in a dreadful fog all the time."

They now climbed the bank and found before them a delightful plain that
spread for miles in all directions. Fragrant wild flowers were
scattered throughout the grass; there were bushes bearing lovely
blossoms and luscious fruits; now and then a group of stately trees
added to the beauty of the landscape. But there were no dwellings or
signs of life.

The farther side of the plain was bordered by a row of palms, and just
in front of the palms rose a queerly shaped hill that towered above the
plain like a mountain. The sides of this hill were straight up and
down; it was oblong in shape and the top seemed flat and level.

"Oh, ho!" cried Dorothy; "I'll bet that's the mountain Glinda told us
of, where the Flatheads live."

"If it is," replied Ozma, "the Lake of the Skeezers must be just beyond
the line of palm trees. Can you walk that far, Dorothy?"

"Of course, in time," was the prompt answer. "I'm sorry we had to leave
the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon behind us, for they'd come in handy just
now; but with the end of our journey in sight a tramp across these
pretty green fields won't tire us a bit."

It was a longer tramp than they suspected, however, and night overtook
them before they could reach the flat mountain. So Ozma proposed they
camp for the night and Dorothy was quite ready to approve. She didn't
like to admit to her friend she was tired, but she told herself that
her legs "had prickers in 'em," meaning they had begun to ache.

Usually when Dorothy started on a journey of exploration or adventure,
she carried with her a basket of food, and other things that a traveler
in a strange country might require, but to go away with Ozma was quite
a different thing, as experience had taught her. The fairy Ruler of Oz
only needed her silver wand--tipped at one end with a great sparkling
emerald--to provide through its magic all that they might need.
Therefore Ozma, having halted with her companion and selected a smooth,
grassy spot on the plain, waved her wand in graceful curves and chanted
some mystic words in her sweet voice, and in an instant a handsome tent
appeared before them. The canvas was striped purple and white, and from
the center pole fluttered the royal banner of Oz.

"Come, dear," said Ozma, taking Dorothy's hand, "I am hungry and I'm
sure you must be also; so let us go in and have our feast."

On entering the tent they found a table set for two, with snowy linen,
bright silver and sparkling glassware, a vase of roses in the center
and many dishes of delicious food, some smoking hot, waiting to satisfy
their hunger. Also, on either side of the tent were beds, with satin
sheets, warm blankets and pillows filled with swansdown. There were
chairs, too, and tall lamps that lighted the interior of the tent with
a soft, rosy glow.

Dorothy, resting herself at her fairy friend's command, and eating her
dinner with unusual enjoyment, thought of the wonders of magic. If one
were a fairy and knew the secret laws of nature and the mystic words
and ceremonies that commanded those laws, then a simple wave of a
silver wand would produce instantly all that men work hard and
anxiously for through weary years. And Dorothy wished in her kindly,
innocent heart, that all men and women could be fairies with silver
wands, and satisfy all their needs without so much work and worry, for
then, she imagined, they would have all their working hours to be happy
in. But Ozma, looking into her friend's face and reading those
thoughts, gave a laugh and said:

"No, no, Dorothy, that wouldn't do at all. Instead of happiness your
plan would bring weariness to the world. If every one could wave a wand
and have his wants fulfilled there would be little to wish for. There
would be no eager striving to obtain the difficult, for nothing would
then be difficult, and the pleasure of earning something longed for,
and only to be secured by hard work and careful thought, would be
utterly lost. There would be nothing to do you see, and no interest in
life and in our fellow creatures. That is all that makes life worth our
while--to do good deeds and to help those less fortunate than
ourselves."

"Well, you're a fairy, Ozma. Aren't you happy?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes, dear, because I can use my fairy powers to make others happy. Had
I no kingdom to rule, and no subjects to look after, I would be
miserable. Also, you must realize that while I am a more powerful fairy
than any other inhabitant of Oz, I am not as powerful as Glinda the
Sorceress, who has studied many arts of magic that I know nothing of.
Even the little Wizard of Oz can do some things I am unable to
accomplish, while I can accomplish things unknown to the Wizard. This
is to explain that I'm not all-powerful, by any means. My magic is
simply fairy magic, and not sorcery or wizardry."

"All the same," said Dorothy, "I'm mighty glad you could make this tent
appear, with our dinners and beds all ready for us."

Ozma smiled.

"Yes, it is indeed wonderful," she agreed. "Not all fairies know that
sort of magic, but some fairies can do magic that fills me with
astonishment. I think that is what makes us modest and unassuming--the
fact that our magic arts are divided, some being given each of us. I'm
glad I don't know everything, Dorothy, and that there still are things
in both nature and in wit for me to marvel at."

Dorothy couldn't quite understand this, so she said nothing more on the
subject and presently had a new reason to marvel. For when they had
quite finished their meal table and contents disappeared in a flash.

"No dishes to wash, Ozma!" she said with a laugh. "I guess you'd make a
lot of folks happy if you could teach 'em just that one trick."

For an hour Ozma told stories, and talked with Dorothy about various
people in whom they were interested. And then it was bedtime, and they
undressed and crept into their soft beds and fell asleep almost as soon
as their heads touched their pillows.




Chapter Five

The Magic Stairway


The flat mountain looked much nearer in the clear light of the morning
sun, but Dorothy and Ozma knew there was a long tramp before them, even
yet. They finished dressing only to find a warm, delicious breakfast
awaiting them, and having eaten they left the tent and started toward
the mountain which was their first goal. After going a little way
Dorothy looked back and found that the fairy tent had entirely
disappeared. She was not surprised, for she knew this would happen.

"Can't your magic give us a horse an' wagon, or an automobile?"
inquired Dorothy.

"No, dear; I'm sorry that such magic is beyond my power," confessed her
fairy friend.

"Perhaps Glinda could," said Dorothy thoughtfully.

"Glinda has a stork chariot that carries her through the air," said
Ozma, "but even our great Sorceress cannot conjure up other modes of
travel. Don't forget what I told you last night, that no one is
powerful enough to do everything."

"Well, I s'pose I ought to know that, having lived so long in the Land
of Oz," replied Dorothy; "but I can't do any magic at all, an' so I
can't figure out e'zactly how you an' Glinda an' the Wizard do it."

"Don't try," laughed Ozma. "But you have at least one magical art,
Dorothy: you know the trick of winning all hearts."

"No, I don't," said Dorothy earnestly. "If I really can do it, Ozma, I
am sure I don't know how I do it."

It took them a good two hours to reach the foot of the round, flat
mountain, and then they found the sides so steep that they were like
the wall of a house.

"Even my purple kitten couldn't climb 'em," remarked Dorothy, gazing
upward.

"But there is some way for the Flatheads to get down and up again,"
declared Ozma; "otherwise they couldn't make war with the Skeezers, or
even meet them and quarrel with them."

"That's so, Ozma. Let's walk around a ways; perhaps we'll find a ladder
or something."

They walked quite a distance, for it was a big mountain, and as they
circled around it and came to the side that faced the palm trees, they
suddenly discovered an entrance way cut out of the rock wall. This
entrance was arched overhead and not very deep because it merely led to
a short flight of stone stairs.

"Oh, we've found a way to the top at last," announced Ozma, and the two
girls turned and walked straight toward the entrance. Suddenly they
bumped against something and stood still, unable to proceed farther.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Dorothy, rubbing her nose, which had struck
something hard, although she could not see what it was; "this isn't as
easy as it looks. What has stopped us, Ozma? Is it magic of some sort?"

Ozma was feeling around, her bands outstretched before her.

"Yes, dear, it is magic," she replied. "The Flatheads had to have a way
from their mountain top from the plain below, but to prevent enemies
from rushing up the stairs to conquer them, they have built, at a small
distance before the entrance a wall of solid stone, the stones being
held in place by cement, and then they made the wall invisible."

"I wonder why they did that?" mused Dorothy. "A wall would keep folks
out anyhow, whether it could be seen or not, so there wasn't any use
making it invisible. Seems to me it would have been better to have left
it solid, for then no one would have seen the entrance behind it. Now
anybody can see the entrance, as we did. And prob'bly anybody that
tries to go up the stairs gets bumped, as we did."

Ozma made no reply at once. Her face was grave and thoughtful.

"I think I know the reason for making the wall invisible," she said
after a while. "The Flatheads use the stairs for coming down and going
up. If there was a solid stone wall to keep them from reaching the
plain they would themselves be imprisoned by the wall. So they had to
leave some place to get around the wall, and, if the wall was visible,
all strangers or enemies would find the place to go around it and then
the wall would be useless. So the Flatheads cunningly made their wall
invisible, believing that everyone who saw the entrance to the mountain
would walk straight toward it, as we did, and find it impossible to go
any farther. I suppose the wall is really high and thick, and can't be
broken through, so those who find it in their way are obliged to go
away again."

"Well," said Dorothy, "if there's a way around the wall, where is it?"

"We must find it," returned Ozma, and began feeling her way along the
wall. Dorothy followed and began to get discouraged when Ozma had
walked nearly a quarter of a mile away from the entrance. But now the
invisible wall curved in toward the side of the mountain and suddenly
ended, leaving just space enough between the wall and the mountain for
an ordinary person to pass through.

The girls went in, single file, and Ozma explained that they were now
behind the barrier and could go back to the entrance. They met no
further obstructions.

"Most people, Ozma, wouldn't have figured this thing out the way you
did," remarked Dorothy. "If I'd been alone the invisible wall surely
would have stumped me."

Reaching the entrance they began to mount the stone stairs. They went
up ten stairs and then down five stairs, following a passage cut from
the rock. The stairs were just wide enough for the two girls to walk
abreast, arm in arm. At the bottom of the five stairs the passage
turned to the right, and they ascended ten more stairs, only to find at
the top of the flight five stairs leading straight down again. Again
the passage turned abruptly, this time to the left, and ten more stairs
led upward.

The passage was now quite dark, for they were in the heart of the
mountain and all daylight had been shut out by the turns of the
passage. However, Ozma drew her silver wand from her bosom and the
great jewel at its end gave out a lustrous, green-tinted light which
lighted the place well enough for them to see their way plainly.

Ten steps up, five steps down, and a turn, this way or that. That was
the program, and Dorothy figured that they were only gaining five
stairs upward each trip that they made.

"Those Flatheads must be funny people," she said to Ozma. "They don't
seem to do anything in a bold straightforward manner. In making this
passage they forced everyone to walk three times as far as is
necessary. And of course this trip is just as tiresome to the Flatheads
as it is to other folks."

"That is true," answered Ozma; "yet it is a clever arrangement to
prevent their being surprised by intruders. Every time we reach the
tenth step of a flight, the pressure of our feet on the stone makes a
bell ring on top of the mountain, to warn the Flatheads of our coming."

"How do you know that?" demanded Dorothy, astonished.

"I've heard the bell ever since we started," Ozma told her. "You could
not hear it, I know, but when I am holding my wand in my hand I can
hear sounds a great distance off."

"Do you hear anything on top of the mountain 'cept the bell?" inquired
Dorothy.

"Yes. The people are calling to one another in alarm and many footsteps
are approaching the place where we will reach the flat top of the
mountain."

This made Dorothy feel somewhat anxious. "I'd thought we were going to
visit just common, ordinary people," she remarked, "but they're pretty
clever, it seems, and they know some kinds of magic, too. They may be
dangerous, Ozma. P'raps we'd better stayed at home."

Finally the upstairs-and-downstairs passage seemed coming to an end,
for daylight again appeared ahead of the two girls and Ozma replaced
her wand in the bosom of her gown. The last ten steps brought them to
the surface, where they found themselves surrounded by such a throng of
queer people that for a time they halted, speechless, and stared into
the faces that confronted them.

Dorothy knew at once why these mountain people were called Flatheads.
Their heads were really flat on top, as if they had been cut off just
above the eyes and ears. Also the heads were bald, with no hair on top
at all, and the ears were big and stuck straight out, and the noses
were small and stubby, while the mouths of the Flatheads were well
shaped and not unusual. Their eyes were perhaps their best feature,
being large and bright and a deep violet in color.

The costumes of the Flatheads were all made of metals dug from their
mountain. Small gold, silver, tin and iron discs, about the size of
pennies, and very thin, were cleverly wired together and made to form
knee trousers and jackets for the men and skirts and waists for the
women. The colored metals were skillfully mixed to form stripes and
checks of various sorts, so that the costumes were quite gorgeous and
reminded Dorothy of pictures she had seen of Knights of old clothed
armor.

Aside from their flat heads, these people were not really bad looking.
The men were armed with bows and arrows and had small axes of steel
stuck in their metal belts. They wore no hats nor ornaments.




Chapter Six

Flathead Mountain


When they saw that the intruders on their mountain were only two little
girls, the Flatheads grunted with satisfaction and drew back,
permitting them to see what the mountain top looked like. It was shaped
like a saucer, so that the houses and other buildings--all made of
rocks--could not be seen over the edge by anyone standing in the plain
below.

But now a big fat Flathead stood before the girls and in a gruff voice
demanded:

"What are you doing here? Have the Skeezers sent you to spy upon us?"

"I am Princess Ozma, Ruler of all the Land of Oz."

"Well, I've never heard of the Land of Oz, so you may be what you
claim," returned the Flathead.

"This is the Land of Oz--part of it, anyway," exclaimed Dorothy. "So
Princess Ozma rules you Flathead people, as well as all the other
people in Oz."

The man laughed, and all the others who stood around laughed, too. Some
one in the crowd called:

"She'd better not tell the Supreme Dictator about ruling the Flatheads.
Eh, friends?"

"No, indeed!" they all answered in positive tones.

"Who is your Supreme Dictator?" answered Ozma.

"I think I'll let him tell you that himself," answered the man who had
first spoken. "You have broken our laws by coming here; and whoever you
are the Supreme Dictator must fix your punishment. Come along with me."

He started down a path and Ozma and Dorothy followed him without
protest, as they wanted to see the most important person in this queer
country. The houses they passed seemed pleasant enough and each had a
little yard in which were flowers and vegetables. Walls of rock
separated the dwellings, and all the paths were paved with smooth slabs
of rock. This seemed their only building material and they utilized it
cleverly for every purpose.

Directly in the center of the great saucer stood a larger building
which the Flathead informed the girls was the palace of the Supreme
Dictator. He led them through an entrance hall into a big reception
room, where they sat upon stone benches and awaited the coming of the
Dictator. Pretty soon he entered from another room--a rather lean and
rather old Flathead, dressed much like the others of this strange race,
and only distinguished from them by the sly and cunning expression of
his face. He kept his eyes half closed and looked through the slits of
them at Ozma and Dorothy, who rose to receive him.

"Are you the Supreme Dictator of the Flatheads?" inquired Ozma.

"Yes, that's me," he said, rubbing his hands slowly together. "My word
is law. I'm the head of the Flatheads on this flat headland."

"I am Princess Ozma of Oz, and I have come from the Emerald City to--"

"Stop a minute," interrupted the Dictator, and turned to the man who
had brought the girls there. "Go away, Dictator Felo Flathead!" he
commanded. "Return to your duty and guard the Stairway. I will look
after these strangers." The man bowed and departed, and Dorothy asked
wonderingly:

"Is he a Dictator, too?"

"Of course," was the answer. "Everybody here is a dictator of something
or other. They're all office holders. That's what keeps them contented.
But I'm the Supreme Dictator of all, and I'm elected once a year. This
is a democracy, you know, where the people are allowed to vote for
their rulers. A good many others would like to be Supreme Dictator, but
as I made a law that I am always to count the votes myself, I am always
elected."

"What is your name?" asked Ozma.

"I am called the Su-dic, which is short for Supreme Dictator. I sent
that man away because the moment you mentioned Ozma of Oz, and the
Emerald City, I knew who you are. I suppose I'm the only Flathead that
ever heard of you, but that's because I have more brains than the rest."

Dorothy was staring hard at the Su-dic.

"I don't see how you can have any brains at all," she remarked,
"because the part of your head is gone where brains are kept."

"I don't blame you for thinking that," he said. "Once the Flatheads had
no brains because, as you say, there is no upper part to their heads,
to hold brains. But long, long ago a band of fairies flew over this
country and made it all a fairyland, and when they came to the
Flatheads the fairies were sorry to find them all very stupid and quite
unable to think. So, as there was no good place in their bodies in
which to put brains the Fairy Queen gave each one of us a nice can of
brains to carry in his pocket and that made us just as intelligent as
other people. See," he continued, "here is one of the cans of brains
the fairies gave us." He took from a pocket a bright tin can having a
pretty red label on it which said: "Concentrated Brains, Extra Quality."

"And does every Flathead have the same kind of brains?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes, they're all alike. Here's another can." From another pocket he
produced a second can of brains.

"Did the fairies give you a double supply?" inquired Dorothy.

"No, but one of the Flatheads thought he wanted to be the Su-dic and
tried to get my people to rebel against me, so I punished him by taking
away his brains. One day my wife scolded me severely, so I took away
her can of brains. She didn't like that and went out and robbed several
women of their brains. Then I made a law that if anyone stole another's
brains, or even tried to borrow them, he would forfeit his own brains
to the Su-dic. So each one is content with his own canned brains and my
wife and I are the only ones on the mountain with more than one can. I
have three cans and that makes me very clever--so clever that I'm a
good Sorcerer, if I do say it myself. My poor wife had four cans of
brains and became a remarkable witch, but alas! that was before those
terrible enemies, the Skeezers, transformed her into a Golden Pig."

"Good gracious!" cried Dorothy; "is your wife really a Golden Pig?"

"She is. The Skeezers did it and so I have declared war on them. In
revenge for making my wife a Pig I intend to ruin their Magic Island
and make the Skeezers the slaves of the Flatheads!"

The Su-dic was very angry now; his eyes flashed and his face took on a
wicked and fierce expression. But Ozma said to him, very sweetly and in
a friendly voice:

"I am sorry to hear this. Will you please tell me more about your
troubles with the Skeezers?  Then perhaps I can help you."

She was only a girl, but there was dignity in her pose and speech which
impressed the Su-dic.

"If you are really Princess Ozma of Oz," the Flathead said, "you are
one of that band of fairies who, under Queen Lurline, made all Oz a
Fairyland. I have heard that Lurline left one of her own fairies to
rule Oz, and gave the fairy the name of Ozma."

"If you knew this why did you not come to me at the Emerald City and
tender me your loyalty and obedience?" asked the Ruler of Oz.

"Well, I only learned the fact lately, and I've been too busy to leave
home," he explained, looking at the floor instead of into Ozma's eyes.
She knew he had spoken a falsehood, but only said:

"Why did you quarrel with the Skeezers?"

"It was this way," began the Su-dic, glad to change the subject. "We
Flatheads love fish, and as we have no fish on this mountain we would
sometimes go to the Lake of the Skeezers to catch fish. This made the
Skeezers angry, for they declared the fish in their lake belonged to
them and were under their protection and they forbade us to catch them.
That was very mean and unfriendly in the Skeezers, you must admit, and
when we paid no attention to their orders they set a guard on the shore
of the lake to prevent our fishing.

"Now, my wife, Rora Flathead, having four cans of brains, had become a
wonderful witch, and fish being brain food, she loved to eat fish
better than any one of us. So she vowed she would destroy every fish in
the lake, unless the Skeezers let us catch what we wanted. They defied
us, so Rora prepared a kettleful of magic poison and went down to the
lake one night to dump it all in the water and poison the fish. It was
a clever idea, quite worthy of my dear wife, but the Skeezer Queen--a
young lady named Coo-ee-oh--hid on the bank of the lake and taking Rora
unawares, transformed her into a Golden Pig. The poison was spilled on
the ground and wicked Queen Coo-ee-oh, not content with her cruel
transformation, even took away my wife's four cans of brains, so she is
now a common grunting pig without even brains enough to know her own
name."

"Then," said Ozma thoughtfully, "the Queen of the Skeezers must be a
Sorceress."

"Yes," said the Su-dic, "but she doesn't know much magic, after all.
She is not as powerful as Rora Flathead was, nor half as powerful as I
am now, as Queen Coo-ee-oh will discover when we fight our great battle
and destroy her."

"The Golden Pig can't be a witch any more, of course," observed Dorothy.

"No; even had Queen Coo-ee-oh left her the four cans of brains, poor
Rora, in a pig's shape, couldn't do any witchcraft. A witch has to use
her fingers, and a pig has only cloven hoofs."

"It seems a sad story," was Ozma's comment, "and all the trouble arose
because the Flatheads wanted fish that did not belong to them."

"As for that," said the Su-dic, again angry, "I made a law that any of
my people could catch fish in the Lake of the Skeezers, whenever they
wanted to. So the trouble was through the Skeezers defying my law."

"You can only make laws to govern your own people," asserted Ozma
sternly. "I, alone, am empowered to make laws that must be obeyed by
all the peoples of Oz."

"Pooh!" cried the Su-dic scornfully. "You can't make me obey your laws,
I assure you. I know the extent of your powers, Princess Ozma of Oz,
and I know that I am more powerful than you are. To prove it I shall
keep you and your companion prisoners in this mountain until after we
have fought and conquered the Skeezers. Then, if you promise to be
good, I may let you go home again."

Dorothy was amazed by this effrontery and defiance of the beautiful
girl Ruler of Oz, whom all until now had obeyed without question. But
Ozma, still unruffled and dignified, looked at the Su-dic and said:

"You did not mean that. You are angry and speak unwisely, without
reflection. I came here from my palace in the Emerald City to prevent
war and to make peace between you and the Skeezers. I do not approve of
Queen Coo-ee-oh's action in transforming your wife Rora into a pig, nor
do I approve of Rora's cruel attempt to poison the fishes in the lake.
No one has the right to work magic in my dominions without my consent,
so the Flatheads and the Skeezers have both broken my laws--which must
be obeyed."

"If you want to make peace," said the Su-dic, "make the Skeezers
restore my wife to her proper form and give back her four cans of
brains. Also make them agree to allow us to catch fish in their lake."

"No," returned Ozma, "I will not do that, for it would be unjust. I
will have the Golden Pig again transformed into your wife Rora, and
give her one can of brains, but the other three cans must be restored
to those she robbed. Neither may you catch fish in the Lake of the
Skeezers, for it is their lake and the fish belong to them. This
arrangement is just and honorable, and you must agree to it."

"Never!" cried the Su-dic. Just then a pig came running into the room,
uttering dismal grunts. It was made of solid gold, with joints at the
bends of the legs and in the neck and jaws. The Golden Pig's eyes were
rubies, and its teeth were polished ivory.

"There!" said the Su-dic, "gaze on the evil work of Queen Coo-ee-oh,
and then say if you can prevent my making war on the Skeezers. That
grunting beast was once my wife--the most beautiful Flathead on our
mountain and a skillful witch. Now look at her!"

"Fight the Skeezers, fight the Skeezers, fight the Skeezers!" grunted
the Golden Pig.

"I will fight the Skeezers," exclaimed the Flathead chief, "and if a
dozen Ozmas of Oz forbade me I would fight just the same."

"Not if I can prevent it!" asserted Ozma.

"You can't prevent it. But since you threaten me, I'll have you
confined in the bronze prison until the war is over," said the Su-dic.
He whistled and four stout Flatheads, armed with axes and spears,
entered the room and saluted him. Turning to the men he said: "Take
these two girls, bind them with wire ropes and cast them into the
bronze prison."

The four men bowed low and one of them asked:

"Where are the two girls, most noble Su-dic?"

The Su-dic turned to where Ozma and Dorothy had stood but they had
vanished!




Chapter Seven

The Magic Isle


Ozma, seeing it was useless to argue with the Supreme Dictator of the
Flatheads, had been considering how best to escape from his power. She
realized that his sorcery might be difficult to overcome, and when he
threatened to cast Dorothy and her into a bronze prison she slipped her
hand into her bosom and grasped her silver wand. With the other hand
she grasped the hand of Dorothy, but these motions were so natural that
the Su-dic did not notice them. Then when he turned to meet his four
soldiers, Ozma instantly rendered both herself and Dorothy invisible
and swiftly led her companion around the group of Flatheads and out of
the room. As they reached the entry and descended the stone steps, Ozma
whispered:

"Let us run, dear! We are invisible, so no one will see us."

Dorothy understood and she was a good runner. Ozma had marked the place
where the grand stairway that led to the plain was located, so they
made directly for it. Some people were in the paths but these they
dodged around. One or two Flatheads heard the pattering of footsteps of
the girls on the stone pavement and stopped with bewildered looks to
gaze around them, but no one interfered with the invisible fugitives.

The Su-dic had lost no time in starting the chase. He and his men ran
so fast that they might have overtaken the girls before they reached
the stairway had not the Golden Pig suddenly run across their path. The
Su-dic tripped over the pig and fell flat, and his four men tripped
over him and tumbled in a heap. Before they could scramble up and reach
the mouth of the passage it was too late to stop the two girls.

There was a guard on each side of the stairway, but of course they did
not see Ozma and Dorothy as they sped past and descended the steps.
Then they had to go up five steps and down another ten, and so on, in
the same manner in which they had climbed to the top of the mountain.
Ozma lighted their way with her wand and they kept on without relaxing
their speed until they reached the bottom. Then they ran to the right
and turned the corner of the invisible wall just as the Su-dic and his
followers rushed out of the arched entrance and looked around in an
attempt to discover the fugitives.

Ozma now knew they were safe, so she told Dorothy to stop and both of
them sat down on the grass until they could breathe freely and become
rested from their mad flight.

As for the Su-dic, he realized he was foiled and soon turned and
climbed his stairs again. He was very angry--angry with Ozma and angry
with himself--because, now that he took time to think, he remembered
that he knew very well the art of making people invisible, and visible
again, and if he had only thought of it in time he could have used his
magic knowledge to make the girls visible and so have captured them
easily. However, it was now too late for regrets and he determined to
make preparations at once to march all his forces against the Skeezers.

"What shall we do next?" asked Dorothy, when they were rested.

"Let us find the Lake of the Skeezers," replied Ozma. "From what that
dreadful Su-dic said I imagine the Skeezers are good people and worthy
of our friendship, and if we go to them we may help them to defeat the
Flatheads."

"I s'pose we can't stop the war now," remarked Dorothy reflectively, as
they walked toward the row of palm trees.

"No; the Su-dic is determined to fight the Skeezers, so all we can do
is to warn them of their danger and help them as much as possible."

"Of course you'll punish the Flatheads," said Dorothy.

"Well, I do not think the Flathead people are as much to blame as their
Supreme Dictator," was the answer. "If he is removed from power and his
unlawful magic taken from him, the people will probably be good and
respect the laws of the Land of Oz, and live at peace with all their
neighbors in the future."

"I hope so," said Dorothy with a sigh of doubt

The palms were not far from the mountain and the girls reached them
after a brisk walk. The huge trees were set close together, in three
rows, and had been planted so as to keep people from passing them, but
the Flatheads had cut a passage through this barrier and Ozma found the
path and led Dorothy to the other side.

Beyond the palms they discovered a very beautiful scene. Bordered by a
green lawn was a great lake fully a mile from shore to shore, the
waters of which were exquisitely blue and sparkling, with little
wavelets breaking its smooth surface where the breezes touched it. In
the center of this lake appeared a lovely island, not of great extent
but almost entirely covered by a huge round building with glass walls
and a high glass dome which glittered brilliantly in the sunshine.
Between the glass building and the edge of the island was no grass,
flowers or shrubbery, but only an expanse of highly polished white
marble. There were no boats on either shore and no signs of life could
be seen anywhere on the island.

"Well," said Dorothy, gazing wistfully at the island, "we've found the
Lake of the Skeezers and their Magic Isle. I guess the Skeezers are in
that big glass palace, but we can't get at 'em."




Chapter Eight

Queen Coo-ee-oh


Princess Ozma considered the situation gravely. Then she tied her
handkerchief to her wand and, standing at the water's edge, waved the
handkerchief like a flag, as a signal. For a time they could observe no
response.

"I don't see what good that will do," said Dorothy. "Even if the
Skeezers are on that island and see us, and know we're friends, they
haven't any boats to come and get us."

But the Skeezers didn't need boats, as the girls soon discovered. For
on a sudden an opening appeared at the base of the palace and from the
opening came a slender shaft of steel, reaching out slowly but steadily
across the water in the direction of the place where they stood. To the
girls this steel arrangement looked like a triangle, with the base
nearest the water. It came toward them in the form of an arch,
stretching out from the palace wall until its end reached the bank and
rested there, while the other end still remained on the island.

Then they saw that it was a bridge, consisting of a steel footway just
broad enough to walk on, and two slender guide rails, one on either
side, which were connected with the footway by steel bars. The bridge
looked rather frail and Dorothy feared it would not bear their weight,
but Ozma at once called, "Come on!" and started to walk across, holding
fast to the rail on either side. So Dorothy summoned her courage and
followed after. Before Ozma had taken three steps she halted and so
forced Dorothy to halt, for the bridge was again moving and returning
to the island.

"We need not walk after all," said Ozma. So they stood still in their
places and let the steel bridge draw them onward. Indeed, the bridge
drew them well into the glass-domed building which covered the island,
and soon they found themselves standing in a marble room where two
handsomely dressed young men stood on a platform to receive them.

Ozma at once stepped from the end of the bridge to the marble platform,
followed by Dorothy, and then the bridge disappeared with a slight
clang of steel and a marble slab covered the opening from which it had
emerged.

The two young men bowed profoundly to Ozma, and one of them said:

"Queen Coo-ee-oh bids you welcome, O Strangers. Her Majesty is waiting
to receive you in her palace."

"Lead on," replied Ozma with dignity.

But instead of "leading on," the platform of marble began to rise,
carrying them upward through a square hole above which just fitted it.
A moment later they found themselves within the great glass dome that
covered almost all of the island.

Within this dome was a little village, with houses, streets, gardens
and parks. The houses were of colored marbles, prettily designed, with
many stained-glass windows, and the streets and gardens seemed well
cared for. Exactly under the center of the lofty dome was a small park
filled with brilliant flowers, with an elaborate fountain, and facing
this park stood a building larger and more imposing than the others.
Toward this building the young men escorted Ozma and Dorothy.

On the streets and in the doorways or open windows of the houses were
men, women and children, all richly dressed. These were much like other
people in different parts of the Land of Oz, except that instead of
seeming merry and contented they all wore expressions of much solemnity
or of nervous irritation. They had beautiful homes, splendid clothes,
and ample food, but Dorothy at once decided something was wrong with
their lives and that they were not happy. She said nothing, however,
but looked curiously at the Skeezers.

At the entrance of the palace Ozma and Dorothy were met by two other
young men, in uniform and armed with queer weapons that seemed about
halfway between pistols and guns, but were like neither. Their
conductors bowed and left them, and the two in uniforms led the girls
into the palace.

In a beautiful throne room, surrounded by a dozen or more young men and
women, sat the Queen of the Skeezers, Coo-ee-oh. She was a girl who
looked older than Ozma or Dorothy--fifteen or sixteen, at least--and
although she was elaborately dressed as if she were going to a ball she
was too thin and plain of feature to be pretty. But evidently Queen
Coo-ee-oh did not realize this fact, for her air and manner betrayed
her as proud and haughty and with a high regard for her own importance.
Dorothy at once decided she was "snippy" and that she would not like
Queen Coo-ee-oh as a companion.

The Queen's hair was as black as her skin was white and her eyes were
black, too. The eyes, as she calmly examined Ozma and Dorothy, had a
suspicious and unfriendly look in them, but she said quietly:

"I know who you are, for I have consulted my Magic Oracle, which told
me that one calls herself Princess Ozma, the Ruler of all the Land of
Oz, and the other is Princess Dorothy of Oz, who came from a country
called Kansas. I know nothing of the Land of Oz, and I know nothing of
Kansas."

"Why, this is the Land of Oz!" cried Dorothy. "It's a part of the Land
of Oz, anyhow, whether you know it or not."

"Oh, in-deed!" answered Queen Coo-ee-oh, scornfully. "I suppose you
will claim next that this Princess Ozma, ruling the Land of Oz, rules
me!"

"Of course," returned Dorothy. "There's no doubt of it."

The Queen turned to Ozma.

"Do you dare make such a claim?" she asked.

By this time Ozma had made up her mind as to the character of this
haughty and disdainful creature, whose self-pride evidently led her to
believe herself superior to all others.

"I did not come here to quarrel with your Majesty," said the girl Ruler
of Oz, quietly. "What and who I am is well established, and my
authority comes from the Fairy Queen Lurline, of whose band I was a
member when Lurline made all Oz a Fairyland. There are several
countries and several different peoples in this broad land, each of
which has its separate rulers, Kings, Emperors and Queens. But all
these render obedience to my laws and acknowledge me as the supreme
Ruler."

"If other Kings and Queens are fools that does not interest me in the
least," replied Coo-ee-oh, disdainfully. "In the Land of the Skeezers I
alone am supreme. You are impudent to think I would defer to you--or to
anyone else."

"Let us not speak of this now, please," answered Ozma. "Your island is
in danger, for a powerful foe is preparing to destroy it."

"Pah! The Flatheads. I do not fear them."

"Their Supreme Dictator is a Sorcerer."

"My magic is greater than his. Let the Flatheads come! They will never
return to their barren mountain-top. I will see to that."

Ozma did not like this attitude, for it meant that the Skeezers were
eager to fight the Flatheads, and Ozma's object in coming here was to
prevent fighting and induce the two quarrelsome neighbors to make
peace. She was also greatly disappointed in Coo-ee-oh, for the reports
of Su-dic had led her to imagine the Queen more just and honorable than
were the Flatheads. Indeed Ozma reflected that the girl might be better
at heart than her self-pride and overbearing manner indicated, and in
any event it would be wise not to antagonize her but to try to win her
friendship.

"I do not like wars, your Majesty," said Ozma. "In the Emerald City,
where I rule thousands of people, and in the countries near to the
Emerald City, where thousands more acknowledge my rule, there is no
army at all, because there is no quarreling and no need to fight. If
differences arise between my people, they come to me and I judge the
cases and award justice to all. So, when I learned there might be war
between two faraway people of Oz, I came here to settle the dispute and
adjust the quarrel."

"No one asked you to come," declared Queen Coo-ee-oh. "It is my
business to settle this dispute, not yours. You say my island is a part
of the Land of Oz, which you rule, but that is all nonsense, for I've
never heard of the Land of Oz, nor of you. You say you are a fairy, and
that fairies gave you command over me. I don't believe it! What I do
believe is that you are an impostor and have come here to stir up
trouble among my people, who are already becoming difficult to manage.
You two girls may even be spies of the vile Flatheads, for all I know,
and may be trying to trick me. But understand this," she added, proudly
rising from her jeweled throne to confront them, "I have magic powers
greater than any fairy possesses, and greater than any Flathead
possesses. I am a Krumbic Witch--the only Krumbic Witch in the
world--and I fear the magic of no other creature that exists! You say
you rule thousands. I rule one hundred and one Skeezers. But every one
of them trembles at my word. Now that Ozma of Oz and Princess Dorothy
are here, I shall rule one hundred and three subjects, for you also
shall bow before my power. More than that, in ruling you I also rule
the thousands you say you rule."

Dorothy was very indignant at this speech.

"I've got a pink kitten that sometimes talks like that," she said, "but
after I give her a good whipping she doesn't think she's so high and
mighty after all. If you only knew who Ozma is you'd be scared to death
to talk to her like that!"

Queen Coo-ee-oh gave the girl a supercilious look. Then she turned
again to Ozma.

"I happen to know," said she, "that the Flatheads intend to attack us
tomorrow, but we are ready for them. Until the battle is over, I shall
keep you two strangers prisoners on my island, from which there is no
chance for you to escape."

She turned and looked around the band of courtiers who stood silently
around her throne.

"Lady Aurex," she continued, singling out one of the young women, "take
these children to your house and care for them, giving them food and
lodging. You may allow them to wander anywhere under the Great Dome,
for they are harmless. After I have attended to the Flatheads I will
consider what next to do with these foolish girls."

She resumed her seat and the Lady Aurex bowed low and said in a humble
manner:

"I obey your Majesty's commands." Then to Ozma and Dorothy she added,
"Follow me," and turned to leave the throne room.

Dorothy looked to see what Ozma would do. To her surprise and a little
to her disappointment Ozma turned and followed Lady Aurex. So Dorothy
trailed after them, but not without giving a parting, haughty look
toward Queen Coo-ee-oh, who had her face turned the other way and did
not see the disapproving look.




Chapter Nine

Lady Aurex


Lady Aurex led Ozma and Dorothy along a street to a pretty marble house
near to one edge of the great glass dome that covered the village. She
did not speak to the girls until she had ushered them into a pleasant
room, comfortably furnished, nor did any of the solemn people they met
on the street venture to speak.

When they were seated Lady Aurex asked if they were hungry, and finding
they were summoned a maid and ordered food to be brought.

This Lady Aurex looked to be about twenty years old, although in the
Land of Oz where people have never changed in appearance since the
fairies made it a fairyland--where no one grows old or dies--it is
always difficult to say how many years anyone has lived. She had a
pleasant, attractive face, even though it was solemn and sad as the
faces of all Skeezers seemed to be, and her costume was rich and
elaborate, as became a lady in waiting upon the Queen.

Ozma had observed Lady Aurex closely and now asked her in a gentle tone:

"Do you, also, believe me to be an impostor?"

"I dare not say," replied Lady Aurex in a low tone.

"Why are you afraid to speak freely?" inquired Ozma.

"The Queen punishes us if we make remarks that she does not like."

"Are we not alone then, in this house?"

"The Queen can hear everything that is spoken on this island--even the
slightest whisper," declared Lady Aurex. "She is a wonderful witch, as
she has told you, and it is folly to criticise her or disobey her
commands."

Ozma looked into her eyes and saw that she would like to say more if
she dared. So she drew from her bosom her silver wand, and having
muttered a magic phrase in a strange tongue, she left the room and
walked slowly around the outside of the house, making a complete circle
and waving her wand in mystic curves as she walked. Lady Aurex watched
her curiously and, when Ozma had again entered the room and seated
herself, she asked:

"What have you done?"

"I've enchanted this house in such a manner that Queen Coo-ee-oh, with
all her witchcraft, cannot hear one word we speak within the magic
circle I have made," replied Ozma. "We may now speak freely and as
loudly as we wish, without fear of the Queen's anger."

Lady Aurex brightened at this.

"Can I trust you?" she asked.

"Ev'rybody trusts Ozma," exclaimed Dorothy. "She is true and honest,
and your wicked Queen will be sorry she insulted the powerful Ruler of
all the Land of Oz."

"The Queen does not know me yet," said Ozma, "but I want you to know
me, Lady Aurex, and I want you to tell me why you, and all the
Skeezers, are unhappy. Do not fear Coo-ee-oh's anger, for she cannot
hear a word we say, I assure you."

Lady Aurex was thoughtful a moment; then she said: "I shall trust you,
Princess Ozma, for I believe you are what you say you are--our supreme
Ruler. If you knew the dreadful punishments our Queen inflicts upon us,
you would not wonder we are so unhappy. The Skeezers are not bad
people; they do not care to quarrel and fight, even with their enemies
the Flatheads; but they are so cowed and fearful of Coo-ee-oh that they
obey her slightest word, rather than suffer her anger."

"Hasn't she any heart, then?" asked Dorothy.

"She never displays mercy. She loves no one but herself," asserted Lady
Aurex, but she trembled as she said it, as if afraid even yet of her
terrible Queen.

"That's pretty bad," said Dorothy, shaking her head gravely. "I see
you've a lot to do here, Ozma, in this forsaken corner of the Land of
Oz. First place, you've got to take the magic away from Queen
Coo-ee-oh, and from that awful Su-dic, too. My idea is that neither of
them is fit to rule anybody, 'cause they're cruel and hateful. So
you'll have to give the Skeezers and Flatheads new rulers and teach all
their people that they're part of the Land of Oz and must obey, above
all, the lawful Ruler, Ozma of Oz. Then, when you've done that, we can
go back home again."

Ozma smiled at her little friend's earnest counsel, but Lady Aurex said
in an anxious tone:

"I am surprised that you suggest these reforms while you are yet
prisoners on this island and in Coo-ee-oh's power. That these things
should be done, there is no doubt, but just now a dreadful war is
likely to break out, and frightful things may happen to us all.  Our
Queen has such conceit that she thinks she can overcome the Su-dic and
his people, but it is said Su-dic's magic is very powerful, although
not as great as that possessed by his wife Rora, before Coo-ee-oh
transformed her into a Golden Pig."

"I don't blame her very much for doing that," remarked Dorothy, "for
the Flatheads were wicked to try to catch your beautiful fish and the
Witch Rora wanted to poison all the fishes in the lake."

"Do you know the reason?" asked the Lady Aurex.

"I don't s'pose there was any reason, 'cept just wickedness," replied
Dorothy.

"Tell us the reason," said Ozma earnestly.

"Well, your Majesty, once--a long time ago--the Flatheads and the
Skeezers were friendly. They visited our island and we visited their
mountain, and everything was pleasant between the two peoples. At that
time the Flatheads were ruled by three Adepts in Sorcery, beautiful
girls who were not Flatheads, but had wandered to the Flat Mountain and
made their home there. These three Adepts used their magic only for
good, and the mountain people gladly made them their rulers. They
taught the Flatheads how to use their canned brains and how to work
metals into clothing that would never wear out, and many other things
that added to their happiness and content.

"Coo-ee-oh was our Queen then, as now, but she knew no magic and so had
nothing to be proud of. But the three Adepts were very kind to
Coo-ee-oh. They built for us this wonderful dome of glass and our
houses of marble and taught us to make beautiful clothing and many
other things. Coo-ee-oh pretended to be very grateful for these favors,
but it seems that all the time she was jealous of the three Adepts and
secretly tried to discover their arts of magic. In this she was more
clever than anyone suspected. She invited the three Adepts to a banquet
one day, and while they were feasting Coo-ee-oh stole their charms and
magical instruments and transformed them into three fishes--a gold
fish, a silver fish and a bronze fish. While the poor fishes were
gasping and flopping helplessly on the floor of the banquet room one of
them said reproachfully: 'You will be punished for this, Coo-ee-oh, for
if one of us dies or is destroyed, you will become shrivelled and
helpless, and all your stolen magic will depart from you.' Frightened
by this threat, Coo-ee-oh at once caught up the three fish and ran with
them to the shore of the lake, where she cast them into the water. This
revived the three Adepts and they swam away and disappeared.

"I, myself, witnessed this shocking scene," continued Lady Aurex, "and
so did many other Skeezers. The news was carried to the Flatheads, who
then turned from friends to enemies. The Su-dic and his wife Rora were
the only ones on the mountain who were glad the three Adepts had been
lost to them, and they at once became Rulers of the Flatheads and stole
their canned brains from others to make themselves the more powerful.
Some of the Adepts' magic tools had been left on the mountain, and
these Rora seized and by the use of them she became a witch.

"The result of Coo-ee-oh's treachery was to make both the Skeezers and
the Flatheads miserable instead of happy. Not only were the Su-dic and
his wife cruel to their people, but our Queen at once became proud and
arrogant and treated us very unkindly. All the Skeezers knew she had
stolen her magic powers and so she hated us and made us humble
ourselves before her and obey her slightest word. If we disobeyed, or
did not please her, or if we talked about her when we were in our own
homes she would have us dragged to the whipping post in her palace and
lashed with knotted cords. That is why we fear her so greatly."

This story filled Ozma's heart with sorrow and Dorothy's heart with
indignation.

"I now understand," said Ozma, "why the fishes in the lake have brought
about war between the Skeezers and the Flatheads."

"Yes," Lady Aurex answered, "now that you know the story it is easy to
understand. The Su-dic and his wife came to our lake hoping to catch
the silver fish, or gold fish, or bronze fish--any one of them would
do--and by destroying it deprive Coo-ee-oh of her magic. Then they
could easily conquer her. Also they had another reason for wanting to
catch the fish--they feared that in some way the three Adepts might
regain their proper forms and then they would be sure to return to the
mountain and punish Rora and the Su-dic. That was why Rora finally
tried to poison all the fishes in the lake, at the time Coo-ee-oh
transformed her into a Golden Pig. Of course this attempt to destroy
the fishes frightened the Queen, for her safety lies in keeping the
three fishes alive."

"I s'pose Coo-ee-oh will fight the Flatheads with all her might,"
observed Dorothy.

"And with all her magic," added Ozma, thoughtfully.

"I do not see how the Flatheads can get to this island to hurt us,"
said Lady Aurex.

"They have bows and arrows, and I guess they mean to shoot the arrows
at your big dome, and break all the glass in it," suggested Dorothy.

But Lady Aurex shook her head with a smile.

"They cannot do that," she replied.

"Why not?"

"I dare not tell you why, but if the Flatheads come to-morrow morning
you will yourselves see the reason."

"I do not think they will attempt to harm the island," Ozma declared.
"I believe they will first attempt to destroy the fishes, by poison or
some other means. If they succeed in that, the conquest of the island
will not be difficult."

"They have no boats," said Lady Aurex, "and Coo-ee-oh, who has long
expected this war, has been preparing for it in many astonishing ways.
I almost wish the Flatheads would conquer us, for then we would be free
from our dreadful Queen; but I do not wish to see the three transformed
fishes destroyed, for in them lies our only hope of future happiness."

"Ozma will take care of you, whatever happens," Dorothy assured her.
But the Lady Aurex, not knowing the extent of Ozma's power--which was,
in fact, not so great as Dorothy imagined--could not take much comfort
in this promise.

It was evident there would be exciting times on the morrow, if the
Flatheads really attacked the Skeezers of the Magic Isle.




Chapter Ten

Under Water


When night fell all the interior of the Great Dome, streets and houses,
became lighted with brilliant incandescent lamps, which rendered it
bright as day. Dorothy thought the island must look beautiful by night
from the outer shore of the lake. There was revelry and feasting in the
Queen's palace, and the music of the royal band could be plainly heard
in Lady Aurex's house, where Ozma and Dorothy remained with their
hostess and keeper. They were prisoners, but treated with much
consideration.

Lady Aurex gave them a nice supper and when they wished to retire
showed them to a pretty room with comfortable beds and wished them a
good night and pleasant dreams.

"What do you think of all this, Ozma?" Dorothy anxiously inquired when
they were alone.

"I am glad we came," was the reply, "for although there may be mischief
done to-morrow, it was necessary I should know about these people,
whose leaders are wild and lawless and oppress their subjects with
injustice and cruelties. My task, therefore, is to liberate the
Skeezers and the Flatheads and secure for them freedom and happiness. I
have no doubt I can accomplish this in time."

"Just now, though, we're in a bad fix," asserted Dorothy. "If Queen
Coo-ee-oh conquers to-morrow, she won't be nice to us, and if the
Su-dic conquers, he'll be worse."

"Do not worry, dear," said Ozma, "I do not think we are in danger,
whatever happens, and the result of our adventure is sure to be good."

Dorothy was not worrying, especially. She had confidence in her friend,
the fairy Princess of Oz, and she enjoyed the excitement of the events
in which she was taking part. So she crept into bed and fell asleep as
easily as if she had been in her own cosy room in Ozma's palace.

A sort of grating, grinding sound awakened her. The whole island seemed
to tremble and sway, as it might do in an earthquake. Dorothy sat up in
bed, rubbing her eyes to get the sleep out of them, and then found it
was daybreak.

Ozma was hurriedly dressing herself.

"What is it?" asked Dorothy, jumping out of bed.

"I'm not sure," answered Ozma "but it feels as if the island is
sinking."

As soon as possible they finished dressing, while the creaking and
swaying continued. Then they rushed into the living room of the house
and found Lady Aurex, fully dressed, awaiting them.

"Do not be alarmed," said their hostess. "Coo-ee-oh has decided to
submerge the island, that is all. But it proves the Flatheads are
coming to attack us."

"What do you mean by sub-sub-merging the island?" asked Dorothy.

"Come here and see," was the reply.

Lady Aurex led them to a window which faced the side of the great dome
which covered all the village, and they could see that the island was
indeed sinking, for the water of the lake was already half way up the
side of the dome. Through the glass could be seen swimming fishes, and
tall stalks of swaying seaweeds, for the water was clear as crystal and
through it they could distinguish even the farther shore of the lake.

"The Flatheads are not here yet," said Lady Aurex. "They will come
soon, but not until all of this dome is under the surface of the water."

"Won't the dome leak?" Dorothy inquired anxiously.

"No, indeed."

"Was the island ever sub-sub-sunk before?"

"Oh, yes; on several occasions. But Coo-ee-oh doesn't care to do that
often, for it requires a lot of hard work to operate the machinery. The
dome was built so that the island could disappear. I think," she
continued, "that our Queen fears the Flatheads will attack the island
and try to break the glass of the dome."

"Well, if we're under water, they can't fight us, and we can't fight
them," asserted Dorothy.

"They could kill the fishes, however," said Ozma gravely.

"We have ways to fight, also, even though our island is under water,"
claimed Lady Aurex. "I cannot tell you all our secrets, but this island
is full of surprises. Also our Queen's magic is astonishing."

"Did she steal it all from the three Adepts in Sorcery that are now
fishes?"

"She stole the knowledge and the magic tools, but she has used them as
the three Adepts never would have done."

By this time the top of the dome was quite under water and suddenly the
island stopped sinking and became stationary.

"See!" cried Lady Aurex, pointing to the shore. "The Flatheads have
come."

On the bank, which was now far above their heads, a crowd of dark
figures could be seen.

"Now let us see what Coo-ee-oh will do to oppose them," continued Lady
Aurex, in a voice that betrayed her excitement.

   *     *     *     *     *

The Flatheads, pushing their way through the line of palm trees, had
reached the shore of the lake just as the top of the island's dome
disappeared beneath the surface. The water now flowed from shore to
shore, but through the clear water the dome was still visible and the
houses of the Skeezers could be dimly seen through the panes of glass.

"Good!" exclaimed the Su-dic, who had armed all his followers and had
brought with him two copper vessels, which he carefully set down upon
the ground beside him. "If Coo-ee-oh wants to hide instead of fighting
our job will be easy, for in one of these copper vessels I have enough
poison to kill every fish in the lake."

"Kill them, then, while we have time, and then we can go home again,"
advised one of the chief officers.

"Not yet," objected the Su-dic. "The Queen of the Skeezers has defied
me, and I want to get her into my power, as well as to destroy her
magic. She transformed my poor wife into a Golden Pig, and I must have
revenge for that, whatever else we do."

"Look out!" suddenly exclaimed the officers, pointing into the lake;
"something's going to happen."

From the submerged dome a door opened and something black shot swiftly
out into the water. The door instantly closed behind it and the dark
object cleaved its way through the water, without rising to the
surface, directly toward the place where the Flatheads were standing.

"What is that?" Dorothy asked the Lady Aurex.

"That is one of the Queen's submarines," was the reply. "It is all
enclosed, and can move under water. Coo-ee-oh has several of these
boats which are kept in little rooms in the basement under our village.
When the island is submerged, the Queen uses these boats to reach the
shore, and I believe she now intends to fight the Flatheads with them."

The Su-dic and his people knew nothing of Coo-ee-oh's submarines, so
they watched with surprise as the under-water boat approached them.
When it was quite near the shore it rose to the surface and the top
parted and fell back, disclosing a boat full of armed Skeezers. At the
head was the Queen, standing up in the bow and holding in one hand a
coil of magic rope that gleamed like silver.

The boat halted and Coo-ee-oh drew back her arm to throw the silver
rope toward the Su-dic, who was now but a few feet from her. But the
wily Flathead leader quickly realized his danger and before the Queen
could throw the rope he caught up one of the copper vessels and dashed
its contents full in her face!




Chapter Eleven

The Conquest of the Skeezers


Queen Coo-ee-oh dropped the rope, tottered and fell headlong into the
water, sinking beneath the surface, while the Skeezers in the submarine
were too bewildered toassist her and only stared at the ripples in the
water where she had disappeared. A moment later there arose to the
surface a beautiful White Swan. This Swan was of large size, very
gracefully formed, and scattered all over its white feathers were tiny
diamonds, so thickly placed that as the rays of the morning sun fell
upon them the entire body of the Swan glistened like one brilliant
diamond. The head of the Diamond Swan had a bill of polished gold and
its eyes were two sparkling amethysts.

"Hooray!" cried the Su-dic, dancing up and down with wicked glee. "My
poor wife, Rora, is avenged at last. You made her a Golden Pig,
Coo-ee-oh, and now I have made you a Diamond Swan. Float on your lake
forever, if you like, for your web feet can do no more magic and you
are as powerless as the Pig you made of my wife!

"Villain! Scoundrel!" croaked the Diamond Swan. "You will be punished
for this. Oh, what a fool I was to let you enchant me!

"A fool you were, and a fool you are!" laughed the Su-dic, dancing
madly in his delight. And then he carelessly tipped over the other
copper vessel with his heel and its contents spilled on the sands and
were lost to the last drop.

The Su-dic stopped short and looked at the overturned vessel with a
rueful countenance.

"That's too bad--too bad!" he exclaimed sorrowfully. "I've lost all the
poison I had to kill the fishes with, and I can't make any more because
only my wife knew the secret of it, and she is now a foolish Pig and
has forgotten all her magic."

"Very well," said the Diamond Swan scornfully, as she floated upon the
water and swam gracefully here and there. "I'm glad to see you are
foiled. Your punishment is just beginning, for although you have
enchanted me and taken away my powers of sorcery you have still the
three magic fishes to deal with, and they'll destroy you in time, mark
my words."

The Su-dic stared at the Swan a moment. Then he yelled to his men:

"Shoot her! Shoot the saucy bird!"

They let fly some arrows at the Diamond Swan, but she dove under the
water and the missiles fell harmless. When Coo-ce-oh rose to the
surface she was far from the shore and she swiftly swam across the lake
to where no arrows or spears could reach her.

The Su-dic rubbed his chin and thought what to do next. Near by floated
the submarine in which the Queen had come, but the Skeezers who were in
it were puzzled what to do with themselves. Perhaps they were not sorry
their cruel mistress had been transformed into a Diamond Swan, but the
transformation had left them quite helpless. The under-water boat was
not operated by machinery, but by certain mystic words uttered by
Coo-ee-oh. They didn't know how to submerge it, or how to make the
water-tight shield cover them again, or how to make the boat go back to
the castle, or make it enter the little basement room where it was
usually kept. As a matter of fact, they were now shut out of their
village under the Great Dome and could not get back again. So one of
the men called to the Supreme Dictator of the Flatheads, saying:

"Please make us prisoners and take us to your mountain, and feed and
keep us, for we have nowhere to go."

Then the Su-dic laughed and answered:

"Not so. I can't be bothered by caring for a lot of stupid Skeezers.
Stay where you are, or go wherever you please, so long as you keep away
from our mountain." He turned to his men and added: "We have conquered
Queen Coo-ee-oh and made her a helpless swan. The Skeezers are under
water and may stay there. So, having won the war, let us go home again
and make merry and feast, having after many years proved the Flatheads
to be greater and more powerful than the Skeezers."

So the Flatheads marched away and passed through the row of palms and
went back to their mountain, where the Su-dic and a few of his officers
feasted and all the others were forced to wait on them.

"I'm sorry we couldn't have roast pig," said the Su-dic, "but as the
only pig we have is made of gold, we can't eat her. Also the Golden Pig
happens to be my wife, and even were she not gold I am sure she would
be too tough to eat."




Chapter Twelve

The Diamond Swan


When the Flatheads had gone away the Diamond Swan swam back to the boat
and one of the young Skeezers named Ervic said to her eagerly:

"How can we get back to the island, your Majesty?"

"Am I not beautiful?" asked Coo-ee-oh, arching her neck gracefully and
spreading her diamond-sprinkled wings. "I can see my reflection in the
water, and I'm sure there is no bird nor beast, nor human as
magnificent as I am!"

"How shall we get back to the island, your Majesty?" pleaded Ervic.

"When my fame spreads throughout the land, people will travel from all
parts of this lake to look upon my loveliness," said Coo-ee-oh, shaking
her feathers to make the diamonds glitter more brilliantly.

"But, your Majesty, we must go home and we do not know how to get
there," Ervic persisted.

"My eyes," remarked the Diamond Swan, "are wonderfully blue and bright
and will charm all beholders."

"Tell us how to make the boat go--how to get back into the island,"
begged Ervic and the others cried just as earnestly: "Tell us,
Coo-ee-oh; tell us!"

"I don't know," replied the Queen in a careless tone.

"You are a magic-worker, a sorceress, a witch!"

"I was, of course, when I was a girl," she said, bending her head over
the clear water to catch her reflection in it; "but now I've forgotten
all such foolish things as magic. Swans are lovelier than girls,
especially when they're sprinkled with diamonds. Don't you think so?"
And she gracefully swam away, without seeming to care whether they
answered or not.

Ervic and his companions were in despair. They saw plainly that
Coo-ee-oh could not or would not help them. The former Queen had no
further thought for her island, her people, or her wonderful magic; she
was only intent on admiring her own beauty.

"Truly," said Ervic, in a gloomy voice, "the Flatheads have conquered
us!"

   *     *     *     *     *

Some of these events had been witnessed by Ozma and Dorothy and Lady
Aurex, who had left the house and gone close to the glass of the dome,
in order to see what was going on. Many of the Skeezers had also
crowded against the dome, wondering what would happen next. Although
their vision was to an extent blurred by the water and the necessity of
looking upward at an angle, they had observed the main points of the
drama enacted above. They saw Queen Coo-ee-oh's submarine come to the
surface and open; they saw the Queen standing erect to throw her magic
rope; they saw her sudden transformation into a Diamond Swan, and a cry
of amazement went up from the Skeezers inside the dome.

"Good!" exclaimed Dorothy. "I hate that old Su-dic, but I'm glad
Coo-ee-oh is punished."

"This is a dreadful misfortune!" cried Lady Aurex, pressing her hands
upon her heart.

"Yes," agreed Ozma, nodding her head thoughtfully; "Coo-ee-oh's
misfortune will prove a terrible blow to her people."

"What do you mean by that?" asked Dorothy in surprise. "Seems to me the
Skeezers are in luck to lose their cruel Queen."

"If that were all you would be right," responded Lady Aurex; "and if
the island were above water it would not be so serious. But here we all
are, at the bottom of the lake, and fast prisoners in this dome."

"Can't you raise the island?" inquired Dorothy.

"No. Only Coo-ee-oh knew how to do that," was the answer.

"We can try," insisted Dorothy. "If it can be made to go down, it can
be made to come up. The machinery is still here, I suppose.

"Yes; but the machinery works by magic, and Coo-ee-oh would never share
her secret power with any one of us."

Dorothy's face grew grave; but she was thinking.

"Ozma knows a lot of magic," she said.

"But not that kind of magic," Ozma replied.

"Can't you learn how, by looking at the machinery?"

"I'm afraid not, my dear. It isn't fairy magic at all; it is
witchcraft."

"Well," said Dorothy, turning to Lady Aurex, "you say there are other
sub-sub-sinking boats. We can get in one of those, and shoot out to the
top of the water, like Coo-ee-oh did, and so escape. And then we can
help to rescue all the Skeezers down here."

"No one knows how to work the under-water boats but the Queen,"
declared Lady Aurex.

"Isn't there any door or window in this dome that we could open?"

"No; and, if there were, the water would rush in to flood the dome, and
we could not get out."

"The Skeezers," said Ozma, "could not drown; they only get wet and
soggy and in that condition they would be very uncomfortable and
unhappy. But you are a mortal girl, Dorothy, and if your Magic Belt
protected you from death you would have to lie forever at the bottom of
the lake."

"No, I'd rather die quickly," asserted the little girl. "But there are
doors in the basement that open--to let out the bridges and the
boats--and that would not flood the dome, you know."

"Those doors open by a magic word, and only Coo-ee-oh knows the word
that must be uttered," said Lady Aurex.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Dorothy, "that dreadful Queen's witchcraft upsets
all my plans to escape. I guess I'll give it up, Ozma, and let you save
us."

Ozma smiled, but her smile was not so cheerful as usual. The Princess
of Oz found herself confronted with a serious problem, and although she
had no thought of despairing she realized that the Skeezers and their
island, as well as Dorothy and herself, were in grave trouble and that
unless she could find a means to save them they would be lost to the
Land of Oz for all future time.

"In such a dilemma," said she, musingly, "nothing is gained by haste.
Careful thought may aid us, and so may the course of events. The
unexpected is always likely to happen, and cheerful patience is better
than reckless action."

"All right," returned Dorothy; "take your time, Ozma; there's no hurry.
How about some breakfast, Lady Aurex?"

Their hostess led them back to the house, where she ordered her
trembling servants to prepare and serve breakfast. All the Skeezers
were frightened and anxious over the transformation of their Queen into
a swan. Coo-ee-oh was feared and hated, but they had depended on her
magic to conquer the Flatheads and she was the only one who could raise
their island to the surface of the lake again.

Before breakfast was over several of the leading Skeezers came to Aurex
to ask her advice and to question Princess Ozma, of whom they knew
nothing except that she claimed to be a fairy and the Ruler of all the
land, including the Lake of the Skeezers.

"If what you told Queen Coo-ee-oh was the truth," they said to her,
"you are our lawful mistress, and we may depend on you to get us out of
our difficulties."

"I will try to do that," Ozma graciously assured them, "but you must
remember that the powers of fairies are granted them to bring comfort
and happiness to all who appeal to them. On the contrary, such magic as
Coo-ee-oh knew and practiced is unlawful witchcraft and her arts are
such as no fairy would condescend to use. However, it is sometimes
necessary to consider evil in order to accomplish good, and perhaps by
studying Coo-ee-oh's tools and charms of witchcraft I may be able to
save us. Do you promise to accept me as your Ruler and to obey my
commands?"

They promised willingly.

"Then," continued Ozma, "I will go to Coo-ee-oh's palace and take
possession of it. Perhaps what I find there will be of use to me. In
the meantime tell all the Skeezers to fear nothing, but have patience.
Let them return to their homes and perform their daily tasks as usual.
Coo-ee-oh's loss may not prove a misfortune, but rather a blessing."

This speech cheered the Skeezers amazingly. Really, they had no one now
to depend upon but Ozma, and in spite of their dangerous position their
hearts were lightened by the transformation and absence of their cruel
Queen.

They got out their brass band and a grand procession escorted Ozma and
Dorothy to the palace, where all of Coo-ee-oh's former servants were
eager to wait upon them. Ozma invited Lady Aurex to stay at the palace
also, for she knew all about the Skeezers and their island and had also
been a favorite of the former Queen, so her advice and information were
sure to prove valuable.

Ozma was somewhat disappointed in what she found in the palace. One
room of Coo-ee-oh's private suite was entirely devoted to the practice
of witchcraft, and here were countless queer instruments and jars of
ointments and bottles of potions labeled with queer names, and strange
machines that Ozma could not guess the use of, and pickled toads and
snails and lizards, and a shelf of books that were written in blood,
but in a language which the Ruler of Oz did not know.

"I do not see," said Ozma to Dorothy, who accompanied her in her
search, "how Coo-ee-oh knew the use of the magic tools she stole from
the three Adept Witches. Moreover, from all reports these Adepts
practiced only good witchcraft, such as would be helpful to their
people, while Coo-ee-oh performed only evil."

"Perhaps she turned the good things to evil uses?" suggested Dorothy.

"Yes, and with the knowledge she gained Coo-ee-oh doubtless invented
many evil things quite unknown to the good Adepts, who are now fishes,"
added Ozma. "It is unfortunate for us that the Queen kept her secrets
so closely guarded, for no one but herself could use any of these
strange things gathered in this room."

"Couldn't we capture the Diamond Swan and make her tell the secrets?"
asked Dorothy.

"No; even were we able to capture her, Coo-ee-oh now has forgotten all
the magic she ever knew. But until we ourselves escape from this dome
we could not capture the Swan, and were we to escape we would have no
use for Coo-ee-oh's magic."

"That's a fact," admitted Dorothy. "But--say, Ozma, here's a good idea!
Couldn't we capture the three fishes--the gold and silver and bronze
ones, and couldn't you transform 'em back to their own shapes, and then
couldn't the three Adepts get us out of here?"

"You are not very practical, Dorothy dear. It would be as hard for us
to capture the three fishes, from among all the other fishes in the
lake, as to capture the Swan."

"But if we could, it would be more help to us," persisted the little
girl.

"That is true," answered Ozma, smiling at her friend's eagerness. "You
find a way to catch the fish, and I'll promise when they are caught to
restore them to their proper forms."

"I know you think I can't do it," replied Dorothy, "but I'm going to
try."

She left the palace and went to a place where she could look through a
clear pane of the glass dome into the surrounding water. Immediately
she became interested in the queer sights that met her view.

The Lake of the Skeezers was inhabited by fishes of many kinds and many
sizes. The water was so transparent that the girl could see for a long
distance and the fishes came so close to the glass of the dome that
sometimes they actually touched it. On the white sands at the bottom of
the lake were star-fish, lobsters, crabs and many shell fish of strange
shapes and with shells of gorgeous hues. The water foliage was of
brilliant colors and to Dorothy it resembled a splendid garden.

But the fishes were the most interesting of all. Some were big and
lazy, floating slowly along or lying at rest with just their fins
waving. Many with big round eyes looked full at the girl as she watched
them and Dorothy wondered if they could hear her through the glass if
she spoke to them. In Oz, where all the animals and birds can talk,
many fishes are able to talk also, but usually they are more stupid
than birds and animals because they think slowly and haven't much to
talk about.

In the Lake of the Skeezers the fish of smaller size were more active
than the big ones and darted quickly in and out among the swaying
weeds, as if they had important business and were in a hurry. It was
among the smaller varieties that Dorothy hoped to spy the gold and
silver and bronze fishes. She had an idea the three would keep
together, being companions now as they were in their natural forms, but
such a multitude of fishes constantly passed, the scene shifting every
moment, that she was not sure she would notice them even if they
appeared in view. Her eyes couldn't look in all directions and the
fishes she sought might be on the other side of the dome, or far away
in the lake.

"P'raps, because they were afraid of Coo-ee-oh, they've hid themselves
somewhere, and don't know their enemy has been transformed," she
reflected.

She watched the fishes for a long time, until she became hungry and
went back to the palace for lunch. But she was not discouraged.

"Anything new, Ozma?" she asked.

"No, dear. Did you discover the three fishes?"

"Not yet. But there isn't anything better for me to do, Ozma, so I
guess I'll go back and watch again."




Chapter Thirteen

The Alarm Bell


Glinda, the Good, in her palace in the Quadling Country, had many
things to occupy her mind, for not only did she look after the weaving
and embroidery of her bevy of maids, and assist all those who came to
her to implore her help--beasts and birds as well as people--but she
was a close student of the arts of sorcery and spent much time in her
Magical Laboratory, where she strove to find a remedy for every evil
and to perfect her skill in magic.

Nevertheless, she did not forget to look in the Great Book of Records
each day to see if any mention was made of the visit of Ozma and
Dorothy to the Enchanted Mountain of the Flatheads and the Magic Isle
of the Skeezers. The Records told her that Ozma had arrived at the
mountain, that she had escaped, with her companion, and gone to the
island of the Skeezers, and that Queen Coo-ee-oh had submerged the
island so that it was entirely under water. Then came the statement
that the Flatheads had come to the lake to poison the fishes and that
their Supreme Dictator had transformed Queen Coo-ee-oh into a swan.

No other details were given in the Great Book and so Glinda did not
know that since Coo-ee-oh had forgotten her magic none of the Skeezers
knew how to raise the island to the surface again. So Glinda was not
worried about Ozma and Dorothy until one morning, while she sat with
her maids, there came a sudden clang of the great alarm bell. This was
so unusual that every maid gave a start and even the Sorceress for a
moment could not think what the alarm meant.

Then she remembered the ring she had given Dorothy when she left the
palace to start on her venture. In giving the ring Glinda had warned
the little girl not to use its magic powers unless she and Ozma were in
real danger, but then she was to turn it on her finger once to the
right and once to the left and Glinda's alarm bell would ring.

So the Sorceress now knew that danger threatened her beloved Ruler and
Princess Dorothy, and she hurried to her magic room to seek information
as to what sort of danger it was. The answer to her question was not
very satisfactory, for it was only: "Ozma and Dorothy are prisoners in
the great Dome of the Isle of the Skeezers, and the Dome is under the
water of the lake."

"Hasn't Ozma the power to raise the island to the surface?" inquired
Glinda.

"No," was the reply, and the Record refused to say more except that
Queen Coo-ee-oh, who alone could command the island to rise, had been
transformed by the Flathead Su-dic into a Diamond Swan.

Then Glinda consulted the past records of the Skeezers in the Great
Book. After diligent search she discovered that Coo-ee-oh was a
powerful sorceress who had gained most of her power by treacherously
transforming the Adepts of Magic, who were visiting her, into three
fishes--gold, silver and bronze--after which she had them cast into the
lake.

Glinda reflected earnestly on this information and decided that someone
must go to Ozma's assistance. While there was no great need of haste,
because Ozma and Dorothy could live in a submerged dome a long time, it
was evident they could not get out until someone was able to raise the
island.

The Sorceress looked through all her recipes and books of sorcery, but
could find no magic that would raise a sunken island. Such a thing had
never before been required in sorcery. Then Glinda made a little
island, covered by a glass dome, and sunk it in a pond near her castle,
and experimented in magical ways to bring it to the surface. She made
several such experiments, but all were failures. It seemed a simple
thing to do, yet she could not do it.

Nevertheless, the wise Sorceress did not despair of finding a way to
liberate her friends. Finally she concluded that the best thing to do
was to go to the Skeezer country and examine the lake. While there she
was more likely to discover a solution to the problem that bothered
her, and to work out a plan for the rescue of Ozma and Dorothy.

So Glinda summoned her storks and her aerial chariot, and telling her
maids she was going on a journey and might not soon return, she entered
the chariot and was carried swiftly to the Emerald City.

In Princess Ozma's palace the Scarecrow was now acting as Ruler of the
Land of Oz. There wasn't much for him to do, because all the affairs of
state moved so smoothly, but he was there in case anything unforeseen
should happen.

Glinda found the Scarecrow playing croquet with Trot and Betsy Bobbin,
two little girls who lived at the palace under Ozma's protection and
were great friends of Dorothy and much loved by all the Oz people.

"Something's happened!" cried Trot, as the chariot of the Sorceress
descended near them. "Glinda never comes here 'cept something's gone
wrong."

"I hope no harm has come to Ozma, or Dorothy," said Betsy anxiously, as
the lovely Sorceress stepped down from her chariot.

Glinda approached the Scarecrow and told him of the dilemma of Ozma and
Dorothy and she added: "We must save them, somehow, Scarecrow."

"Of course," replied the Scarecrow, stumbling over a wicket and falling
flat on his painted face.

The girls picked him up and patted his straw stuffing into shape, and
he continued, as if nothing had occurred: "But you'll have to tell me
what to do, for I never have raised a sunken island in all my life."

"We must have a Council of State as soon as possible," proposed the
Sorceress. "Please send messengers to summon all of Ozma's counsellors
to this palace. Then we can decide what is best to be done."

The Scarecrow lost no time in doing this. Fortunately most of the royal
counsellors were in the Emerald City or near to it, so they all met in
the throne room of the palace that same evening.




Chapter Fourteen

Ozma's Counsellors


No Ruler ever had such a queer assortment of advisers as the Princess
Ozma had gathered about her throne. Indeed, in no other country could
such amazing people exist. But Ozma loved them for their peculiarities
and could trust every one of them.

First there was the Tin Woodman. Every bit of him was tin, brightly
polished. All his joints were kept well oiled and moved smoothly. He
carried a gleaming axe to prove he was a woodman, but seldom had cause
to use it because he lived in a magnificent tin castle in the Winkie
Country of Oz and was the Emperor of all the Winkies. The Tin Woodman's
name was Nick Chopper. He had a very good mind, but his heart was not
of much account, so he was very careful to do nothing unkind or to hurt
anyone's feelings.

Another counsellor was Scraps, the Patchwork Girl of Oz, who was made
of a gaudy patchwork quilt, cut into shape and stuffed with cotton.
This Patchwork Girl was very intelligent, but so full of fun and mad
pranks that a lot of more stupid folks thought she must be crazy.
Scraps was jolly under all conditions, however grave they might be, but
her laughter and good spirits were of value in cheering others and in
her seemingly careless remarks much wisdom could often be found.

Then there was the Shaggy Man--shaggy from head to foot, hair and
whiskers, clothes and shoes--but very kind and gentle and one of Ozma's
most loyal supporters.

Tik-Tok was there, a copper man with machinery inside him, so cleverly
constructed that he moved, spoke and thought by three separate
clock-works. Tik-Tok was very reliable because he always did exactly
what he was wound up to do, but his machinery was liable to run down at
times and then he was quite helpless until wound up again.

A different sort of person was Jack Pumpkinhead, one of Ozma's oldest
friends and her companion on many adventures. Jack's body was very
crude and awkward, being formed of limbs of trees of different sizes,
jointed with wooden pegs. But it was a substantial body and not likely
to break or wear out, and when it was dressed the clothes covered much
of its roughness. The head of Jack Pumpkinhead was, as you have
guessed, a ripe pumpkin, with the eyes, nose and mouth carved upon one
side. The pumpkin was stuck on Jack's wooden neck and was liable to get
turned sidewise or backward and then he would have to straighten it
with his wooden hands.

The worst thing about this sort of a head was that it did not keep well
and was sure to spoil sooner or later. So Jack's main business was to
grow a field of fine pumpkins each year, and always before his old head
spoiled he would select a fresh pumpkin from the field and carve the
features on it very neatly, and have it ready to replace the old head
whenever it became necessary. He didn't always carve it the same way,
so his friends never knew exactly what sort of an expression they would
find on his face. But there was no mistaking him, because he was the
only pumpkin-headed man alive in the Land of Oz.

A one-legged sailor-man was a member of Ozma's council. His name was
Cap'n Bill and he had come to the Land of Oz with Trot, and had been
made welcome on account of his cleverness, honesty and good nature. He
wore a wooden leg to replace the one he had lost and was a great friend
of all the children in Oz because he could whittle all sorts of toys
out of wood with his big jack-knife.

Professor H. M. Wogglebug, T. E., was another member of the council.
The "H. M." meant Highly Magnified, for the Professor was once a little
bug, who became magnified to the size of a man and always remained so.
The "T. E." meant that he was Thoroughly Educated. He was at the head
of Princess Ozma's Royal Athletic College, and so that the students
would not have to study and so lose much time that could be devoted to
athletic sports, such as football, baseball and the like, Professor
Wogglebug had invented the famous Educational Pills. If one of the
college students took a Geography Pill after breakfast, he knew his
geography lesson in an instant; if he took a Spelling Pill he at once
knew his spelling lesson, and an Arithmetic Pill enabled the student to
do any kind of sum without having to think about it.

These useful pills made the college very popular and taught the boys
and girls of Oz their lessons in the easiest possible way. In spite of
this, Professor Wogglebug was not a favorite outside his college, for
he was very conceited and admired himself so much and displayed his
cleverness and learning so constantly, that no one cared to associate
with him. Ozma found him of value in her councils, nevertheless.

Perhaps the most splendidly dressed of all those present was a great
frog as large as a man, called the Frogman, who was noted for his wise
sayings. He had come to the Emerald City from the Yip Country of Oz and
was a guest of honor. His long-tailed coat was of velvet, his vest of
satin and his trousers of finest silk. There were diamond buckles on
his shoes and he carried a gold-headed cane and a high silk hat. All of
the bright colors were represented in his rich attire, so it tired
one's eyes to look at him for long, until one became used to his
splendor.

The best farmer in all Oz was Uncle Henry, who was Dorothy's own uncle,
and who now lived near the Emerald City with his wife Aunt Em. Uncle
Henry taught the Oz people how to grow the finest vegetables and fruits
and grains and was of much use to Ozma in keeping the Royal Storehouses
well filled. He, too, was a counsellor.

The reason I mention the little Wizard of Oz last is because he was the
most important man in the Land of Oz. He wasn't a big man in size but
he was a man in power and intelligence and second only to Glinda the
Good in all the mystic arts of magic. Glinda had taught him, and the
Wizard and the Sorceress were the only ones in Oz permitted by law to
practice wizardry and sorcery, which they applied only to good uses and
for the benefit of the people.

The Wizard wasn't exactly handsome but he was pleasant to look at. His
bald head was as shiny as if it had been varnished; there was always a
merry twinkle in his eyes and he was as spry as a schoolboy.  Dorothy
says the reason the Wizard is not as powerful as Glinda is because
Glinda didn't teach him all she knows, but what the Wizard knows he
knows very well and so he performs some very remarkable magic. The ten
I have mentioned assembled, with the Scarecrow and Glinda, in Ozma's
throne room, right after dinner that evening, and the Sorceress told
them all she knew of the plight of Ozma and Dorothy.

"Of course we must rescue them," she continued, "and the sooner they
are rescued the better pleased they will be; but what we must now
determine is how they can be saved. That is why I have called you
together in council."

"The easiest way," remarked the Shaggy Man, "is to raise the sunken
island of the Skeezers to the top of the water again."

"Tell me how?" said Glinda.

"I don't know how, your Highness, for I have never raised a sunken
island."

"We might all get under it and lift," suggested Professor Wogglebug.

"How can we get under it when it rests on the bottom of the lake?"
asked the Sorceress.

"Couldn't we throw a rope around it and pull it ashore?" inquired Jack
Pumpkinhead.

"Why not pump the water out of the lake?" suggested the Patchwork Girl
with a laugh.

"Do be sensible!" pleaded Glinda. "This is a serious matter, and we
must give it serious thought."

"How big is the lake and how big is the island?" was the Frogman's
question.

"None of us can tell, for we have not been there."

"In that case," said the Scarecrow, "it appears to me we ought to go to
the Skeezer country and examine it carefully."

"Quite right," agreed the Tin Woodman.

"We-will-have-to-go-there-any-how," remarked Tik-Tok in his jerky
machine voice.

"The question is which of us shall go, and how many of us?" said the
Wizard.

"I shall go of course," declared the Scarecrow.

"And I," said Scraps.

"It is my duty to Ozma to go," asserted the Tin Woodman.

"I could not stay away, knowing our loved Princess is in danger," said
the Wizard.

"We all feel like that," Uncle Henry said.

Finally one and all present decided to go to the Skeezer country, with
Glinda and the little Wizard to lead them. Magic must meet magic in
order to conquer it, so these two skillful magic-workers were necessary
to insure the success of the expedition.

They were all ready to start at a moment's notice, for none had any
affairs of importance to attend to. Jack was wearing a newly made
Pumpkin-head and the Scarecrow had recently been stuffed with fresh
straw. Tik-Tok's machinery was in good running order and the Tin
Woodman always was well oiled.

"It is quite a long journey," said Glinda, "and while I might travel
quickly to the Skeezer country by means of my stork chariot the rest of
you will be obliged to walk. So, as we must keep together, I will send
my chariot back to my castle and we will plan to leave the Emerald City
at sunrise to-morrow."




Chapter Fifteen

The Great Sorceress


Betsy and Trot, when they heard of the rescue expedition, begged the
Wizard to permit them to join it and he consented. The Glass Cat,
overhearing the conversation, wanted to go also and to this the Wizard
made no objection.

This Glass Cat was one of the real curiosities of Oz. It had been made
and brought to life by a clever magician named Dr. Pipt, who was not
now permitted to work magic and was an ordinary citizen of the Emerald
City. The cat was of transparent glass, through which one could plainly
see its ruby heart beating and its pink brains whirling around in the
top of the head.

The Glass Cat's eyes were emeralds; its fluffy tail was of spun glass
and very beautiful. The ruby heart, while pretty to look at, was hard
and cold and the Glass Cat's disposition was not pleasant at all times.
It scorned to catch mice, did not eat, and was extremely lazy. If you
complimented the remarkable cat on her beauty, she would be very
friendly, for she loved admiration above everything. The pink brains
were always working and their owner was indeed more intelligent than
most common cats.

Three other additions to the rescue party were made the next morning,
just as they were setting out upon their journey. The first was a
little boy called Button Bright, because he had no other name that
anyone could remember. He was a fine, manly little fellow, well
mannered and good humored, who had only one bad fault. He was
continually getting lost. To be sure, Button Bright got found as often
as he got lost, but when he was missing his friends could not help
being anxious about him.

"Some day," predicted the Patchwork Girl, "he won't be found, and that
will be the last of him." But that didn't worry Button Bright, who was
so careless that he did not seem to be able to break the habit of
getting lost.

The second addition to the party was a Munchkin boy of about Button
Bright's age, named Ojo. He was often called "Ojo the Lucky," because
good fortune followed him wherever he went. He and Button Bright were
close friends, although of such different natures, and Trot and Betsy
were fond of both.

The third and last to join the expedition was an enormous lion, one of
Ozma's regular guardians and the most important and intelligent beast
in all Oz. He called himself the Cowardly Lion, saying that every
little danger scared him so badly that his heart thumped against his
ribs, but all who knew him knew that the Cowardly Lion's fears were
coupled with bravery and that however much he might be frightened he
summoned courage to meet every danger he encountered. Often he had
saved Dorothy and Ozma in times of peril, but afterward he moaned and
trembled and wept because he had been so scared.

"If Ozma needs help, I'm going to help her," said the great beast.
"Also, I suspect the rest of you may need me on the journey--especially
Trot and Betsy--for you may pass through a dangerous part of the
country. I know that wild Gillikin country pretty well. Its forests
harbor many ferocious beasts."

They were glad the Cowardly Lion was to join them, and in good spirits
the entire party formed a procession and marched out of the Emerald
City amid the shouts of the people, who wished them success and a safe
return with their beloved Ruler.

They followed a different route from that taken by Ozma and Dorothy,
for they went through the Winkie Country and up north toward Oogaboo.
But before they got there they swerved to the left and entered the
Great Gillikin Forest, the nearest thing to a wilderness in all Oz.
Even the Cowardly Lion had to admit that certain parts of this forest
were unknown to him, although he had often wandered among the trees,
and the Scarecrow and Tin Woodman, who were great travelers, never had
been there at all.

The forest was only reached after a tedious tramp, for some of the
Rescue Expedition were quite awkward on their feet. The Patchwork Girl
was as light as a feather and very spry; the Tin Woodman covered the
ground as easily as Uncle Henry and the Wizard; but Tik-Tok moved
slowly and the slightest obstruction in the road would halt him until
the others cleared it away. Then, too, Tik-Tok's machinery kept running
down, so Betsy and Trot took turns in winding it up.

The Scarecrow was more clumsy but less bother, for although he often
stumbled and fell he could scramble up again and a little patting of
his straw-stuffed body would put him in good shape again.

Another awkward one was Jack Pumpkinhead, for walking would jar his
head around on his neck and then he would be likely to go in the wrong
direction. But the Frogman took Jack's arm and then he followed the
path more easily.

Cap'n Bill's wooden leg didn't prevent him from keeping up with the
others and the old sailor could walk as far as any of them.

When they entered the forest the Cowardly Lion took the lead. There was
no path here for men, but many beasts had made paths of their own which
only the eyes of the Lion, practiced in woodcraft, could discern. So he
stalked ahead and wound his way in and out, the others following in
single file, Glinda being next to the Lion.

There are dangers in the forest, of course, but as the huge Lion headed
the party he kept the wild denizens of the wilderness from bothering
the travelers. Once, to be sure, an enormous leopard sprang upon the
Glass Cat and caught her in his powerful jaws, but he broke several of
his teeth and with howls of pain and dismay dropped his prey and
vanished among the trees.

"Are you hurt?" Trot anxiously inquired of the Glass Cat.

"How silly!" exclaimed the creature in an irritated tone of voice;
"nothing can hurt glass, and I'm too solid to break easily. But I'm
annoyed at that leopard's impudence. He has no respect for beauty or
intelligence. If he had noticed my pink brains work, I'm sure he would
have realized I'm too important to be grabbed in a wild beast's jaws."

"Never mind," said Trot consolingly; "I'm sure he won't do it again."

They were almost in the center of the forest when Ojo, the Munchkin
boy, suddenly said: "Why, where's Button Bright?"

They halted and looked around them. Button Bright was not with the
party.

"Dear me," remarked Betsy, "I expect he's lost again!"

"When did you see him last, Ojo?" inquired Glinda.

"It was some time ago," replied Ojo. "He was trailing along at the end
and throwing twigs at the squirrels in the trees. Then I went to talk
to Betsy and Trot, and just now I noticed he was gone."

"This is too bad," declared the Wizard, "for it is sure to delay our
journey. We must find Button Bright before we go any farther, for this
forest is full of ferocious beasts that would not hesitate to tear the
boy to pieces."

"But what shall we do?" asked the Scarecrow. "If any of us leaves the
party to search for Button Bright he or she might fall a victim to the
beasts, and if the Lion leaves us we will have no protector.

"The Glass Cat could go," suggested the Frogman. "The beasts can do her
no harm, as we have discovered."

The Wizard turned to Glinda.

"Cannot your sorcery discover where Button Bright is?" he asked.

"I think so," replied the Sorceress.

She called to Uncle Henry, who had been carrying her wicker box, to
bring it to her, and when he obeyed she opened it and drew out a small
round mirror. On the surface of the glass she dusted a white powder and
then wiped it away with her handkerchief and looked in the mirror. It
reflected a part of the forest, and there, beneath a wide-spreading
tree, Button Bright was lying asleep. On one side of him crouched a
tiger, ready to spring; on the other side was a big gray wolf, its
bared fangs glistening in a wicked way.

"Goodness me!" cried Trot, looking over Glinda's shoulder. "They'll
catch and kill him sure."

Everyone crowded around for a glimpse at the magic mirror.

"Pretty bad--pretty bad!" said the Scarecrow sorrowfully.

"Comes of getting lost!" said Cap'n Bill, sighing.

"Guess he's a goner!" said the Frogman, wiping his eyes on his purple
silk handkerchief.

"But where is he?  Can't we save him?" asked Ojo the Lucky.

"If we knew where he is we could probably save him," replied the little
Wizard, "but that tree looks so much like all the other trees, that we
can't tell whether it's far away or near by."

"Look at Glinda!" exclaimed Betsy

Glinda, having handed the mirror to the Wizard, had stepped aside and
was making strange passes with her outstretched arms and reciting in
low, sweet tones a mystical incantation. Most of them watched the
Sorceress with anxious eyes, despair giving way to the hope that she
might be able to save their friend. The Wizard, however, watched the
scene in the mirror, while over his shoulders peered Trot, the
Scarecrow and the Shaggy Man.

What they saw was more strange than Glinda's actions. The tiger started
to spring on the sleeping boy, but suddenly lost its power to move and
lay flat upon the ground. The gray wolf seemed unable to lift its feet
from the ground. It pulled first at one leg and then at another, and
finding itself strangely confined to the spot began to back and snarl
angrily. They couldn't hear the barkings and snarls, but they could see
the creature's mouth open and its thick lips move. Button Bright,
however, being but a few feet away from the wolf, heard its cries of
rage, which wakened him from his untroubled sleep. The boy sat up and
looked first at the tiger and then at the wolf. His face showed that
for a moment he was quite frightened, but he soon saw that the beasts
were unable to approach him and so he got upon his feet and examined
them curiously, with a mischievous smile upon his face. Then he
deliberately kicked the tiger's head with his foot and catching up a
fallen branch of a tree he went to the wolf and gave it a good
whacking. Both the beasts were furious at such treatment but could not
resent it.

Button Bright now threw down the stick and with his hands in his
pockets wandered carelessly away.

"Now," said Glinda, "let the Glass Cat run and find him. He is in that
direction," pointing the way, "but how far off I do not know. Make
haste and lead him back to us as quickly as you can."

The Glass Cat did not obey everyone's orders, but she really feared the
great Sorceress, so as soon as the words were spoken the crystal animal
darted away and was quickly lost to sight.

The Wizard handed the mirror back to Glinda, for the woodland scene had
now faded from the glass. Then those who cared to rest sat down to
await Button Bright's coming. It was not long before hye appeared
through the trees and as he rejoined his friends he said in a peevish
tone:

"Don't ever send that Glass Cat to find me again. She was very impolite
and, if we didn't all know that she had no manners, I'd say she
insulted me."

Glinda turned upon the boy sternly.

"You have caused all of us much anxiety and annoyance," said she. "Only
my magic saved you from destruction. I forbid you to get lost again."

"Of course," he answered. "It won't be my fault if I get lost again;
but it wasn't my fault this time."




Chapter Sixteen

The Enchanted Fishes


I must now tell you what happened to Ervic and the three other Skeezers
who were left floating in the iron boat after Queen Coo-ee-oh had been
transformed into a Diamond Swan by the magic of the Flathead Su-dic.

The four Skeezers were all young men and their leader was Ervic.
Coo-ee-oh had taken them with her in the boat to assist her if she
captured the Flathead chief, as she hoped to do by means of her silver
rope. They knew nothing about the witchcraft that moved the submarine
and so, when left floating upon the lake, were at a loss what to do.
The submarine could not be submerged by them or made to return to the
sunken island. There were neither oars nor sails in the boat, which was
not anchored but drifted quietly upon the surface of the lake.

The Diamond Swan had no further thought or care for her people. She had
sailed over to the other side of the lake and all the calls and
pleadings of Ervic and his companions were unheeded by the vain bird.
As there was nothing else for them to do, they sat quietly in their
boat and waited as patiently as they could for someone to come to their
aid.

The Flatheads had refused to help them and had gone back to their
mountain. All the Skeezers were imprisoned in the Great Dome and could
not help even themselves. When evening came, they saw the Diamond Swan,
still keeping to the opposite shore of the lake, walk out of the water
to the sands, shake her diamond-sprinkled feathers, and then disappear
among the bushes to seek a resting place for the night.

"I'm hungry," said Ervic.

"I'm cold," said another Skeezer.

"I'm tired," said a third.

"I'm afraid," said the last one of them.

But it did them no good to complain. Night fell and the moon rose and
cast a silvery sheen over the surface of the water.

"Go to sleep," said Ervic to his companions. "I'll stay awake and
watch, for we may be rescued in some unexpected way."

So the other three laid themselves down in the bottom of the boat and
were soon fast asleep.

Ervic watched. He rested himself by leaning over the bow of the boat,
his face near to the moonlit water, and thought dreamily of the day's
surprising events and wondered what would happen to the prisoners in
the Great Dome.

Suddenly a tiny goldfish popped its head above the surface of the lake,
not more than a foot from his eyes. A silverfish then raised its head
beside that of the goldfish, and a moment later a bronzefish lifted its
head beside the others. The three fish, all in a row, looked earnestly
with their round, bright eyes into the astonished eyes of Ervic the
Skeezer.

"We are the three Adepts whom Queen Coo-ee-oh betrayed and wickedly
transformed," said the goldfish, its voice low and soft but distinctly
heard in the stillness of the night.

"I know of our Queen's treacherous deed," replied Ervic, "and I am
sorry for your misfortune. Have you been in the lake ever since?"

"Yes," was the reply.

"I--I hope you are well--and comfortable," stammered Ervic, not knowing
what else to say.

"We knew that some day Coo-ee-oh would meet with the fate she so richly
deserves," declared the bronzefish. "We have waited and watched for
this time. Now if you will promise to help us and will be faithful and
true, you can aid us in regaining our natural forms, and save yourself
and all your people from the dangers that now threaten you."

"Well," said Ervic, "you can depend on my doing the best I can. But I'm
no witch, nor magician, you must know."

"All we ask is that you obey our instructions," returned the
silverfish. "We know that you are honest and that you served Coo-ee-oh
only because you were obliged to in order to escape her anger. Do as we
command and all will be well."

"I promise!" exclaimed the young man. "Tell me what I am to do first."

"You will find in the bottom of your boat the silver cord which dropped
from Coo-ee-oh's hand when she was transformed," said the goldfish.
"Tie one end of that cord to the bow of your boat and drop the other
end to us in the water. Together we will pull your boat to the shore."

Ervic much doubted that the three small fishes could move so heavy a
boat, but he did as he was told and the fishes all seized their end of
the silver cord in their mouths and headed toward the nearest shore,
which was the very place where the Flatheads had stood when they
conquered Queen Coo-ee-oh.

At first the boat did not move at all, although the fishes pulled with
all their strength. But presently the strain began to tell. Very slowly
the boat crept toward the shore, gaining more speed at every moment. A
couple of yards away from the sandy beach the fishes dropped the cord
from their mouths and swam to one side, while the iron boat, being now
under way, continued to move until its prow grated upon the sands.

Ervic leaned over the side and said to the fishes: "What next?"

"You will find upon the sand," said the silverfish, "a copper kettle,
which the Su-dic forgot when he went away. Cleanse it thoroughly in the
water of the lake, for it has had poison in it. When it is cleaned,
fill it with fresh water and hold it over the side of the boat, so that
we three may swim into the kettle. We will then instruct you further."

"Do you wish me to catch you, then?" asked Ervic in surprise.

"Yes," was the reply.

So Ervic jumped out of the boat and found the copper kettle. Carrying
it a little way down the beach, he washed it well, scrubbing away every
drop of the poison it had contained with sand from the shore.

Then he went back to the boat.

Ervic's comrades were still sound asleep and knew nothing of the three
fishes or what strange happenings were taking place about them. Ervic
dipped the kettle in the lake, holding fast to the handle until it was
under water. The gold and silver and bronze fishes promptly swam into
the kettle. The young Skeezer then lifted it, poured out a little of
the water so it would not spill over the edge, and said to the fishes:
"What next?"

"Carry the kettle to the shore. Take one hundred steps to the east,
along the edge of the lake, and then you will see a path leading
through the meadows, up hill and down dale. Follow the path until you
come to a cottage which is painted a purple color with white trimmings.
When you stop at the gate of this cottage we will tell you what to do
next. Be careful, above all, not to stumble and spill the water from
the kettle, or you would destroy us and all you have done would be in
vain."

The goldfish issued these commands and Ervic promised to be careful and
started to obey. He left his sleeping comrades in the boat, stepping
cautiously over their bodies, and on reaching the shore took exactly
one hundred steps to the east. Then he looked for the path and the
moonlight was so bright that he easily discovered it, although it was
hidden from view by tall weeds until one came full upon it. This path
was very narrow and did not seem to be much used, but it was quite
distinct and Ervic had no difficulty in following it. He walked through
a broad meadow, covered with tall grass and weeds, up a hill and down
into a valley and then up another hill and down again.

It seemed to Ervic that he had walked miles and miles. Indeed the moon
sank low and day was beginning to dawn when finally he discovered by
the roadside a pretty little cottage, painted purple with white
trimmings. It was a lonely place--no other buildings were anywhere
about and the ground was not tilled at all. No farmer lived here, that
was certain. Who would care to dwell in such an isolated place?

But Ervic did not bother his head long with such questions. He went up
to the gate that led to the cottage, set the copper kettle carefully
down and bending over it asked:

"What next?"




Chapter Seventeen

Under the Great Dome


When Glinda the Good and her followers of the Rescue Expedition came in
sight of the Enchanted Mountain of the Flatheads, it was away to the
left of them, for the route they had taken through the Great Forest was
some distance from that followed by Ozma and Dorothy.

They halted awhile to decide whether they should call upon the Supreme
Dictator first, or go on to the Lake of the Skeezers.

"If we go to the mountain," said the Wizard, "we may get into trouble
with that wicked Su-dic, and then we would be delayed in rescuing Ozma
and Dorothy. So I think our best plan will be to go to the Skeezer
Country, raise the sunken island and save our friends and the
imprisoned Skeezers. Afterward we can visit the mountain and punish the
cruel magician of the Flatheads."

"That is sensible," approved the Shaggy Man. "I quite agree with you."

The others, too, seemed to think the Wizard's plan the best, and Glinda
herself commended it, so on they marched toward the line of palm trees
that hid the Skeezers' lake from view.

Pretty soon they came to the palms. These were set closely together,
the branches, which came quite to the ground, being so tightly
interlaced that even the Glass Cat could scarcely find a place to
squeeze through. The path which the Flatheads used was some distance
away.

"Here's a job for the Tin Woodman," said the Scarecrow.

So the Tin Woodman, who was always glad to be of use, set to work with
his sharp, gleaming axe, which he always carried, and in a surprisingly
short time had chopped away enough branches to permit them all to pass
easily through the trees.

Now the clear waters of the beautiful lake were before them and by
looking closely they could see the outlines of the Great Dome of the
sunken island, far from shore and directly in the center of the lake.

Of course every eye was at first fixed upon this dome, where Ozma and
Dorothy and the Skeezers were still fast prisoners. But soon their
attention was caught by a more brilliant sight, for here was the
Diamond Swan swimming just before them, its long neck arched proudly,
the amethyst eyes gleaming and all the diamond-sprinkled feathers
glistening splendidly under the rays of the sun.

"That," said Glinda, "is the transformation of Queen Coo-ce-oh, the
haughty and wicked witch who betrayed the three Adepts at Magic and
treated her people like slaves."

"She's wonderfully beautiful now," remarked the Frogman.

"It doesn't seem like much of a punishment," said Trot. "The Flathead
Su-dic ought to have made her a toad."

"I am sure Coo-ee-oh is punished," said Glinda, "for she has lost all
her magic power and her grand palace and can no longer misrule the poor
Skeezers."

"Let us call to her, and hear what she has to say," proposed the Wizard.

So Glinda beckoned the Diamond Swan, which swam gracefully to a
position near them. Before anyone could speak Coo-ee-oh called to them
in a rasping voice--for the voice of a swan is always harsh and
unpleasant--and said with much pride:

"Admire me, Strangers!  Admire the lovely Coo-ee-oh, the handsomest
creature in all Oz. Admire me!"

"Handsome is as handsome does," replied the Scarecrow. "Are your deeds
lovely, Coo-ce-oh?"

"Deeds?  What deeds can a swan do but swim around and give pleasure to
all beholders?" said the sparkling bird.

"Have you forgotten your former life? Have you forgotten your magic and
witchcraft?" inquired the Wizard.

"Magic--witchcraft? Pshaw, who cares for such silly things?" retorted
Coo-ee-oh. "As for my past life, it seems like an unpleasant dream. I
wouldn't go back to it if I could. Don't you admire my beauty,
Strangers?"

"Tell us, Coo-ee-oh," said Glinda earnestly, "if you can recall enough
of your witchcraft to enable us to raise the sunken island to the
surface of the lake. Tell us that and I'll give you a string of pearls
to wear around your neck and add to your beauty."

"Nothing can add to my beauty, for I'm the most beautiful creature
anywhere in the whole world."

"But how can we raise the island?"

"I don't know and I don't care. If ever I knew I've forgotten, and I'm
glad of it," was the response. "Just watch me circle around and see me
glitter!

"It's no use," said Button Bright; "the old Swan is too much in love
with herself to think of anything else."

"That's a fact," agreed Betsy with a sigh; "but we've got to get Ozma
and Dorothy out of that lake, somehow or other."

"And we must do it in our own way," added the Scarecrow.

"But how?" asked Uncle Henry in a grave voice, for he could not bear to
think of his dear niece Dorothy being out there under water; "how shall
we do it?"

"Leave that to Glinda," advised the Wizard, realizing he was helpless
to do it himself.

"If it were just an ordinary sunken island," said the powerful
sorceress, "there would be several ways by which I might bring it to
the surface again. But this is a Magic Isle, and by some curious art of
witchcraft, unknown to any but Queen Coo-ce-oh, it obeys certain
commands of magic and will not respond to any other. I do not despair
in the least, but it will require some deep study to solve this
difficult problem. If the Swan could only remember the witchcraft that
she invented and knew as a woman, I could force her to tell me the
secret, but all her former knowledge is now forgotten."

"It seems to me," said the Wizard after a brief silence had followed
Glinda's speech, "that there are three fishes in this lake that used to
be Adepts at Magic and from whom Coo-ee-oh stole much of her knowledge.
If we could find those fishes and return them to their former shapes,
they could doubtless tell us what to do to bring the sunken island to
the surface."

"I have thought of those fishes," replied Glinda, "but among so many
fishes as this lake contains how are we to single them out?"

You will understand, of course, that had Glinda been at home in her
castle, where the Great Book of Records was, she would have known that
Ervic the Skeezer already had taken the gold and silver and bronze
fishes from the lake. But that act had been recorded in the Book after
Glinda had set out on this journey, so it was all unknown to her.

"I think I see a boat yonder on the shore," said Ojo the Munchkin boy,
pointing to a place around the edge of the lake. "If we could get that
boat and row all over the lake, calling to the magic fishes, we might
be able to find them."

"Let us go to the boat," said the Wizard.

They walked around the lake to where the boat was stranded upon the
beach, but found it empty. It was a mere shell of blackened steel, with
a collapsible roof that, when in position, made the submarine
watertight, but at present the roof rested in slots on either side of
the magic craft. There were no oars or sails, no machinery to make the
boat go, and although Glinda promptly realized it was meant to be
operated by witchcraft, she was not acquainted with that sort of magic.

"However," said she, "the boat is merely a boat, and I believe I can
make it obey a command of sorcery, as well as it did the command of
witchcraft. After I have given a little thought to the matter, the boat
will take us wherever we desire to go."

"Not all of us," returned the Wizard, "for it won't hold so many. But,
most noble Sorceress, provided you can make the boat go, of what use
will it be to us?"

"Can't we use it to catch the three fishes?" asked Button Bright.

"It will not be necessary to use the boat for that purpose," replied
Glinda. "Wherever in the lake the enchanted fishes may be, they will
answer to my call. What I am trying to discover is how the boat came to
be on this shore, while the island on which it belongs is under water
yonder. Did Coo-ee-oh come here in the boat to meet the Flatheads
before the island was sunk, or afterward?"

No one could answer that question, of course; but while they pondered
the matter three young men advanced from the line of trees, and rather
timidly bowed to the strangers.

"Who are you, and where did you come from?" inquired the Wizard.

"We are Skeezers," answered one of them, "and our home is on the Magic
Isle of the Lake. We ran away when we saw you coming, and hid behind
the trees, but as you are Strangers and seem to be friendly we decided
to meet you, for we are in great trouble and need assistance."

"If you belong on the island, why are you here?" demanded Glinda.

So they told her all the story: How the Queen had defied the Flatheads
and submerged the whole island so that her enemies could not get to it
or destroy it; how, when the Flatheads came to the shore, Coo-ee-oh had
commanded them, together with their friend Ervic, to go with her in the
submarine to conquer the Su-dic, and how the boat had shot out from the
basement of the sunken isle, obeying a magic word, and risen to the
surface, where it opened and floated upon the water.

Then followed the account of how the Su-dic had transformed Coo-ee-oh
into a swan, after which she had forgotten all the witchcraft she ever
knew. The young men told how, in the night when they were asleep, their
comrade Ervic had mysteriously disappeared, while the boat in some
strange manner had floated to the shore and stranded upon the beach.

That was all they knew. They had searched in vain for three days for
Ervic. As their island was under water and they could not get back to
it, the three Skeezers had no place to go, and so had waited patiently
beside their boat for something to happen.

Being questioned by Glinda and the Wizard, they told all they knew
about Ozma and Dorothy and declared the two girls were still in the
village under the Great Dome. They were quite safe and would be well
cared for by Lady Aurex, now that the Queen who opposed them was out of
the way.

When they had gleaned all the information they could from these
Skeezers, the Wizard said to Glinda:

"If you find you can make this boat obey your sorcery, you could have
it return to the island, submerge itself, and enter the door in the
basement from which it came. But I cannot see that our going to the
sunken island would enable our friends to escape. We would only Join
them as prisoners."

"Not so, friend Wizard," replied Glinda. "If the boat would obey my
commands to enter the basement door, it would also obey my commands to
come out again, and I could bring Ozma and Dorothy back with me."

"And leave all of our people still imprisoned?" asked one of the
Skeezers reproachfully.

"By making several trips in the boat, Glinda could fetch all your
people to the shore," replied the Wizard.

"But what could they do then?" inquired another Skeezer. "They would
have no homes and no place to go, and would be at the mercy of their
enemies, the Flatheads."

"That is true," said Glinda the Good. "And as these people are Ozma's
subjects, I think she would refuse to escape with Dorothy and leave the
others behind, or to abandon the island which is the lawful home of the
Skeezers. I believe the best plan will be to summon the three fishes
and learn from them how to raise the island."

The little Wizard seemed to think that this was rather a forlorn hope.

"How will you summon them," he asked the lovely Sorceress, "and how can
they hear you?"

"That is something we must consider carefully," responded stately
Glinda, with a serene smile.  "I think I can find a way."

All of Ozma's counsellors applauded this sentiment, for they knew well
the powers of the Sorceress.

"Very well," agreed the Wizard. "Summon them, most noble Glinda."




Chapter Eighteen

The Cleverness of Ervic


We must now return to Ervic the Skeezer, who, when he had set down the
copper kettle containing the three fishes at the gate of the lonely
cottage, had asked, "What next?"

The goldfish stuck its head above the water in the kettle and said in
its small but distinct voice:

"You are to lift the latch, open the door, and walk boldly into the
cottage. Do not be afraid of anything you see, for however you seem to
be threatened with dangers, nothing can harm you. The cottage is the
home of a powerful Yookoohoo, named Reera the Red, who assumes all
sorts of forms, sometimes changing her form several times in a day,
according to her fancy. What her real form may be we do not know. This
strange creature cannot be bribed with treasure, or coaxed through
friendship, or won by pity. She has never assisted anyone, or done
wrong to anyone, that we know of. All her wonderful powers are used for
her own selfish amusement. She will order you out of the house but you
must refuse to go. Remain and watch Reera closely and try to see what
she uses to accomplish her transformations. If you can discover the
secret whisper it to us and we will then tell you what to do next."

"That sounds easy," returned Ervic, who had listened carefully. "But
are you sure she will not hurt me, or try to transform me?"

"She may change your form," replied the goldfish, "but do not worry if
that happens, for we can break that enchantment easily. You may be sure
that nothing will harm you, so you must not be frightened at anything
you see or hear."

Now Ervic was as brave as any ordinary young man, and he knew the
fishes who spoke to him were truthful and to be relied upon,
nevertheless he experienced a strange sinking of the heart as he picked
up the kettle and approached the door of the cottage. His hand trembled
as he raised the latch, but he was resolved to obey his instructions.
He pushed the door open, took three strides into the middle of the one
room the cottage contained, and then stood still and looked around him.

The sights that met his gaze were enough to frighten anyone who had not
been properly warned. On the floor just before Ervic lay a great
crocodile, its red eyes gleaming wickedly and its wide open mouth
displaying rows of sharp teeth. Horned toads hopped about; each of the
four upper corners of the room was festooned with a thick cobweb, in
the center of which sat a spider as big around as a washbasin, and
armed with pincher-like claws; a red-and-green lizard was stretched at
full length on the window-sill and black rats darted in and out of the
holes they had gnawed in the floor of the cottage.

But the most startling thing was a huge gray ape which sat upon a bench
and knitted. It wore a lace cap, such as old ladies wear, and a little
apron of lace, but no other clothing. Its eyes were bright and looked
as if coals were burning in them. The ape moved as naturally as an
ordinary person might, and on Ervic's entrance stopped knitting and
raised its head to look at him.

"Get out!" cried a sharp voice, seeming to come from the ape's mouth.

Ervic saw another bench, empty, just beyond him, so he stepped over the
crocodile, sat down upon the bench and carefully placed the kettle
beside him.

"Get out!" again cried the voice.

Ervic shook his head.

"No," said he, "I'm going to stay."

The spiders left their four corners, dropped to the floor and made a
rush toward the young Skeezer, circling around his legs with their
pinchers extended. Ervic paid no attention to them. An enormous black
rat ran up Ervic's body, passed around his shoulders and uttered
piercing squeals in his ears, but he did not wince. The green-and-red
lizard, coming from the window-sill, approached Ervic and began
spitting a flaming fluid at him, but Ervic merely stared at the
creature and its flame did not touch him.

The crocodile raised its tail and, swinging around, swept Ervic off the
bench with a powerful blow. But the Skeezer managed to save the kettle
from upsetting and he got up, shook off the horned toads that were
crawling over him and resumed his seat on the bench.

All the creatures, after this first attack, remained motionless, as if
awaiting orders. The old gray ape knitted on, not looking toward Ervic
now, and the young Skeezer stolidly kept his seat. He expected
something else to happen, but nothing did. A full hour passed and Ervic
was growing nervous.

"What do you want?" the ape asked at last.

"Nothing," said Ervic.

"You may have that!" retorted the ape, and at this all the strange
creatures in the room broke into a chorus of cackling laughter.

Another long wait.

"Do you know who I am?" questioned the ape.

"You must be Reera the Red--the Yookoohoo," Ervic answered.

"Knowing so much, you must also know that I do not like strangers. Your
presence here in my home annoys me. Do you not fear my anger?"

"No," said the young man.

"Do you intend to obey me, and leave this house?" "No," replied Ervic,
just as quietly as the Yookoohoo had spoken.

The ape knitted for a long time before resuming the conversation.

"Curiosity," it said, "has led to many a man's undoing. I suppose in
some way you have learned that I do tricks of magic, and so through
curiosity you have come here. You may have been told that I do not
injure anyone, so you are bold enough to disobey my commands to go
away. You imagine that you may witness some of the rites of witchcraft,
and that they may amuse you. Have I spoken truly?"

"Well," remarked Ervic, who had been pondering on the strange
circumstances of his coming here, "you are right in some ways, but not
in others. I am told that you work magic only for your own amusement.
That seems to me very selfish. Few people understand magic. I'm told
that you are the only real Yookoohoo in all Oz. Why don't you amuse
others as well as yourself?"

"What right have you to question my actions?"

"None at all."

"And you say you are not here to demand any favors of me?"

"For myself I want nothing from you."

"You are wise in that. I never grant favors."

"That doesn't worry me," declared Ervic.

"But you are curious? You hope to witness some of my magic
transformations?"

"If you wish to perform any magic, go ahead," said Ervic. "It may
interest me and it may not. If you'd rather go on with your knitting,
it's all the same to me. I am in no hurry at all."

This may have puzzled Red Reera, but the face beneath the lace cap
could show no expression, being covered with hair. Perhaps in all her
career the Yookoohoo had never been visited by anyone who, like this
young man, asked for nothing, expected nothing, and had no reason for
coming except curiosity. This attitude practically disarmed the witch
and she began to regard the Skeezer in a more friendly way. She knitted
for some time, seemingly in deep thought, and then she arose and walked
to a big cupboard that stood against the wall of the room. When the
cupboard door was opened Ervic could see a lot of drawers inside, and
into one of these drawers--the second from the bottom--Reera thrust a
hairy hand.

Until now Ervic could see over the bent form of the ape, but suddenly
the form, with its back to him, seemed to straighten up and blot out
the cupboard of drawers. The ape had changed to the form of a woman,
dressed in the pretty Gillikin costume, and when she turned around he
saw that it was a young woman, whose face was quite attractive.

"Do you like me better this way?" Reera inquired with a smile.

"You look better," he said calmly, "but I'm not sure I like you any
better."

She laughed, saying: "During the heat of the day I like to be an ape,
for an ape doesn't wear any clothes to speak of. But if one has
gentlemen callers it is proper to dress up."

Ervic noticed her right hand was closed, as if she held something in
it. She shut the cupboard door, bent over the crocodile and in a moment
the creature had changed to a red wolf. It was not pretty even now, and
the wolf crouched beside its mistress as a dog might have done. Its
teeth looked as dangerous as had those of the crocodile.

Next the Yookoohoo went about touching all the lizards and toads, and
at her touch they became kittens. The rats she changed into chipmunks.
Now the only horrid creatures remaining were the four great spiders,
which hid themselves behind their thick webs.

"There!" Reera cried, "now my cottage presents a more comfortable
appearance. I love the toads and lizards and rats, because most people
hate them, but I would tire of them if they always remained the same.
Sometimes I change their forms a dozen times a day."

"You are clever," said Ervic. "I did not hear you utter any
incantations or magic words. All you did was to touch the creatures."

"Oh, do you think so?" she replied. "Well, touch them yourself, if you
like, and see if you can change their forms."

"No," said the Skeezer, "I don't understand magic and if I did I would
not try to imitate your skill. You are a wonderful Yookoohoo, while I
am only a common Skeezer."

This confession seemed to please Reera, who liked to have her
witchcraft appreciated.

"Will you go away now?" she asked. "I prefer to be alone."

"I prefer to stay here," said Ervic.

"In another person's home, where you are not wanted?"

"Yes."

"Is not your curiosity yet satisfied?" demanded Reera, with a smile.

"I don't know. Is there anything else you can do?"

"Many things. But why should I exhibit my powers to a stranger?"

"I can think of no reason at all," he replied.

She looked at him curiously.

"You want no power for yourself, you say, and you're too stupid to be
able to steal my secrets. This isn't a pretty cottage, while outside
are sunshine, broad prairies and beautiful wildflowers. Yet you insist
on sitting on that bench and annoying me with your unwelcome presence.
What have you in that kettle?"

"Three fishes," he answered readily.

"Where did you get them?"

"I caught them in the Lake of the Skeezers."

"What do you intend to do with the fishes?"

"I shall carry them to the home of a friend of mine who has three
children. The children will love to have the fishes for pets."

She came over to the bench and looked into the kettle, where the three
fishes were swimming quietly in the water.

"They're pretty," said Reera. "Let me transform them into something
else."

"No," objected the Skeezer.

"I love to transform things; it's so interesting. And I've never
transformed any fishes in all my life."

"Let them alone," said Ervic.

"What shapes would you prefer them to have? I can make them turtles, or
cute little sea-horses; or I could make them piglets, or rabbits, or
guinea-pigs; or, if you like I can make chickens of them, or eagles, or
bluejays."

"Let them alone!" repeated Ervic.

"You're not a very pleasant visitor," laughed Red Reera. "People accuse
me of being cross and crabbed and unsociable, and they are quite right.
If you had come here pleading and begging for favors, and half afraid
of my Yookoohoo magic, I'd have abused you until you ran away; but
you're quite different from that. You're the unsociable and crabbed and
disagreeable one, and so I like you, and bear with your grumpiness.
It's time for my midday meal; are you hungry?"

"No," said Ervic, although he really desired food.

"Well, I am," Reera declared and clapped her hands together. Instantly
a table appeared, spread with linen and bearing dishes of various
foods, some smoking hot. There were two plates laid, one at each end of
the table, and as soon as Reera seated herself all her creatures
gathered around her, as if they were accustomed to be fed when she ate.
The wolf squatted at her right hand and the kittens and chipmunks
gathered at her left.

"Come, Stranger, sit down and eat," she called cheerfully, "and while
we're eating let us decide into what forms we shall change your fishes."

"They're all right as they are," asserted Ervic, drawing up his bench
to the table. "The fishes are beauties--one gold, one silver and one
bronze. Nothing that has life is more lovely than a beautiful fish."

"What! Am I not more lovely?" Reera asked, smiling at his serious face.

"I don't object to you--for a Yookoohoo, you know," he said, helping
himself to the food and eating with good appetite.

"And don't you consider a beautiful girl more lovely than a fish,
however pretty the fish may be?"

"Well," replied Ervic, after a period of thought, "that might be. If
you transformed my three fish into three girls--girls who would be
Adepts at Magic, you know they might please me as well as the fish do.
You won't do that of course, because you can't, with all your skill.
And, should you be able to do so, I fear my troubles would be more than
I could bear. They would not consent to be my slaves--especially if
they were Adepts at Magic--and so they would command me to obey them.
No, Mistress Reera, let us not transform the fishes at all."

The Skeezer had put his case with remarkable cleverness. He realized
that if he appeared anxious for such a transformation the Yookoohoo
would not perform it, yet he had skillfully suggested that they be made
Adepts at Magic.




Chapter Nineteen

Red Reera, the Yookoohoo


After the meal was over and Reera had fed her pets, including the four
monster spiders which had come down from their webs to secure their
share, she made the table disappear from the floor of the cottage.

"I wish you'd consent to my transforming your fishes," she said, as she
took up her knitting again.

The Skeezer made no reply. He thought it unwise to hurry matters. All
during the afternoon they sat silent. Once Reera went to her cupboard
and after thrusting her hand into the same drawer as before, touched
the wolf and transformed it into a bird with gorgeous colored feathers.
This bird was larger than a parrot and of a somewhat different form,
but Ervic had never seen one like it before.

"Sing!" said Reera to the bird, which had perched itself on a big
wooden peg--as if it had been in the cottage before and knew just what
to do.

And the bird sang jolly, rollicking songs with words to them--just as a
person who had been carefully trained might do. The songs were
entertaining and Ervic enjoyed listening to them. In an hour or so the
bird stopped singing, tucked its head under its wing and went to sleep.
Reera continued knitting but seemed thoughtful.

Now Ervic had marked this cupboard drawer well and had concluded that
Reera took something from it which enabled her to perform her
transformations. He thought that if he managed to remain in the
cottage, and Reera fell asleep, he could slyly open the cupboard, take
a portion of whatever was in the drawer, and by dropping it into the
copper kettle transform the three fishes into their natural shapes.
Indeed, he had firmly resolved to carry out this plan when the
Yookoohoo put down her knitting and walked toward the door.

"I'm going out for a few minutes," said she; "do you wish to go with
me, or will you remain here?"

Ervic did not answer but sat quietly on his bench. So Reera went out
and closed the cottage door.

As soon as she was gone, Ervic rose and tiptoed to the cupboard.

"Take care! Take care!" cried several voices, coming from the kittens
and chipmunks. "If you touch anything we'll tell the Yookoohoo!"

Ervic hesitated a moment but, remembering that he need not consider
Reera's anger if he succeeded in transforming the fishes, he was about
to open the cupboard when he was arrested by the voices of the fishes,
which stuck their heads above the water in the kettle and called out:

"Come here, Ervic!"

So he went back to the kettle and bent over it

"Let the cupboard alone," said the goldfish to him earnestly. "You
could not succeed by getting that magic powder, for only the Yookoohoo
knows how to use it. The best way is to allow her to transform us into
three girls, for then we will have our natural shapes and be able to
perform all the Arts of Magic we have learned and well understand. You
are acting wisely and in the most effective manner. We did not know you
were so intelligent, or that Reera could be so easily deceived by you.
Continue as you have begun and try to persuade her to transform us. But
insist that we be given the forms of girls."

The goldfish ducked its head down just as Reera re-entered the cottage.
She saw Ervic bent over the kettle, so she came and joined him.

"Can your fishes talk?" she asked.

"Sometimes," he replied, "for all fishes in the Land of Oz know how to
speak. Just now they were asking me for some bread. They are hungry."

"Well, they can have some bread," said Reera. "But it is nearly
supper-time, and if you would allow me to transform your fishes into
girls they could join us at the table and have plenty of food much
nicer than crumbs. Why not let me transform them?"

"Well," said Ervic, as if hesitating, "ask the fishes. If they consent,
why--why, then, I'll think it over."

Reera bent over the kettle and asked:

"Can you hear me, little fishes?"

All three popped their heads above water.

"We can hear you," said the bronzefish.

"I want to give you other forms, such as rabbits, or turtles or girls,
or something; but your master, the surly Skeezer, does not wish me to.
However, he has agreed to the plan if you will consent."

"We'd like to be girls," said the silverfish.

"No, no!" exclaimed Ervic.

"If you promise to make us three beautiful girls, we will consent,"
said the goldfish.

"No, no!" exclaimed Ervic again.

"Also make us Adepts at Magic," added the bronzefish.

"I don't know exactly what that means," replied Reera musingly, "but as
no Adept at Magic is as powerful as Yookoohoo, I'll add that to the
transformation."

"We won't try to harm you, or to interfere with your magic in any way,"
promised the goldfish. "On the contrary, we will be your friends."

"Will you agree to go away and leave me alone in my cottage, whenever I
command you to do so?" asked Reera.

"We promise that," cried the three fishes.

"Don't do it! Don't consent to the transformation," urged Ervic.

"They have already consented," said the Yookoohoo, laughing in his
face, "and you have promised me to abide by their decision. So, friend
Skeezer, I shall perform the transformation whether you like it or not."

Ervic seated himself on the bench again, a deep scowl on his face but
joy in his heart. Reera moved over to the cupboard, took something from
the drawer and returned to the copper kettle. She was clutching
something tightly in her right hand, but with her left she reached
within the kettle, took out the three fishes and laid them carefully on
the floor, where they gasped in distress at being out of water.

Reera did not keep them in misery more than a few seconds, for she
touched each one with her right hand and instantly the fishes were
transformed into three tall and slender young women, with fine,
intelligent faces and clothed in handsome, clinging gowns. The one who
had been a goldfish had beautiful golden hair and blue eyes and was
exceedingly fair of skin; the one who had been a bronzefish had dark
brown hair and clear gray eyes and her complexion matched these lovely
features. The one who had been a silverfish had snow-white hair of the
finest texture and deep brown eyes. The hair contrasted exquisitely
with her pink cheeks and ruby-red lips, nor did it make her look a day
older than her two companions.

As soon as they secured these girlish shapes, all three bowed low to
the Yookoohoo and said:

"We thank you, Reera."

Then they bowed to the Skeezer and said:

"We thank you, Ervic."

"Very good!" cried the Yookoohoo, examining her work with critical
approval. "You are much better and more interesting than fishes, and
this ungracious Skeezer would scarcely allow me to do the
transformations. You surely have nothing to thank him for. But now let
us dine in honor of the occasion."

She clapped her hands together and again a table loaded with food
appeared in the cottage. It was a longer table, this time, and places
were set for the three Adepts as well as for Reera and Ervic.

"Sit down, friends, and eat your fill," said the Yookoohoo, but instead
of seating herself at the head of the table she went to the cupboard,
saying to the Adepts: "Your beauty and grace, my fair friends, quite
outshine my own. So that I may appear properly at the banquet table I
intend, in honor of this occasion, to take upon myself my natural
shape."

Scarcely had she finished this speech when Reera transformed herself
into a young woman fully as lovely as the three Adepts. She was not
quite so tall as they, but her form was more rounded and more
handsomely clothed, with a wonderful jeweled girdle and a necklace of
shining pearls. Her hair was a bright auburn red, and her eyes large
and dark.

"Do you claim this is your natural form?" asked Ervic of the Yookoohoo.

"Yes," she replied. "This is the only form I am really entitled to
wear. But I seldom assume it because there is no one here to admire or
appreciate it and I get tired admiring it myself."

"I see now why you are named Reera the Red," remarked Ervic.

"It is on account of my red hair," she explained smiling. "I do not
care for red hair myself, which is one reason I usually wear other
forms."

"It is beautiful," asserted the young man; and then remembering the
other women present he added: "But, of course, all women should not
have red hair, because that would make it too common. Gold and silver
and brown hair are equally handsome."

The smiles that he saw interchanged between the four filled the poor
Skeezer with embarrassment, so he fell silent and attended to eating
his supper, leaving the others to do the talking. The three Adepts
frankly told Reera who they were, how they became fishes and how they
had planned secretly to induce the Yookoohoo to transform them. They
admitted that they had feared, had they asked her to help, that she
would have refused them.

"You were quite right," returned the Yookoohoo. "I make it my rule
never to perform magic to assist others, for if I did there would
always be crowd at my cottage demanding help and I hate crowds and want
to be left alone."

"However, now that you are restored to your proper shapes, I do not
regret my action and I hope you will be of use in saving the Skeezer
people by raising their island to the surface of the lake, where it
really belongs. But you must promise me that after you go away you will
never come here again, nor tell anyone what I have done for you."

The three Adepts and Ervic thanked the Yookoohoo warmly. They promised
to remember her wish that they should not come to her cottage again and
so, with a good-bye, took their departure.




Chapter Twenty

A Puzzling Problem


Glinda the Good, having decided to try her sorcery upon the abandoned
submarine, so that it would obey her commands, asked all of her party,
including the Skeezers, to withdraw from the shore of the lake to the
line of palm trees. She kept with her only the little Wizard of Oz, who
was her pupil and knew how to assist her in her magic rites. When they
two were alone beside the stranded boat, Glinda said to the Wizard:

"I shall first try my magic recipe No. 1163, which is intended to make
inanimate objects move at my command. Have you a skeropythrope with
you?"

"Yes, I always carry one in my bag," replied the Wizard. He opened his
black bag of magic tools and took out a brightly polished
skeropythrope, which he handed to the Sorceress. Glinda had also
brought a small wicker bag, containing various requirements of sorcery,
and from this she took a parcel of powder and a vial of liquid. She
poured the liquid into the skeropythrope and added the powder. At once
the skeropythrope began to sputter and emit sparks of a violet color,
which spread in all directions. The Sorceress instantly stepped into
the middle of the boat and held the instrument so that the sparks fell
all around her and covered every bit of the blackened steel boat. At
the same time Glinda crooned a weird incantation in the language of
sorcery, her voice sounding low and musical.

After a little the violet sparks ceased, and those that had fallen upon
the boat had disappeared and left no mark upon its surface. The
ceremony was ended and Glinda returned the skeropythrope to the Wizard,
who put it away in his black bag.

"That ought to do the business all right," he said confidently.

"Let us make a trial and see," she replied.

So they both entered the boat and seated themselves.

Speaking in a tone of command the Sorceress said to the boat: "Carry us
across the lake, to the farther shore."

At once the boat backed off the sandy beach, turned its prow and moved
swiftly over the water.

"Very good--very good indeed!" cried the Wizard, when the boat slowed
up at the shore opposite from that whence they had departed. "Even
Coo-ee-oh, with all her witchcraft, could do no better."

The Sorceress now said to the boat:

"Close up, submerge and carry us to the basement door of the sunken
island--the door from which you emerged at the command of Queen
Coo-ee-oh."

The boat obeyed. As it sank into the water the top sections rose from
the sides and joined together over the heads of Glinda and the Wizard,
who were thus enclosed in a water-proof chamber. There were four glass
windows in this covering, one on each side and one on either end, so
that the passengers could see exactly where they were going. Moving
under water more slowly than on the surface, the submarine gradually
approached the island and halted with its bow pressed against the huge
marble door in the basement under the Dome. This door was tightly
closed and it was evident to both Glinda and the Wizard that it would
not open to admit the underwater boat unless a magic word was spoken by
them or someone from within the basement of the island. But what was
this magic word?  Neither of them knew.

"I'm afraid," said the Wizard regretfully, "that we can't get in, after
all. Unless your sorcery can discover the word to open the marble door."

"That is probably some word only known to Coo-ce-oh," replied the
Sorceress. "I may be able to discover what it is, but that will require
time. Let us go back again to our companions."

"It seems a shame, after we have made the boat obey us, to be balked by
just a marble door," grumbled the Wizard.

At Glinda's command the boat rose until it was on a level with the
glass dome that covered the Skeezer village, when the Sorceress made it
slowly circle all around the Great Dome.

Many faces were pressed against the glass from the inside, eagerly
watching the submarine, and in one place were Dorothy and Ozma, who
quickly recognized Glinda and the Wizard through the glass windows of
the boat. Glinda saw them, too, and held the boat close to the Dome
while the friends exchanged greetings in pantomime. Their voices,
unfortunately, could not be heard through the Dome and the water and
the side of the boat. The Wizard tried to make the girls understand,
through signs, that he and Glinda had come to their rescue, and Ozma
and Dorothy understood this from the very fact that the Sorceress and
the Wizard had appeared. The two girl prisoners were smiling and in
safety, and knowing this Glinda felt she could take all the time
necessary in order to effect their final rescue.

As nothing more could be done just then, Glinda ordered the boat to
return to shore and it obeyed readily. First it ascended to the surface
of the water, then the roof parted and fell into the slots at the side
of the boat, and then the magic craft quickly made the shore and
beached itself on the sands at the very spot from which it had departed
at Glinda's command. All the Oz people and the Skeezers at once ran to
the boat to ask if they had reached the island, and whether they had
seen Ozma and Dorothy. The Wizard told them of the obstacle they had
met in the way of a marble door, and how Glinda would now undertake to
find a magic way to conquer the door.

Realizing that it would require several days to succeed in reaching the
island raising it and liberating their friends and the Skeezer people,
Glinda now prepared a camp half way between the lake shore and the palm
trees.

The Wizard's wizardry made a number of tents appear and the sorcery of
the Sorceress furnished these tents all complete, with beds, chairs,
tables, flags, lamps and even books with which to pass idle hours. All
the tents had the Royal Banner of Oz flying from the centerpoles and
one big tent, not now occupied, had Ozma's own banner moving in the
breeze.

Betsy and Trot had a tent to themselves, and Button Bright and Ojo had
another. The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman paired together in one tent
and so did Jack Pumpkinhead and the Shaggy Man, Cap'n Bill and Uncle
Henry, Tik-Tok and Professor Wogglebug. Glinda had the most splendid
tent of all, except that reserved for Ozma, while the Wizard had a
little one of his own. Whenever it was meal time, tables loaded with
food magically appeared in the tents of those who were in the habit of
eating, and these complete arrangements made the rescue party just
comfortable as they would have been in their own homes.

Far into the night Glinda sat in her tent studying a roll of mystic
scrolls in search of a word that would open the basement door of the
island and admit her to the Great Dome. She also made many magical
experiments, hoping to discover something that would aid her. Yet the
morning found the powerful Sorceress still unsuccessful.

Glinda's art could have opened any ordinary door, you may be sure, but
you must realize that this marble door of the island had been commanded
not to open save in obedience to one magic word, and therefore all
other magic words could have no effect upon it. The magic word that
guarded the door had probably been invented by Coo-ee-oh, who had now
forgotten it. The only way, then, to gain entrance to the sunken island
was to break the charm that held the door fast shut. If this could be
done no magic would be required to open it.

The next day the Sorceress and the Wizard again entered the boat and
made it submerge and go to the marble door, which they tried in various
ways to open, but without success.

"We shall have to abandon this attempt, I think," said Glinda. "The
easiest way to raise the island would be for us to gain admittance to
the Dome and then descend to the basement and see in what manner
Coo-ee-oh made the entire island sink or rise at her command. It
naturally occurred to me that the easiest way to gain admittance would
be by having the boat take us into the basement through the marble door
from which Coo-ee-oh launched it. But there must be other ways to get
inside the Dome and join Ozma and Dorothy, and such ways we must find
by study and the proper use of our powers of magic."

"It won't be easy," declared the Wizard, "for we must not forget that
Ozma herself understands considerable magic, and has doubtless tried to
raise the island or find other means of escape from it and failed."

"That is true," returned Glinda, "but Ozma's magic is fairy magic,
while you are a Wizard and I am a Sorceress. In this way the three of
us have a great variety of magic to work with, and if we should all
fail it will be because the island is raised and lowered by a magic
power none of us is acquainted with. My idea therefore is to seek--by
such magic as we possess--to accomplish our object in another way."

They made the circle of the Dome again in their boat, and once more saw
Ozma and Dorothy through their windows and exchanged signals with the
two imprisoned girls.

Ozma realized that her friends were doing all in their power to rescue
her and smiled an encouragement to their efforts. Dorothy seemed a
little anxious but was trying to be as brave as her companion.

After the boat had returned to the camp and Glinda was seated in her
tent, working out various ways by which Ozma and Dorothy could be
rescued, the Wizard stood on the shore dreamily eying the outlines of
the Great Dome which showed beneath the clear water, when he raised his
eyes and saw a group of strange people approaching from around the
lake. Three were young women of stately presence, very beautifully
dressed, who moved with remarkable grace. They were followed at a
little distance by a good-looking young Skeezer.

The Wizard saw at a glance that these people might be very important,
so he advanced to meet them. The three maidens received him graciously
and the one with the golden hair said:

"I believe you are the famous Wizard of Oz, of whom I have often heard.
We are seeking Glinda, the Sorceress, and perhaps you can lead us to
her."

"I can, and will, right gladly," answered the Wizard. "Follow me,
please."

The little Wizard was puzzled as to the identity of the three lovely
visitors but he gave no sign that might embarrass them.

He understood they did not wish to be questioned, and so he made no
remarks as he led the way to Glinda's tent.

With a courtly bow the Wizard ushered the three visitors into the
gracious presence of Glinda, the Good.




Chapter Twenty-One

The Three Adepts


The Sorceress looked up from her work as the three maidens entered, and
something in their appearance and manner led her to rise and bow to
them in her most dignified manner. The three knelt an instant before
the great Sorceress and then stood upright and waited for her to speak.

"Whoever you may be," said Glinda, "I bid you welcome."

"My name is Audah," said one.

"My name is Aurah," said another.

"My name is Aujah," said the third.

Glinda had never heard these names before, but looking closely at the
three she asked:

"Are you witches or workers in magic?"

"Some of the secret arts we have gleaned from Nature," replied the
brownhaired maiden modestly, "but we do not place our skill beside that
of the Great Sorceress, Glinda the Good."

"I suppose you are aware it is unlawful to practice magic in the Land
of Oz, without the permission of our Ruler, Princess Ozma?"

"No, we were not aware of that," was the reply.  "We have heard of
Ozma, who is the appointed Ruler of all this great fairyland, but her
laws have not reached us, as yet."

Glinda studied the strange maidens thoughtfully; then she said to them:

"Princess Ozma is even now imprisoned in the Skeezer village, for the
whole island with its Great Dome, was sunk to the bottom of the lake by
the witchcraft of Coo-ee-oh, whom the Flathead Su-dic transformed into
a silly swan. I am seeking some way to overcome Coo-ee-oh's magic and
raise the isle to the surface again. Can you help me do this?"

The maidens exchanged glances, and the white-haired one replied:

"We do not know; but we will try to assist you."

"It seems," continued Glinda musingly, "that Coo-ee-oh derived most of
her witchcraft from three Adepts at Magic, who at one time ruled the
Flatheads. While the Adepts were being entertained by Coo-ee-oh at a
banquet in her palace, she cruelly betrayed them and after transforming
them into fishes cast them into the lake.

"If I could find these three fishes and return them to their natural
shapes--they might know what magic Coo-ee-oh used to sink the island. I
was about to go to the shore and call these fishes to me when you
arrived. So, if you will join me, we will try to find them."

The maidens exchanged smiles now, and the golden-haired one, Audah,
said to Glinda:

"It will not be necessary to go to the lake. We are the three fishes."

"Indeed!" cried Glinda. "Then you are the three Adepts at Magic,
restored to your proper forms?"

"We are the three Adepts," admitted Aujah.

"Then," said Glinda, "my task is half accomplished. But who destroyed
the transformation that made you fishes?"

"We have promised not to tell," answered Aurah; "but this young Skeezer
was largely responsible for our release; he is brave and clever, and we
owe him our gratitude."

Glinda looked at Ervic, who stood modestly behind the Adepts, hat in
hand. "He shall be properly rewarded," she declared, "for in helping
you he has helped us all, and perhaps saved his people from being
imprisoned forever in the sunken isle."

The Sorceress now asked her guests to seat themselves and a long talk
followed, in which the Wizard of Oz shared.

"We are quite certain," said Aurah, "that if we could get inside the
Dome we could discover Coo-ee-oh's secrets, for in all her work, after
we became fishes, she used the formulas and incantations and arts that
she stole from us. She may have added to these things, but they were
the foundation of all her work."

"What means do you suggest for our getting into the Dome?" inquired
Glinda.

The three Adepts hesitated to reply, for they had not yet considered
what could be done to reach the inside of the Great Dome. While they
were in deep thought, and Glinda and the Wizard were quietly awaiting
their suggestions, into the tent rushed Trot and Betsy, dragging
between them the Patchwork Girl.

"Oh, Glinda," cried Trot, "Scraps has thought of a way to rescue Ozma
and Dorothy and all of the Skeezers."

The three Adepts could not avoid laughing merrily, for not only were
they amused by the queer form of the Patchwork Girl, but Trot's
enthusiastic speech struck them as really funny. If the Great Sorceress
and the famous Wizard and the three talented Adepts at Magic were
unable as yet to solve the important problem of the sunken isle, there
was little chance for a patched girl stuffed with cotton to succeed.

But Glinda, smiling indulgently at the earnest faces turned toward her,
patted the children's heads and said:

"Scraps is very clever. Tell us what she has thought of, my dear."

"Well," said Trot, "Scraps says that if you could dry up all the water
in the lake the island would be on dry land, an' everyone could come
and go whenever they liked."

Glinda smiled again, but the Wizard said to the girls:

"If we should dry up the lake, what would become of all the beautiful
fishes that now live in the water?"

"Dear me! That's so," admitted Betsy, crestfallen; "we never thought of
that, did we Trot?"

"Couldn't you transform 'em into polliwogs?" asked Scraps, turning a
somersault and then standing on one leg. "You could give them a little,
teeny pond to swim in, and they'd be just as happy as they are as
fishes."

"No indeed!" replied the Wizard, severely. "It is wicked to transform
any living creatures without their consent, and the lake is the home of
the fishes and belongs to them."

"All right," said Scraps, making a face at him; "I don't care."

"It's too bad," sighed Trot, "for I thought we'd struck a splendid
idea."

"So you did," declared Glinda, her face now grave and thoughtful.
"There is something in the Patchwork Girl's idea that may be of real
value to us."

"I think so, too," agreed the golden-haired Adept. "The top of the
Great Dome is only a few feet below the surface of the water. If we
could reduce the level of the lake until the Dome sticks a little above
the water, we could remove some of the glass and let ourselves down
into the village by means of ropes."

"And there would be plenty of water left for the fishes to swim in,"
added the white-haired maiden.

"If we succeed in raising the island we could fill up the lake again,"
suggested the brown-haired Adept.

"I believe," said the Wizard, rubbing his hands together in delight,
"that the Patchwork Girl has shown us the way to success."

The girls were looking curiously at the three beautiful Adepts,
wondering who they were, so Glinda introduced them to Trot and Betsy
and Scraps, and then sent the children away while she considered how to
carry the new idea into effect.

Not much could be done that night, so the Wizard prepared another tent
for the Adepts, and in the evening Glinda held a reception and invited
all her followers to meet the new arrivals. The Adepts were greatly
astonished at the extraordinary personages presented to them, and
marveled that Jack Pumpkinhead and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman
and Tik-Tok could really live and think and talk just like other
people. They were especially pleased with the lively Patchwork Girl and
loved to watch her antics.

It was quite a pleasant party, for Glinda served some dainty
refreshments to those who could eat, and the Scarecrow recited some
poems, and the Cowardly Lion sang a song in his deep bass voice. The
only thing that marred their joy was the thought that their beloved
Ozma and dear little Dorothy were yet confined in the Great Dome of the
Sunken island.




Chapter Twenty-Two

The Sunken Island


As soon as they had breakfasted the next morning, Glinda and the Wizard
and the three Adepts went down to the shore of the lake and formed a
line with their faces toward the submerged island. All the others came
to watch them, but stood at a respectful distance in the background.

At the right of the Sorceress stood Audah and Aurah, while at the left
stood the Wizard and Aujah. Together they stretched their arms over the
water's edge and in unison the five chanted a rhythmic incantation.

This chant they repeated again and again, swaying their arms gently
from side to side, and in a few minutes the watchers behind them
noticed that the lake had begun to recede from the shore. Before long
the highest point of the dome appeared above the water. Gradually the
water fell, making the dome appear to rise. When it was three or four
feet above the surface Glinda gave the signal to stop, for their work
had been accomplished.

The blackened submarine was now entirely out of water, but Uncle Henry
and Cap'n Bill managed to push it into the lake. Glinda, the Wizard,
Ervic and the Adepts got into the boat, taking with them a coil of
strong rope, and at the command of the Sorceress the craft cleaved its
way through the water toward the part of the Dome which was now visible.

"There's still plenty of water for the fish to swim in," observed the
Wizard as they rode along. "They might like more but I'm sure they can
get along until we have raised the island and can fill up the lake
again."

The boat touched gently on the sloping glass of the Dome, and the
Wizard took some tools from his black bag and quickly removed one large
pane of glass, thus making a hole large enough for their bodies to pass
through. Stout frames of steel supported the glass of the Dome, and
around one of these frames the Wizard tied the end of a rope.

"I'll go down first," said he, "for while I'm not as spry as Cap'n Bill
I'm sure I can manage it easily.  Are you sure the rope is long enough
to reach the bottom?"

"Quite sure," replied the Sorceress.

So the Wizard let down the rope and climbing through the opening
lowered himself down, hand over hand, clinging to the rope with his
legs and feet. Below in the streets of the village were gathered all
the Skeezers, men, women and children, and you may be sure that Ozma
and Dorothy, with Lady Aurex, were filled with joy that their friends
were at last coming to their rescue.

The Queen's palace, now occupied by Ozma, was directly in the center of
the Dome, so that when the rope was let down the end of it came just in
front of the palace entrance. Several Skeezers held fast to the rope's
end to steady it and the Wizard reached the ground in safety. He hugged
first Ozma and then Dorothy, while all the Skeezers cheered as loud as
they could.

The Wizard now discovered that the rope was long enough to reach from
the top of the Dome to the ground when doubled, so he tied a chair to
one end of the rope and called to Glinda to sit in the chair while he
and some of the Skeezers lowered her to the pavement. In this way the
Sorceress reached the ground quite comfortably and the three Adepts and
Ervic soon followed her.

The Skeezers quickly recognized the three Adepts at Magic, whom they
had learned to respect before their wicked Queen betrayed them, and
welcomed them as friends. All the inhabitants of the village had been
greatly frightened by their imprisonment under water, but now realized
that an attempt was to be made to rescue them.

Glinda, the Wizard and the Adepts followed Ozma and Dorothy into the
palace, and they asked Lady Aurex and Ervic to join them. After Ozma
had told of her adventures in trying to prevent war between the
Flatheads and the Skeezers, and Glinda had told all about the Rescue
Expedition and the restoration of the three Adepts by the help of
Ervic, a serious consultation was held as to how the island could be
made to rise.

"I've tried every way in my power," said Ozma, "but Coo-ee-oh used a
very unusual sort of magic which I do not understand. She seems to have
prepared her witchcraft in such a way that a spoken word is necessary
to accomplish her designs, and these spoken words are known only to
herself."

"That is a method we taught her," declared Aurah the Adept.

"I can do no more, Glinda," continued Ozma, "so I wish you would try
what your sorcery can accomplish."

"First, then," said Glinda, "let us visit the basement of the island,
which I am told is underneath the village."

A flight of marble stairs led from one of Coo-ee-oh's private rooms
down to the basement, but when the party arrived all were puzzled by
what they saw. In the center of a broad, low room, stood a mass of
great cog-wheels, chains and pulleys, all interlocked and seeming to
form a huge machine; but there was no engine or other motive power to
make the wheels turn.

"This, I suppose, is the means by which the island is lowered or
raised," said Ozma, "but the magic word which is needed to move the
machinery is unknown to us."

The three Adepts were carefully examining the mass of wheels, and soon
the golden-haired one said:

"These wheels do not control the island at all. On the contrary, one
set of them is used to open the doors of the little rooms where the
submarines are kept, as may be seen from the chains and pulleys used.
Each boat is kept in a little room with two doors, one to the basement
room where we are now and the other letting into the lake.

"When Coo-ee-oh used the boat in which she attacked the Flatheads, she
first commanded the basement door to open and with her followers she
got into the boat and made the top close over them. Then the basement
door being closed, the outer door was slowly opened, letting the water
fill the room to float the boat, which then left the island, keeping
under water."

"But how could she expect to get back again?" asked the Wizard.

"Why the boat would enter the room filled with water and after the
outer door was closed a word of command started a pump which pumped all
the water from the room. Then the boat would open and Coo-ee-oh could
enter the basement."

"I see," said the Wizard. "It is a clever contrivance, but won't work
unless one knows the magic words."

"Another part of this machinery," explained the white-haired Adept, "is
used to extend the bridge from the island to the mainland. The steel
bridge is in a room much like that in which the boats are kept, and at
Coo-ce-oh's command it would reach out, joint by joint, until its far
end touched the shore of the lake. The same magic command would make
the bridge return to its former position. Of course the bridge could
not be used unless the island was on the surface of the water."

"But how do you suppose Coo-ee-oh managed to sink the island, and make
it rise again?" inquired Glinda.

This the Adepts could not yet explain. As nothing more could be learned
from the basement they mounted the steps to the Queen's private suite
again, and Ozma showed them to a special room where Coo-ee-oh kept her
magical instruments and performed all her arts of witchcraft.




Chapter Twenty-Three

The Magic Words


Many interesting things were to be seen in the Room of Magic, including
much that had been stolen from the Adepts when they were transformed to
fishes, but they had to admit that Coo-ee-oh had a rare genius for
mechanics, and had used her knowledge in inventing a lot of mechanical
apparatus that ordinary witches, wizards and sorcerers could not
understand.

They all carefully inspected this room, taking care to examine every
article they came across.

"The island," said Glinda thoughtfully, "rests on a base of solid
marble. When it is submerged, as it is now, the base of the island is
upon the bottom of the lake. What puzzles me is how such a great weight
can be lifted and suspended in the water, even by magic."

"I now remember," returned Aujah, "that one of the arts we taught
Coo-ee-oh was the way to expand steel, and I think that explains how
the island is raised and lowered. I noticed in the basement a big steel
pillar that passed through the floor and extended upward to this
palace. Perhaps the end of it is concealed in this very room. If the
lower end of the steel pillar is firmly embedded in the bottom of the
lake, Coo-ee-oh could utter a magic word that would make the pillar
expand, and so lift the entire island to the level of the water."

"I've found the end of the steel pillar. It's just here," announced the
Wizard, pointing to one side of the room where a great basin of
polished steel seemed to have been set upon the floor.

They all gathered around, and Ozma said:

"Yes, I am quite sure that is the upper end of the pillar that supports
the island. I noticed it when I first came here. It has been hollowed
out, you see, and something has been burned in the basin, for the fire
has left its marks. I wondered what was under the great basin and got
several of the Skeezers to come up here and try to lift it for me. They
were strong men, but could not move it at all."

"It seems to me," said Audah the Adept, "that we have discovered the
manner in which Coo-ee-oh raised the island. She would burn some sort
of magic powder in the basin, utter the magic word, and the pillar
would lengthen out and lift the island with it."

"What's this?" asked Dorothy, who had been searching around with the
others, and now noticed a slight hollow in the wall, near to where the
steel basin stood. As she spoke Dorothy pushed her thumb into the
hollow and instantly a small drawer popped out from the wall.

The three Adepts, Glinda and the Wizard sprang forward and peered into
the drawer. It was half filled with a grayish powder, the tiny grains
of which constantly moved as if impelled by some living force.

"It may be some kind of radium," said the Wizard.

"No," replied Glinda, "it is more wonderful than even radium, for I
recognize it as a rare mineral powder called Gaulau by the sorcerers. I
wonder how Coo-ee-oh discovered it and where she obtained it."

"There is no doubt," said Aujah the Adept, "that this is the magic
powder Coo-ee-oh burned in the basin. If only we knew the magic word, I
am quite sure we could raise the island."

"How can we discover the magic word?" asked Ozma, turning to Glinda as
she spoke.

"That we must now seriously consider," answered the Sorceress.

So all of them sat down in the Room of Magic and began to think. It was
so still that after a while Dorothy grew nervous. The little girl never
could keep silent for long, and at the risk of displeasing her
magic-working friends she suddenly said:

"Well, Coo-ee-oh used just three magic words, one to make the bridge
work, and one to make the submarines go out of their holes, and one to
raise and lower the island. Three words. And Coo-ee-oh's name is made
up of just three words. One is 'Coo,' and one is 'ee,' and one is 'oh.'"

The Wizard frowned but Glinda looked wonderingly at the young girl and
Ozma cried out:

"A good thought, Dorothy dear! You may have solved our problem."

"I believe it is worth a trial," agreed Glinda. "It would be quite
natural for Coo-ee-oh to divide her name into three magic syllables,
and Dorothy's suggestion seems like an inspiration."

The three Adepts also approved the trial but the brown-haired one said:

"We must be careful not to use the wrong word, and send the bridge out
under water. The main thing, if Dorothy's idea is correct, is to hit
upon the one word that moves the island."

"Let us experiment," suggested the Wizard.

In the drawer with the moving gray powder was a tiny golden cup, which
they thought was used for measuring. Glinda filled this cup with the
powder and carefully poured it into the shallow basin, which was the
top of the great steel pillar supporting the island. Then Aurah the
Adept lighted a taper and touched it to the powder, which instantly
glowed fiery red and tumbled about the basin with astonishing energy.
While the grains of powder still glowed red the Sorceress bent over it
and said in a voice of command: "Coo!"

They waited motionless to see what would happen. There was a grating
noise and a whirl of machinery, but the island did not move a particle.

Dorothy rushed to the window, which overlooked the glass side of the
dome.

"The boats!" she exclaimed. "The boats are all loose an' sailing under
water."

"We've made a mistake," said the Wizard gloomily.

"But it's one which shows we are on the right track," declared Aujah
the Adept. "We know now that Coo-ee-oh used the syllables of her name
for the magic words."

"If 'Coo' sends out the boats, it is probable that ee' works the
bridge," suggested Ozma. "So the last part of the name may raise the
island."

"Let us try that next then," proposed the Wizard.

He scraped the embers of the burned powder out of the basin and Glinda
again filled the golden cup from the drawer and placed it on top the
steel pillar. Aurah lighted it with her taper and Ozma bent over the
basin and murmured the long drawn syllable: "Oh-h-h!"

Instantly the island trembled and with a weird groaning noise it moved
upward--slowly, very slowly, but with a steady motion, while all the
company stood by in awed silence. It was a wonderful thing, even to
those skilled in the arts of magic, wizardry and sorcery, to realize
that a single word could raise that great, heavy island, with its
immense glass Dome.

"Why, we're way above the lake now!" exclaimed Dorothy from the window,
when at last the island ceased to move.

"That is because we lowered the level of the water," explained Glinda.

They could hear the Skeezers cheering lustily in the streets of the
village as they realized that they were saved.

"Come," said Ozma eagerly, "let us go down and join the people."

"Not just yet," returned Glinda, a happy smile upon her lovely face,
for she was overjoyed at their success. "First let us extend the bridge
to the mainland, where our friends from the Emerald City are waiting."

It didn't take long to put more powder in the basin, light it and utter
the syllable "EE!" The result was that a door in the basement opened
and the steel bridge moved out, extended itself joint by joint, and
finally rested its far end on the shore of the lake just in front of
the encampment.

"Now," said Glinda, "we can go up and receive the congratulations of
the Skeezers and of our friends of the Rescue Expedition."

Across the water, on the shore of the lake, the Patchwork Girl was
waving them a welcome.




Chapter Twenty-Four

Glinda's Triumph


Of course all those who had joined Glinda's expedition at once crossed
the bridge to the island, where they were warmly welcomed by the
Skeezers. Before all the concourse of people Princess Ozma made a
speech from a porch of the palace and demanded that they recognize her
as their lawful Ruler and promise to obey the laws of the Land of Oz.
In return she agreed to protect them from all future harm and declared
they would no longer be subjected to cruelty and abuse.

This pleased the Skeezers greatly, and when Ozma told them they might
elect a Queen to rule over them, who in turn would be subject to Ozma
of Oz, they voted for Lady Aurex, and that same day the ceremony of
crowning the new Queen was held and Aurex was installed as mistress of
the palace.

For her Prime Minister the Queen selected Ervic, for the three Adepts
had told of his good judgment, faithfulness and cleverness, and all the
Skeezers approved the appointment.

Glinda, the Wizard and the Adepts stood on the bridge and recited an
incantation that quite filled the lake with water again, and the
Scarecrow and the Patchwork Girl climbed to the top of the Great Dome
and replaced the pane of glass that had been removed to allow Glinda
and her followers to enter.

When evening came Ozma ordered a great feast prepared, to which every
Skeezer was invited. The village was beautifully decorated and
brilliantly lighted and there was music and dancing until a late hour
to celebrate the liberation of the people. For the Skeezers had been
freed, not only from the water of the lake but from the cruelty of
their former Queen.

As the people from the Emerald City prepared the next morning to depart
Queen Aurex said to Ozma:

"There is only one thing I now fear for my people, and that is the
enmity of the terrible Su-dic of the Flatheads. He is liable to come
here at any time and try to annoy us, and my Skeezers are peaceful
folks and unable to fight the wild and wilful Flatheads."

"Do not worry," returned Ozma, reassuringly. "We intend to stop on our
way at the Flatheads' Enchanted Mountain and punish the Su-dic for his
misdeeds."

That satisfied Aurex and when Ozma and her followers trooped over the
bridge to the shore, having taken leave of their friends, all the
Skeezers cheered them and waved their hats and handkerchiefs, and the
band played and the departure was indeed a ceremony long to be
remembered.

The three Adepts at Magic, who had formerly ruled the Flatheads wisely
and considerately, went with Princess Ozma and her people, for they had
promised Ozma to stay on the mountain and again see that the laws were
enforced.

Glinda had been told all about the curious Flatheads and she had
consulted with the Wizard and formed a plan to render them more
intelligent and agreeable.

When the party reached the mountain Ozma and Dorothy showed them how to
pass around the invisible wall--which had been built by the Flatheads
after the Adepts were transformed--and how to gain the up-and-down
stairway that led to the mountain top.

The Su-dic had watched the approach of the party from the edge of the
mountain and was frightened when he saw that the three Adepts had
recovered their natural forms and were coming back to their former
home. He realized that his power would soon be gone and yet he
determined to fight to the last. He called all the Flatheads together
and armed them, and told them to arrest all who came up the stairway
and hurl them over the edge of the mountain to the plain below. But
although they feared the Supreme Dictator, who had threatened to punish
them if they did not obey his commands, as soon as they saw the three
Adepts they threw down their arms and begged their former rulers to
protect them.

The three Adepts assured the excited Flatheads that they had nothing to
fear.

Seeing that his people had rebelled the Su-dic ran away and tried to
hide, but the Adepts found him and had him cast into a prison, all his
cans of brains being taken away from him.

After this easy conquest of the Su-dic, Glinda told the Adepts of her
plan, which had already been approved by Ozma of Oz, and they joyfully
agreed to it. So, during the next few days, the great Sorceress
transformed, in a way, every Flathead on the mountain.

Taking them one at a time, she had the can of brains that belonged to
each one opened and the contents spread on the flat head, after which,
by means of her arts of sorcery, she caused the head to grow over the
brains--in the manner most people wear them--and they were thus
rendered as intelligent and good looking as any of the other
inhabitants of the Land of Oz.

When all had been treated in this manner there were no more Flatheads
at all, and the Adepts decided to name their people Mountaineers. One
good result of Glinda's sorcery was that no one could now be deprived
of the brains that belonged to him and each person had exactly the
share he was entitled to.

Even the Su-dic was given his portion of brains and his flat head made
round, like the others, but he was deprived of all power to work
further mischief, and with the Adepts constantly watching him he would
be forced to become obedient and humble.

The Golden Pig, which ran grunting about the streets, with no brains at
all, was disenchanted by Glinda, and in her woman's form was given
brains and a round head. This wife of the Su-dic had once been even
more wicked than her evil husband, but she had now forgotten all her
wickedness and was likely to be a good woman thereafter.

These things being accomplished in a satisfactory manner, Princess Ozma
and her people bade farewell to the three Adepts and departed for the
Emerald City, well pleased with their interesting adventures.

They returned by the road over which Ozma and Dorothy had come,
stopping to get the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon where they had left them.

"I'm very glad I went to see these peoples," said Princess Ozma, "for I
not only prevented any further warfare between them, but they have been
freed from the rule of the Su-dic and Coo-ee-oh and are now happy and
loyal subjects of the Land of Oz. Which proves that it is always wise
to do one's duty, however unpleasant that duty may seem to be."






The Wonderful Oz Books

by L. Frank Baum:

  The Wizard of Oz
  The Land of Oz
  Ozma of Oz
  Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz
  The Road to Oz
  The Emerald city of Oz
  The Patchwork Girl of Oz
  Tik-Tok of Oz
  The Scarecrow of Oz
  Rinkitink in Oz
  The Lost Princess of Oz
  The Tin Woodman of Oz
  The Magic of Oz
  Glinda of Oz

========================================
========================================

RINKITINK IN OZ


by

L. Frank Baum



  Wherein is recorded the Perilous Quest of
     Prince Inga of Pingaree and King
         Rinkitink in the Magical
          Isles that lie beyond
              the Borderland
                   of Oz

             By L. Frank Baum
         "Royal Historian of Oz"



Introducing this Story


Here is a story with a boy hero, and a boy of whom you have never
before heard. There are girls in the story, too, including our old
friend Dorothy, and some of the characters wander a good way from the
Land of Oz before they all assemble in the Emerald City to take part in
Ozma's banquet. Indeed, I think you will find this story  quite
different from the other histories of Oz, but I hope you will not like
it the less on that account.

If I am permitted to write another Oz book it will tell of some
thrilling adventures encountered by Dorothy, Betsy Bobbin, Trot and the
Patchwork Girl right in the Land of Oz, and how they discovered some
amazing creatures that never could have existed outside a fairy-land. I
have an idea that about the time you are reading this story of
Rinkitink I shall be writing that story of Adventures in Oz.

Don't fail to write me often and give me your advice and suggestions,
which I always appreciate. I get a good many letters from my readers,
but every one is a joy to me and I answer them as soon as I can find
time to do so.

"OZCOT"
  at HOLLYWOOD
    in CALIFORNIA, 1916.

L. FRANK BAUM
  Royal Historian of Oz




LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1  The Prince of Pingaree
   2  The Coming of King Rinkitink
   3  The Warriors from the North
   4  The Deserted Island
   5  The Three Pearls
   6  The Magic Boat
   7  The Twin Islands
   8  Rinkitink Makes a Great Mistake
   9  A Present for Zella
  10  The Cunning of Queen Cor
  11  Zella Goes to Coregos
  12  The Excitement of Bilbil the Goat
  13  Zella Saves the Prince
  14  The Escape
  15  The Flight of the Rulers
  16  Nikobob Refuses a Crown
  17  The Nome King
  18  Inga Parts With His Pink Pearl
  19  Rinkitink Chuckles
  20  Dorothy to the Rescue
  21  The Wizard Finds an Enchantment
  22  Ozma's Banquet
  23  The Pearl Kingdom
  24  The Captive King




Chapter One

The Prince of Pingaree


If you have a map of the Land of Oz handy, you will find that the great
Nonestic Ocean washes the shores of the Kingdom of Rinkitink, between
which and the Land of Oz lies a strip of the country of the Nome King
and a Sandy Desert. The Kingdom of Rinkitink isn't very big and lies
close to the ocean, all the houses and the King's palace being built
near the shore. The people live much upon the water, boating and
fishing, and the wealth of Rinkitink is gained from trading along the
coast and with the islands nearest it.

Four days' journey by boat to the north of Rinkitink is the Island of
Pingaree, and as our story begins here I must tell you something about
this island. At the north end of Pingaree, where it is widest, the land
is a mile from shore to shore, but at the south end it is scarcely half
a mile broad; thus, although Pingaree is four miles long, from north to
south, it cannot be called a very big island. It is exceedingly pretty,
however, and to the gulls who approach it from the sea it must resemble
a huge green wedge lying upon the waters, for its grass and trees give
it the color of an emerald.

The grass came to the edge of the sloping shores; the beautiful trees
occupied all the central portion of Pingaree, forming a continuous
grove where the branches met high overhead and there was just space
beneath them for the cosy houses of the inhabitants. These houses were
scattered everywhere throughout the island, so that there was no town
or city, unless the whole island might be called a city. The canopy of
leaves, high overhead, formed a shelter from sun and rain, and the
dwellers in the grove could all look past the straight tree-trunks and
across the grassy slopes to the purple waters of the Nonestic Ocean.

At the big end of the island, at the north, stood the royal palace of
King Kitticut, the lord and ruler of Pingaree. It was a beautiful
palace, built entirely of snow-white marble and capped by domes of
burnished gold, for the King was exceedingly wealthy. All along the
coast of Pingaree were found the largest and finest pearls in the whole
world.

These pearls grew within the shells of big oysters, and the people
raked the oysters from their watery beds, sought out the milky pearls
and carried them dutifully to their King. Therefore, once every year
His Majesty was able to send six of his boats, with sixty rowers and
many sacks of the valuable pearls, to the Kingdom of Rinkitink, where
there was a city called Gilgad, in which King Rinkitink's palace stood
on a rocky headland and served, with its high towers, as a lighthouse
to guide sailors to the harbor. In Gilgad the pearls from Pingaree were
purchased by the King's treasurer, and the boats went back to the
island laden with stores of rich merchandise and such supplies of food
as the people and the royal family of Pingaree needed.

The Pingaree people never visited any other land but that of Rinkitink,
and so there were few other lands that knew there was such an island.
To the southwest was an island called the Isle of Phreex, where the
inhabitants had no use for pearls. And far north of Pingaree--six days'
journey by boat, it was said--were twin islands named Regos and
Coregos, inhabited by a fierce and warlike people.

Many years before this story really begins, ten big boatloads of those
fierce warriors of Regos and Coregos visited Pingaree, landing suddenly
upon the north end of the island. There they began to plunder and
conquer, as was their custom, but the people of Pingaree, although
neither so big nor so strong as their foes, were able to defeat them
and drive them all back to the sea, where a great storm overtook the
raiders from Regos and Coregos and destroyed them and their boats, not
a single warrior returning to his own country.

This defeat of the enemy seemed the more wonderful because the
pearl-fishers of Pingaree were mild and peaceful in disposition and
seldom quarreled even among themselves. Their only weapons were their
oyster rakes; yet the fact remains that they drove their fierce enemies
from Regos and Coregos from their shores.

King Kitticut was only a boy when this remarkable battle was fought,
and now his hair was gray; but he remembered the day well and, during
the years that followed, his one constant fear was of another invasion
of his enemies. He feared they might send a more numerous army to his
island, both for conquest and revenge, in which case there could be
little hope of successfully opposing them.

This anxiety on the part of King Kitticut led him to keep a sharp
lookout for strange boats, one of his men patrolling the beach
constantly, but he was too wise to allow any fear to make him or his
subjects unhappy. He was a good King and lived very contentedly in his
fine palace, with his fair Queen Garee and their one child, Prince Inga.

The wealth of Pingaree increased year by year; and the happiness of the
people increased, too. Perhaps there was no place, outside the Land of
Oz, where contentment and peace were more manifest than on this pretty
island, hidden in the besom of the Nonestic Ocean. Had these conditions
remained undisturbed, there would have been no need to speak of
Pingaree in this story.

Prince Inga, the heir to all the riches and the kingship of Pingaree,
grew up surrounded by every luxury; but he was a manly little fellow,
although somewhat too grave and thoughtful, and he could never bear to
be idle a single minute. He knew where the finest oysters lay hidden
along the coast and was as successful in finding pearls as any of the
men of the island, although he was so slight and small. He had a little
boat of his own and a rake for dragging up the oysters and he was very
proud indeed when he could carry a big white pearl to his father.

There was no school upon the island, as the people of Pingaree were far
removed from the state of civilization that gives our modern children
such advantages as schools and learned professors, but the King owned
several manuscript books, the pages being made of sheepskin. Being a
man of intelligence, he was able to teach his son something of reading,
writing and arithmetic.

When studying his lessons Prince Inga used to go into the grove near
his father's palace and climb into the branches of a tall tree, where
he had built a platform with a comfortable seat to rest upon, all
hidden by the canopy of leaves. There, with no one to disturb him, he
would pore over the sheepskin on which were written the queer
characters of the Pingarese language.

King Kitticut was very proud of his little son, as well he might be,
and he soon felt a high respect for Inga's judgment and thought that he
was worthy to be taken into the confidence of his father in many
matters of state. He taught the boy the needs of the people and how to
rule them justly, for some day he knew that Inga would be King in his
place. One day he called his son to his side and said to him:

"Our island now seems peaceful enough, Inga, and we are happy and
prosperous, but I cannot forget those terrible people of Regos and
Coregos. My constant fear is that they will send a fleet of boats to
search for those of their race whom we defeated many years ago, and
whom the sea afterwards destroyed. If the warriors come in great
numbers we may be unable to oppose them, for my people are little
trained to fighting at best; they surely would cause us much injury and
suffering."

"Are we, then, less powerful than in my grandfather's day?" asked
Prince Inga.

The King shook his head thoughtfully.

"It is not that," said he. "That you may fully understand that
marvelous battle, I must confide to, you a great secret. I have in my
possession three Magic Talismans, which I have ever guarded with utmost
care, keeping the knowledge of their existence from anyone else. But,
lest I should die, and the secret be lost, I have decided to tell you
what these talismans are and where they are hidden. Come with me, my
son."

He led the way through the rooms of the palace until they came to the
great banquet hall. There, stopping in the center of the room, he
stooped down and touched a hidden spring in the tiled floor. At once
one of the tiles sank downward and the King reached within the cavity
and drew out a silken bag.

This bag he proceeded to open, showing Inga that it contained three
great pearls, each one as big around as a marble. One had a blue tint
and one was of a delicate rose color, but the third was pure white.

"These three pearls," said the King, speaking in a solemn, impressive
voice, "are the most wonderful the world has ever known. They were
gifts to one of my ancestors from the Mermaid Queen, a powerful fairy
whom he once had the good fortune to rescue from her enemies. In
gratitude for this favor she presented him with these pearls. Each of
the three possesses an astonishing power, and whoever is their owner
may count himself a fortunate man. This one having the blue tint will
give to the person who carries it a strength so great that no power can
resist him. The one with the pink glow will protect its owner from all
dangers that may threaten him, no matter from what source they may
come. The third pearl--this one of pure white--can speak, and its words
are always wise and helpful."

"What is this, my father!" exclaimed the Prince, amazed; "do you tell
me that a pearl can speak? It sounds impossible."

"Your doubt is due to your ignorance of fairy powers," returned the
King, gravely. "Listen, my son, and you will know that I speak the
truth."

He held the white pearl to Inga's ear and the Prince heard a small
voice say distinctly: "Your father is right. Never question the truth
of what you fail to understand, for the world is filled with wonders."

"I crave your pardon, dear father," said the Prince, "for clearly I
heard the pearl speak, and its words were full of wisdom."

"The powers of the other pearls are even greater," resumed the King.
"Were I poor in all else, these gems would make me richer than any
other monarch the world holds."

"I believe that," replied Inga, looking at the beautiful pearls with
much awe. "But tell me, my father, why do you fear the warriors of
Regos and Coregos when these marvelous powers are yours?"

"The powers are mine only while I have the pearls upon my person,"
answered King Kitticut, "and I dare not carry them constantly for fear
they might be lost. Therefore, I keep them safely hidden in this
recess. My only danger lies in the chance that my watchmen might fail
to discover the approach of our enemies and allow the warrior invaders
to seize me before I could secure the pearls. I should, in that case,
be quite powerless to resist. My father owned the magic pearls at the
time of the Great Fight, of which you have so often heard, and the pink
pearl protected him from harm, while the blue pearl enabled him and his
people to drive away the enemy. Often have I suspected that the
destroying storm was caused by the fairy mermaids, but that is a matter
of which I have no proof."

"I have often wondered how we managed to win that battle," remarked
Inga thoughtfully. "But the pearls will assist us in case the warriors
come again, will they not?"

"They are as powerful as ever," declared the King. "Really, my son, I
have little to fear from any foe. But lest I die and the secret be lost
to the next King, I have now given it into your keeping. Remember that
these pearls are the rightful heritage of all Kings of Pingaree. If at
any time I should be taken from you, Inga, guard this treasure well and
do not forget where it is hidden."

"I shall not forget," said Inga.

Then the King returned the pearls to their hiding place and the boy
went to his own room to ponder upon the wonderful secret his father had
that day confided to his care.




Chapter Two

The Coming of King Rinkitink


A few days after this, on a bright and sunny morning when the breeze
blew soft and sweet from the ocean and the trees waved their leaf-laden
branches, the Royal Watchman, whose duty it was to patrol the shore,
came running to the King with news that a strange boat was approaching
the island.

At first the King was sore afraid and made a step toward the hidden
pearls, but the next moment he reflected that one boat, even if filled
with enemies, would be powerless to injure him, so he curbed his fear
and went down to the beach to discover who the strangers might be. Many
of the men of Pingaree assembled there also, and Prince Inga followed
his father. Arriving at the water's edge, they all stood gazing eagerly
at the oncoming boat.

It was quite a big boat, they observed, and covered with a canopy of
purple silk, embroidered with gold. It was rowed by twenty men, ten on
each side. As it came nearer, Inga could see that in the stern, seated
upon a high, cushioned chair of state, was a little man who was so very
fat that he was nearly as broad as he was high This man was dressed in
a loose silken robe of purple that fell in folds to his feet, while
upon his head was a cap of white velvet curiously worked with golden
threads and having a circle of diamonds sewn around the band. At the
opposite end of the boat stood an oddly shaped cage, and several large
boxes of sandalwood were piled near the center of the craft.

As the boat approached the shore the fat little man got upon his feet
and bowed several times in the direction of those who had assembled to
greet him, and as he bowed he flourished his white cap in an energetic
manner. His face was round as an apple and nearly as rosy. When he
stopped bowing he smiled in such a sweet and happy way that Inga
thought he must be a very jolly fellow.

The prow of the boat grounded on the beach, stopping its speed so
suddenly that the little man was caught unawares and nearly toppled
headlong into the sea. But he managed to catch hold of the chair with
one hand and the hair of one of his rowers with the other, and so
steadied himself. Then, again waving his jeweled cap around his head,
he cried in a merry voice:

"Well, here I am at last!"

"So I perceive," responded King Kitticut, bowing with much dignity.

The fat man glanced at all the sober faces before him and burst into a
rollicking laugh. Perhaps I should say it was half laughter and half a
chuckle of merriment, for the sounds he emitted were quaint and droll
and tempted every hearer to laugh with him.

"Heh, heh--ho, ho, ho!" he roared. "Didn't expect me, I see.
Keek-eek-eek-eek! This is funny--it's really funny. Didn't know I was
coming, did you? Hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo! This is certainly amusing. But I'm
here, just the same."

"Hush up!" said a deep, growling voice. "You're making yourself
ridiculous."

Everyone looked to see where this voice came from; but none could guess
who had uttered the words of rebuke. The rowers of the boat were all
solemn and silent and certainly no one on the shore had spoken. But the
little man did not seem astonished in the least, or even annoyed.

King Kitticut now addressed the stranger, saying courteously:

"You are welcome to the Kingdom of Pingaree. Perhaps you will deign to
come ashore and at your convenience inform us whom we have the honor of
receiving as a guest."

"Thanks; I will," returned the little fat man, waddling from his place
in the boat and stepping, with some difficulty, upon the sandy beach.
"I am King Rinkitink, of the City of Gilgad in the Kingdom of
Rinkitink, and I have come to Pingaree to see for myself the monarch
who sends to my city so many beautiful pearls. I have long wished to
visit this island; and so, as I said before, here I am!"

"I am pleased to welcome you," said King Kitticut. "But why has Your
Majesty so few attendants? Is it not dangerous for the King of a great
country to make distant journeys in one frail boat, and with but twenty
men?"

"Oh, I suppose so," answered King Rinkitink, with a laugh. "But what
else could I do? My subjects would not allow me to go anywhere at all,
if they knew it. So I just ran away."

"Ran away!" exclaimed King Kitticut in surprise.

"Funny, isn't it? Heh, heh, heh--woo, hoo!" laughed Rinkitink, and this
is as near as I can spell with letters the jolly sounds of his
laughter. "Fancy a King running away from his own ple--hoo, hoo--keek,
eek, eek, eek! But I had to, don't you see!"

"Why?" asked the other King.

"They're afraid I'll get into mischief. They don't trust me.
Keek-eek-eek--Oh, dear me! Don't trust their own King. Funny, isn't it?"

"No harm can come to you on this island," said Kitticut, pretending not
to notice the odd ways of his guest. "And, whenever it pleases you to
return to your own country, I will send with you a fitting escort of my
own people. In the meantime, pray accompany me to my palace, where
everything shall be done to make you comfortable and happy."

"Much obliged," answered Rinkitink, tipping his white cap over his left
ear and heartily shaking the hand of his brother monarch. "I'm sure you
can make me comfortable if you've plenty to eat. And as for being
happy--ha, ha, ha, ha!--why, that's my trouble. I'm too happy. But
stop! I've brought you some presents in those boxes. Please order your
men to carry them up to the palace."

"Certainly," answered King Kitticut, well pleased, and at once he gave
his men the proper orders.

"And, by the way," continued the fat little King, "let them also take
my goat from his cage."

"A goat!" exclaimed the King of Pingaree.

"Exactly; my goat Bilbil. I always ride him wherever I go, for I'm not
at all fond of walking, being a trifle stout--eh, Kitticut?--a trifle
stout! Hoo, hoo, hoo-keek, eek!"

The Pingaree people started to lift the big cage out of the boat, but
just then a gruff voice cried: "Be careful, you villains!" and as the
words seemed to come from the goat's mouth the men were so astonished
that they dropped the cage upon the sand with a sudden jar.

"There! I told you so!" cried the voice angrily. "You've rubbed the
skin off my left knee. Why on earth didn't you handle me gently?"

"There, there, Bilbil," said King Rinkitink soothingly; "don't scold,
my boy. Remember that these are strangers, and we their guests." Then
he turned to Kitticut and remarked: "You have no talking goats on your
island, I suppose."

"We have no goats at all," replied the King; "nor have we any animals,
of any sort, who are able to talk."

"I wish my animal couldn't talk, either," said Rinkitink, winking
comically at Inga and then looking toward the cage. "He is very cross
at times, and indulges in language that is not respectful. I thought,
at first, it would be fine to have a talking goat, with whom I could
converse as I rode about my city on his back;
but--keek-eek-eek-eek!--the rascal treats me as if I were a chimney
sweep instead of a King. Heh, heh, heh, keek, eek! A chimney sweep-hoo,
hoo, hoo!--and me a King! Funny, isn't it?" This last was addressed to
Prince Inga, whom he chucked familiarly under the chin, to the boy's
great embarrassment.

"Why do you not ride a horse?" asked King Kitticut.

"I can't climb upon his back, being rather stout; that's why. Kee, kee,
keek, eek!--rather stout--hoo, hoo, hoo!" He paused to wipe the tears
of merriment from his eyes and then added: "But I can get on and off
Bilbil's back with ease."

He now opened the cage and the goat deliberately walked out and looked
about him in a sulky manner. One of the rowers brought from the boat a
saddle made of red velvet and beautifully embroidered with silver
thistles, which he fastened upon the goat's back. The fat King put his
leg over the saddle and seated himself comfortably, saying:

"Lead on, my noble host, and we will follow."

"What! Up that steep hill?" cried the goat. "Get off my back at once,
Rinkitink, or I won't budge a step.

"But-consider, Bilbil," remonstrated the King. "How am I to get up that
hill unless I ride?"

"Walk!" growled Bilbil.

"But I'm too fat. Really, Bilbil, I'm surprised at you. Haven't I
brought you all this distance so you may see something of the world and
enjoy life? And now you are so ungrateful as to refuse to carry me!
Turn about is fair play, my boy. The boat carried you to this shore,
because you can't swim, and now you must carry me up the hill, because
I can't climb. Eh, Bilbil, isn't that reasonable?"

"Well, well, well," said the goat, surlily, "keep quiet and I'll carry
you. But you make me very tired, Rinkitink, with your ceaseless
chatter."

After making this protest Bilbil began walking up the hill, carrying
the fat King upon his back with no difficulty whatever.

Prince Inga and his father and all the men of Pingaree were much
astonished to overhear this dispute between King Rinkitink and his
goat; but they were too polite to make critical remarks in the presence
of their guests. King Kitticut walked beside the goat and the Prince
followed after, the men coming last with the boxes of sandalwood.

When they neared the palace, the Queen and her maidens came out to meet
them and the royal guest was escorted in state to the splendid throne
room of the palace. Here the boxes were opened and King Rinkitink
displayed all the beautiful silks and laces and jewelry with which they
were filled. Every one of the courtiers and ladies received a handsome
present, and the King and Queen had many rich gifts and Inga not a few.
Thus the time passed pleasantly until the Chamberlain announced that
dinner was served.

Bilbil the goat declared that he preferred eating of the sweet, rich
grass that grew abundantly in the palace grounds, and Rinkitink said
that the beast could never bear being shut up in a stable; so they
removed the saddle from his back and allowed him to wander wherever he
pleased.

During the dinner Inga divided his attention between admiring the
pretty gifts he had received and listening to the jolly sayings of the
fat King, who laughed when he was not eating and ate when he was not
laughing and seemed to enjoy himself immensely.

"For four days I have lived in that narrow boat," said he, "with no
other amusement than to watch the rowers and quarrel with Bilbil; so I
am very glad to be on land again with such friendly and agreeable
people."

"You do us great honor," said King Kitticut, with a polite bow.

"Not at all--not at all, my brother. This Pingaree must be a wonderful
island, for its pearls are the admiration of all the world; nor will I
deny the fact that my kingdom would be a poor one without the riches
and glory it derives from the trade in your pearls. So I have wished
for many years to come here to see you, but my people said: 'No! Stay
at home and behave yourself, or we'll know the reason why.'"

"Will they not miss Your Majesty from your palace at Gilgad?" inquired
Kitticut.

"I think not," answered Rinkitink. "You see, one of my clever subjects
has written a parchment entitled 'How to be Good,' and I believed it
would benefit me to study it, as I consider the accomplishment of being
good one of the fine arts. I had just scolded severely my Lord High
Chancellor for coming to breakfast without combing his eyebrows, and
was so sad and regretful at having hurt the poor man's feelings that I
decided to shut myself up in my own room and study the scroll until I
knew how to be good--hee, heek, keek, eek, eek!--to be good! Clever
idea, that, wasn't it? Mighty clever! And I issued a decree that no one
should enter my room, under pain of my royal displeasure, until I was
ready to come out. They're awfully afraid of my royal displeasure,
although not a bit afraid of me. Then I put the parchment in my pocket
and escaped through the back door to my boat--and here I am. Oo,
hoo-hoo, keek-eek! Imagine the fuss there would be in Gilgad if my
subjects knew where I am this very minute!"

"I would like to see that parchment," said the solemn-eyed Prince Inga,
"for if it indeed teaches one to be good it must be worth its weight in
pearls."

"Oh, it's a fine essay," said Rinkitink, "and beautifully written with
a goosequill. Listen to this: You'll enjoy it--tee, hee, hee!--enjoy
it."

He took from his pocket a scroll of parchment tied with a black ribbon,
and having carefully unrolled it, he proceeded to read as follows:

"'A Good Man is One who is Never Bad.' How's that, eh? Fine thought,
what? 'Therefore, in order to be Good, you must avoid those Things
which are Evil.' Oh, hoo-hoo-hoo!--how clever! When I get back I shall
make the man who wrote that a royal hippolorum, for, beyond question,
he is the wisest man in my kingdom--as he has often told me himself."
With this, Rinkitink lay back in his chair and chuckled his queer
chuckle until he coughed, and coughed until he choked and choked until
he sneezed. And he wrinkled his face in such a jolly, droll way that
few could keep from laughing with him, and even the good Queen was
forced to titter behind her fan.

When Rinkitink had recovered from his fit of laughter and had wiped his
eyes upon a fine lace handkerchief, Prince Inga said to him:

"The parchment speaks truly."

"Yes, it is true beyond doubt," answered Rinkitink, "and if I could
persuade Bilbil to read it he would be a much better goat than he is
now. Here is another selection: 'To avoid saying Unpleasant Things,
always Speak Agreeably.' That would hit Bilbil, to a dot. And here is
one that applies to you, my Prince: 'Good Children are seldom punished,
for the reason that they deserve no punishment.' Now, I think that is
neatly put, and shows the author to be a deep thinker. But the advice
that has impressed me the most is in the following paragraph: 'You may
not find it as Pleasant to be Good as it is to be Bad, but Other People
will find it more Pleasant.' Haw-hoo-ho! keek-eek! 'Other people will
find it more pleasant!'--hee, hee, heek, keek!--'more pleasant.' Dear
me--dear me! Therein lies a noble incentive to be good, and whenever I
get time I'm surely going to try it."

Then he wiped his eyes again with the lace handkerchief and, suddenly
remembering his dinner, seized his knife and fork and began eating.




Chapter Three

The Warriors from the North


King Rinkitink was so much pleased with the Island of Pingaree that he
continued his stay day after day and week after week, eating good
dinners, talking with King Kitticut and sleeping. Once in a while he
would read from his scroll. "For," said he, "whenever I return home, my
subjects will be anxious to know if I have learned 'How to be Good,'
and I must not disappoint them."

The twenty rowers lived on the small end of the island, with the pearl
fishers, and seemed not to care whether they ever returned to the
Kingdom of Rinkitink or not. Bilbil the goat wandered over the grassy
slopes, or among the trees, and passed his days exactly as he pleased.
His master seldom cared to ride him. Bilbil was a rare curiosity to the
islanders, but since there was little pleasure in talking with the goat
they kept away from him. This pleased the creature, who seemed well
satisfied to be left to his own devices.

Once Prince Inga, wishing to be courteous, walked up to the goat and
said: "Good morning, Bilbil."

"It isn't a good morning," answered Bilbil grumpily. "It is cloudy and
damp, and looks like rain."

"I hope you are contented in our kingdom," continued the boy, politely
ignoring the other's harsh words.

"I'm not," said Bilbil. "I'm never contented; so it doesn't matter to
me whether I'm in your kingdom or in some other kingdom. Go away--will
you?"

"Certainly," answered the Prince, and after this rebuff he did not
again try to make friends with Bilbil.

Now that the King, his father, was so much occupied with his royal
guest, Inga was often left to amuse himself, for a boy could not be
allowed to take part in the conversation of two great monarchs. He
devoted himself to his studies, therefore, and day after day he climbed
into the branches of his favorite tree and sat for hours in his
"tree-top rest," reading his father's precious manuscripts and thinking
upon what he read.

You must not think that Inga was a molly-coddle or a prig, because he
was so solemn and studious. Being a King's son and heir to a throne, he
could not play with the other boys of Pingaree, and he lived so much in
the society of the King and Queen, and was so surrounded by the pomp
and dignity of a court, that he missed all the jolly times that boys
usually have. I have no doubt that had he been able to live as other
boys do, he would have been much like other boys; as it was, he was
subdued by his surroundings, and more grave and thoughtful than one of
his years should be.

Inga was in his tree one morning when, without warning, a great fog
enveloped the Island of Pingaree. The boy could scarcely see the tree
next to that in which he sat, but the leaves above him prevented the
dampness from wetting him, so he curled himself up in his seat and fell
fast asleep.

All that forenoon the fog continued. King Kitticut, who sat in his
palace talking with his merry visitor, ordered the candles lighted,
that they might be able to see one another. The good Queen, Inga's
mother, found it was too dark to work at her embroidery, so she called
her maidens together and told them wonderful stories of bygone days, in
order to pass away the dreary hours.

But soon after noon the weather changed. The dense fog rolled away like
a heavy cloud and suddenly the sun shot his bright rays over the island.

"Very good!" exclaimed King Kitticut. "We shall have a pleasant
afternoon, I am sure," and he blew out the candles.

Then he stood a moment motionless, as if turned to stone, for a
terrible cry from without the palace reached his ears--a cry so full of
fear and horror that the King's heart almost stopped beating.
Immediately there was a scurrying of feet as every one in the palace,
filled with dismay, rushed outside to see what had happened. Even fat
little Rinkitink sprang from his chair and followed his host and the
others through the arched vestibule.

After many years the worst fears of King Kitticut were realized.

Landing upon the beach, which was but a few steps from the palace
itself, were hundreds of boats, every one filled with a throng of
fierce warriors. They sprang upon the land with wild shouts of defiance
and rushed to the King's palace, waving aloft their swords and spears
and battleaxes.

King Kitticut, so completely surprised that he was bewildered, gazed at
the approaching host with terror and grief.

"They are the men of Regos and Coregos!" he groaned. "We are, indeed,
lost!"

Then he bethought himself, for the first time, of his wonderful pearls.
Turning quickly, he ran back into the palace and hastened to the hall
where the treasures were hidden. But the leader of the warriors had
seen the King enter the palace and bounded after him, thinking he meant
to escape. Just as the King had stooped to press the secret spring in
the tiles, the warrior seized him from the rear and threw him backward
upon the floor, at the same time shouting to his men to fetch ropes and
bind the prisoner. This they did very quickly and King Kitticut soon
found himself helplessly bound and in the power of his enemies. In this
sad condition he was lifted by the warriors and carried outside, when
the good King looked upon a sorry sight.

The Queen and her maidens, the officers and servants of the royal
household and all who had inhabited this end of the Island of Pingaree
had been seized by the invaders and bound with ropes. At once they
began carrying their victims to the boats, tossing them in as
unceremoniously as if they had been bales of merchandise.

The King looked around for his son Inga, but failed to find the boy
among the prisoners. Nor was the fat King, Rinkitink, to be seen
anywhere about.

The warriors were swarming over the palace like bees in a hive, seeking
anyone who might be in hiding, and after the search had been prolonged
for some time the leader asked impatiently: "Do you find anyone else?"

"No," his men told him. "We have captured them all."

"Then," commanded the leader, "remove everything of value from the
palace and tear down its walls and towers, so that not one stone
remains upon another!"

While the warriors were busy with this task we will return to the boy
Prince, who, when the fog lifted and the sun came out, wakened from his
sleep and began to climb down from his perch in the tree. But the
terrifying cries of the people, mingled with the shouts of the rude
warriors, caused him to pause and listen eagerly.

Then he climbed rapidly up the tree, far above his platform, to the
topmost swaying branches. This tree, which Inga called his own, was
somewhat taller than the other trees that surrounded it, and when he
had reached the top he pressed aside the leaves and saw a great fleet
of boats upon the shore--strange boats, with banners that he had never
seen before. Turning to look upon his father's palace, he found it
surrounded by a horde of enemies. Then Inga knew the truth: that the
island had been invaded by the barbaric warriors from the north. He
grew so faint from the terror of it all that he might have fallen had
he not wound his arms around a limb and clung fast until the dizzy
feeling passed away. Then with his sash he bound himself to the limb
and again ventured to look out through the leaves.

The warriors were now engaged in carrying King Kitticut and Queen Garee
and all their other captives down to the boats, where they were thrown
in and chained one to another. It was a dreadful sight for the Prince
to witness, but he sat very still, concealed from the sight of anyone
below by the bower of leafy branches around him. Inga knew very well
that he could do nothing to help his beloved parents, and that if he
came down he would only be forced to share their cruel fate.

Now a procession of the Northmen passed between the boats and the
palace, bearing the rich furniture, splendid draperies and rare
ornaments of which the royal palace had been robbed, together with such
food and other plunder as they could lay their hands upon. After this,
the men of Regos and Coregos threw ropes around the marble domes and
towers and hundreds of warriors tugged at these ropes until the domes
and towers toppled and fell in ruins upon the ground. Then the walls
themselves were torn down, till little remained of the beautiful palace
but a vast heap of white marble blocks tumbled and scattered upon the
ground.

Prince Inga wept bitter tears of grief as he watched the ruin of his
home; yet he was powerless to avert the destruction. When the palace
had been demolished, some of the warriors entered their boats and rowed
along the coast of the island, while the others marched in a great body
down the length of the island itself. They were so numerous that they
formed a line stretching from shore to shore and they destroyed every
house they came to and took every inhabitant prisoner.

The pearl fishers who lived at the lower end of the island tried to
escape in their boats, but they were soon overtaken and made prisoners,
like the others. Nor was there any attempt to resist the foe, for the
sharp spears and pikes and swords of the invaders terrified the hearts
of the defenseless people of Pingaree, whose sole weapons were their
oyster rakes.

When night fell the whole of the Island of Pingaree had been conquered
by the men of the North, and all its people were slaves of the
conquerors. Next morning the men of Regos and Coregos, being capable of
no further mischief, departed from the scene of their triumph, carrying
their prisoners with them and taking also every boat to be found upon
the island. Many of the boats they had filled with rich plunder, with
pearls and silks and velvets, with silver and gold ornaments and all
the treasure that had made Pingaree famed as one of the richest
kingdoms in the world. And the hundreds of slaves they had captured
would be set to work in the mines of Regos and the grain fields of
Coregos.

So complete was the victory of the Northmen that it is no wonder the
warriors sang songs of triumph as they hastened back to their homes.
Great rewards were awaiting them when they showed the haughty King of
Regos and the terrible Queen of Coregos the results of their ocean raid
and conquest.




Chapter Four

The Deserted Island


All through that terrible night Prince Inga remained hidden in his
tree. In the morning he watched the great fleet of boats depart for
their own country, carrying his parents and his countrymen with them,
as well as everything of value the Island of Pingaree had contained.

Sad, indeed, were the boy's thoughts when the last of the boats had
become a mere speck in the distance, but Inga did not dare leave his
perch of safety until all of the craft of the invaders had disappeared
beyond the horizon. Then he came down, very slowly and carefully, for
he was weak from hunger and the long and weary watch, as he had been in
the tree for twenty-four hours without food.

The sun shone upon the beautiful green isle as brilliantly as if no
ruthless invader had passed and laid it in ruins. The birds still
chirped among the trees and the butterflies darted from flower to
flower as happily as when the land was filled with a prosperous and
contented people.

Inga feared that only he was left of all his nation. Perhaps he might
be obliged to pass his life there alone. He would not starve, for the
sea would give him oysters and fish, and the trees fruit; yet the life
that confronted him was far from enticing.

The boy's first act was to walk over to where the palace had stood and
search the ruins until he found some scraps of food that had been
overlooked by the enemy. He sat upon a block of marble and ate of this,
and tears filled his eyes as he gazed upon the desolation around him.
But Inga tried to bear up bravely, and having satisfied his hunger he
walked over to the well, intending to draw a bucket of drinking water.

Fortunately, this well had been overlooked by the invaders and the
bucket was still fastened to the chain that wound around a stout wooden
windlass. Inga took hold of the crank and began letting the bucket down
into the well, when suddenly he was startled by a muffled voice crying
out:

"Be careful, up there!"

The sound and the words seemed to indicate that the voice came from the
bottom of the well, so Inga looked down. Nothing could be seen, on
account of the darkness.

"Who are you?" he shouted.

"It's I--Rinkitink," came the answer, and the depths of the well
echoed: "Tink-i-tink-i-tink!" in a ghostly manner.

"Are you in the well?" asked the boy, greatly surprised.

"Yes, and nearly drowned. I fell in while running from those terrible
warriors, and I've been standing in this damp hole ever since, with my
head just above the water. It's lucky the well was no deeper, for had
my head been under water, instead of above it--hoo, hoo, hoo, keek,
eek!--under instead of over, you know--why, then I wouldn't be talking
to you now! Ha, hoo, hee!" And the well dismally echoed: "Ha, hoo,
hee!" which you must imagine was a laugh half merry and half sad.

"I'm awfully sorry," cried the boy, in answer. "I wonder you have the
heart to laugh at all. But how am I to get you out?"

"I've been considering that all night," said Rinkitink, "and I believe
the best plan will be for you to let down the bucket to me, and I'll
hold fast to it while you wind up the chain and so draw me to the top."

"I will try to do that," replied Inga, and he let the bucket down very
carefully until he heard the King call out:

"I've got it! Now pull me up--slowly, my boy, slowly--so I won't rub
against the rough sides."

Inga began winding up the chain, but King Rinkitink was so fat that he
was very heavy and by the time the boy had managed to pull him halfway
up the well his strength was gone. He clung to the crank as long as
possible, but suddenly it slipped from his grasp and the next minute he
heard Rinkitink fall "plump!" into the water again.

"That's too bad!" called Inga, in real distress; "but you were so heavy
I couldn't help it."

"Dear me!" gasped the King, from the darkness below, as he spluttered
and coughed to get the water out of his mouth. "Why didn't you tell me
you were going to let go?"

"I hadn't time," said Inga, sorrowfully.

"Well, I'm not suffering from thirst," declared the King, "for there's
enough water inside me to float all the boats of Regos and Coregos or
at least it feels that way. But never mind! So long as I'm not actually
drowned, what does it matter?"

"What shall we do next?" asked the boy anxiously.

"Call someone to help you," was the reply.

"There is no one on the island but myself," said the boy; "--excepting
you," he added, as an afterthought.

"I'm not on it--more's the pity!--but in it," responded Rinkitink. "Are
the warriors all gone?"

"Yes," said Inga, "and they have taken my father and mother, and all
our people, to be their slaves," he added, trying in vain to repress a
sob.

"So--so!" said Rinkitink softly; and then he paused a moment, as if in
thought. Finally he said: "There are worse things than slavery, but I
never imagined a well could be one of them. Tell me, Inga, could you
let down some food to me? I'm nearly starved, and if you could manage
to send me down some food I'd be well fed--hoo, hoo, heek, keek,
eek!--well fed. Do you see the joke, Inga?"

"Do not ask me to enjoy a joke just now, Your Majesty," begged Inga in
a sad voice; "but if you will be patient I will try to find something
for you to eat."

He ran back to the ruins of the palace and began searching for bits of
food with which to satisfy the hunger of the King, when to his surprise
he observed the goat, Bilbil, wandering among the marble blocks.

"What!" cried Inga. "Didn't the warriors get you, either?"

"If they had," calmly replied Bilbil, "I shouldn't be here."

"But how did you escape?" asked the boy.

"Easily enough. I kept my mouth shut and stayed away from the rascals,"
said the goat. "I knew that the soldiers would not care for a skinny
old beast like me, for to the eye of a stranger I seem good for
nothing. Had they known I could talk, and that my head contained more
wisdom than a hundred of their own noddles, I might not have escaped so
easily."

"Perhaps you are right," said the boy.

"I suppose they got the old man?" carelessly remarked Bilbil.

"What old man?"

"Rinkitink."

"Oh, no! His Majesty is at the bottom of the well," said Inga, "and I
don't know how to get him out again."

"Then let him stay there," suggested the goat.

"That would be cruel. I am sure, Bilbil, that you are fond of the good
King, your master, and do not mean what you say. Together, let us find
some way to save poor King Rinkitink. He is a very jolly companion, and
has a heart exceedingly kind and gentle."

"Oh, well; the old boy isn't so bad, taken altogether," admitted
Bilbil, speaking in a more friendly tone. "But his bad jokes and fat
laughter tire me dreadfully, at times."

Prince Inga now ran back to the well, the goat following more leisurely.

"Here's Bilbil!" shouted the boy to the King. "The enemy didn't get
him, it seems."

"That's lucky for the enemy," said Rinkitink. "But it's lucky for me,
too, for perhaps the beast can assist me out of this hole. If you can
let a rope down the well, I am sure that you and Bilbil, pulling
together, will be able to drag me to the earth's surface."

"Be patient and we will make the attempt," replied Inga encouragingly,
and he ran to search the ruins for a rope. Presently he found one that
had been used by the warriors in toppling over the towers, which in
their haste they had neglected to remove, and with some difficulty he
untied the knots and carried the rope to the mouth of the well.

Bilbil had lain down to sleep and the refrain of a merry song came in
muffled tones from the well, proving that Rinkitink was making a
patient endeavor to amuse himself.

"I've found a rope!" Inga called down to him; and then the boy
proceeded to make a loop in one end of the rope, for the King to put
his arms through, and the other end he placed over the drum of the
windlass. He now aroused Bilbil and fastened the rope firmly around the
goat's shoulders.

"Are you ready?" asked the boy, leaning over the well.

"I am," replied the King.

"And I am not," growled the goat, "for I have not yet had my nap out.
Old Rinki will be safe enough in the well until I've slept an hour or
two longer."

"But it is damp in the well," protested the boy, "and King Rinkitink
may catch the rheumatism, so that he will have to ride upon your back
wherever he goes."

Hearing this, Bilbil jumped up at once.

"Let's get him out," he said earnestly.

"Hold fast!" shouted Inga to the King. Then he seized the rope and
helped Bilbil to pull. They soon found the task more difficult than
they had supposed. Once or twice the King's weight threatened to drag
both the boy and the goat into the well, to keep Rinkitink company. But
they pulled sturdily, being aware of this danger, and at last the King
popped out of the hole and fell sprawling full length upon the ground.

For a time he lay panting and breathing hard to get his breath back,
while Inga and Bilbil were likewise worn out from their long strain at
the rope; so the three rested quietly upon the grass and looked at one
another in silence.

Finally Bilbil said to the King: "I'm surprised at you. Why were you so
foolish as to fall down that well? Don't you know it's a dangerous
thing to do? You might have broken your neck in the fall, or been
drowned in the water."

"Bilbil," replied the King solemnly, "you're a goat. Do you imagine I
fell down the well on purpose?"

"I imagine nothing," retorted Bilbil. "I only know you were there."

"There? Heh-heh-heek-keek-eek! To be sure I was there," laughed
Rinkitink. "There in a dark hole, where there was no light; there in a
watery well, where the wetness soaked me through and
through--keek-eek-eek-eek!--through and through!"

"How did it happen?" inquired Inga.

"I was running away from the enemy," explained the King, "and I was
carelessly looking over my shoulder at the same time, to see if they
were chasing me. So I did not see the well, but stepped into it and
found myself tumbling down to the bottom. I struck the water very
neatly and began struggling to keep myself from drowning, but presently
I found that when I stood upon my feet on the bottom of the well, that
my chin was just above the water. So I stood still and yelled for help;
but no one heard me."

"If the warriors had heard you," said Bilbil, "they would have pulled
you out and carried you away to be a slave. Then you would have been
obliged to work for a living, and that would be a new experience."

"Work!" exclaimed Rinkitink. "Me work? Hoo, hoo, heek-keek-eek! How
absurd! I'm so stout--not to say chubby--not to say fat--that I can
hardly walk, and I couldn't earn my salt at hard work. So I'm glad the
enemy did not find me, Bilbil. How many others escaped?"

"That I do not know," replied the boy, "for I have not yet had time to
visit the other parts of the island. When you have rested and satisfied
your royal hunger, it might be well for us to look around and see what
the thieving warriors of Regos and Coregos have left us."

"An excellent idea," declared Rinkitink. "I am somewhat feeble from my
long confinement in the well, but I can ride upon Bilbil's back and we
may as well start at once."

Hearing this, Bilbil cast a surly glance at his master but said
nothing, since it was really the goat's business to carry King
Rinkitink wherever he desired to go.

They first searched the ruins of the palace, and where the kitchen had
once been they found a small quantity of food that had been half hidden
by a block of marble. This they carefully placed in a sack to preserve
it for future use, the little fat King having first eaten as much as he
cared for. This consumed some time, for Rinkitink had been exceedingly
hungry and liked to eat in a leisurely manner. When he had finished the
meal he straddled Bilbil's back and set out to explore the island,
Prince Inga walking by his side.

They found on every hand ruin and desolation. The houses of the people
had been pilfered of all valuables and then torn down or burned. Not a
boat had been left upon the shore, nor was there a single person, man
or woman or child, remaining upon the island, save themselves. The only
inhabitants of Pingaree now consisted of a fat little King, a boy and a
goat.

Even Rinkitink, merry hearted as he was, found it hard to laugh in the
face of this mighty disaster. Even the goat, contrary to its usual
habit, refrained from saying anything disagreeable. As for the poor boy
whose home was now a wilderness, the tears came often to his eyes as he
marked the ruin of his dearly loved island.

When, at nightfall, they reached the lower end of Pingaree and found it
swept as bare as the rest, Inga's grief was almost more than he could
bear. Everything had been swept from him--parents, home and country--in
so brief a time that his bewilderment was equal to his sorrow.

Since no house remained standing, in which they might sleep, the three
wanderers crept beneath the overhanging branches of a cassa tree and
curled themselves up as comfortably as possible. So tired and exhausted
were they by the day's anxieties and griefs that their troubles soon
faded into the mists of dreamland. Beast and King and boy slumbered
peacefully together until wakened by the singing of the birds which
greeted the dawn of a new day.




Chapter Five

The Three Pearls


When King Rinkitink and Prince Inga had bathed themselves in the sea
and eaten a simple breakfast, they began wondering what they could do
to improve their condition.

"The poor people of Gilgad," said Rinkitink cheerfully, "are little
likely ever again to behold their King in the flesh, for my boat and my
rowers are gone with everything else. Let us face the fact that we are
imprisoned for life upon this island, and that our lives will be short
unless we can secure more to eat than is in this small sack."

"I'll not starve, for I can eat grass," remarked the goat in a pleasant
tone--or a tone as pleasant as Bilbil could assume.

"True, quite true," said the King. Then he seemed thoughtful for a
moment and turning to Inga he asked: "Do you think, Prince, that if the
worst comes, we could eat Bilbil?"

The goat gave a groan and cast a reproachful look at his master as he
said:

"Monster! Would you, indeed, eat your old friend and servant?"

"Not if I can help it, Bilbil," answered the King pleasantly. "You
would make a remarkably tough morsel, and my teeth are not as good as
they once were."

While this talk was in progress Inga suddenly remembered the three
pearls which his father had hidden under the tiled floor of the banquet
hall. Without doubt King Kitticut had been so suddenly surprised by the
invaders that he had found no opportunity to get the pearls, for
otherwise the fierce warriors would have been defeated and driven out
of Pingaree. So they must still be in their hiding place, and Inga
believed they would prove of great assistance to him and his comrades
in this hour of need. But the palace was a mass of ruins; perhaps he
would be unable now to find the place where the pearls were hidden.

He said nothing of this to Rinkitink, remembering that his father had
charged him to preserve the secret of the pearls and of their magic
powers. Nevertheless, the thought of securing the wonderful treasures
of his ancestors gave the boy new hope.

He stood up and said to the King:

"Let us return to the other end of Pingaree. It is more pleasant than
here in spite of the desolation of my father's palace. And there, if
anywhere, we shall discover a way out of our difficulties."

This suggestion met with Rinkitink's approval and the little party at
once started upon the return journey. As there was no occasion to delay
upon the way, they reached the big end of the island about the middle
of the day and at once began searching the ruins of the palace.

They found, to their satisfaction, that one room at the bottom of a
tower was still habitable, although the roof was broken in and the
place was somewhat littered with stones. The King was, as he said, too
fat to do any hard work, so he sat down on a block of marble and
watched Inga clear the room of its rubbish. This done, the boy hunted
through the ruins until he discovered a stool and an armchair that had
not been broken beyond use. Some bedding and a mattress were also
found, so that by nightfall the little room had been made quite
comfortable.

The following morning, while Rinkitink was still sound asleep and
Bilbil was busily cropping the dewy grass that edged the shore, Prince
Inga began to search the tumbled heaps of marble for the place where
the royal banquet hall had been. After climbing over the ruins for a
time he reached a flat place which he recognized, by means of the tiled
flooring and the broken furniture scattered about, to be the great hall
he was seeking. But in the center of the floor, directly over the spot
where the pearls were hidden, lay several large and heavy blocks of
marble, which had been torn from the dismantled walls.

This unfortunate discovery for a time discouraged the boy, who realized
how helpless he was to remove such vast obstacles; but it was so
important to secure the pearls that he dared not give way to despair
until every human effort had been made, so he sat him down to think
over the matter with great care.

Meantime Rinkitink had risen from his bed and walked out upon the lawn,
where he found Bilbil reclining at ease upon the greensward.

"Where is Inga?" asked Rinkitink, rubbing his eyes with his knuckles
because their vision was blurred with too much sleep.

"Don't ask me," said the goat, chewing with much satisfaction a cud of
sweet grasses.

"Bilbil," said the King, squatting down beside the goat and resting his
fat chin upon his hands and his elbows on his knees, "allow me to
confide to you the fact that I am bored, and need amusement. My good
friend Kitticut has been kidnapped by the barbarians and taken from me,
so there is no one to converse with me intelligently. I am the King and
you are the goat. Suppose you tell me a story.

"Suppose I don't," said Bilbil, with a scowl, for a goat's face is very
expressive.

"If you refuse, I shall be more unhappy than ever, and I know your
disposition is too sweet to permit that. Tell me a story, Bilbil."

The goat looked at him with an expression of scorn. Said he:

"One would think you are but four years old, Rinkitink! But there--I
will do as you command. Listen carefully, and the story may do you some
good--although I doubt if you understand the moral."

"I am sure the story will do me good," declared the King, whose eyes
were twinkling.

"Once on a time," began the goat.

"When was that, Bilbil?" asked the King gently.

"Don't interrupt; it is impolite. Once on a time there was a King with
a hollow inside his head, where most people have their brains, and--"

"Is this a true story, Bilbil?"

"And the King with a hollow head could chatter words, which had no
sense, and laugh in a brainless manner at senseless things. That part
of the story is true enough, Rinkitink."

"Then proceed with the tale, sweet Bilbil. Yet it is hard to believe
that any King could be brainless--unless, indeed, he proved it by
owning a talking goat."

Bilbil glared at him a full minute in silence. Then he resumed his
story:

"This empty-headed man was a King by accident, having been born to that
high station. Also the King was empty-headed by the same chance, being
born without brains."

"Poor fellow!" quoth the King. "Did he own a talking goat?"

"He did," answered Bilbil.

"Then he was wrong to have been born at all. Cheek-eek-eek-eek, oo,
hoo!" chuckled Rinkitink, his fat body shaking with merriment. "But
it's hard to prevent oneself from being born; there's no chance for
protest, eh, Bilbil?"

"Who is telling this story, I'd like to know," demanded the goat, with
anger.

"Ask someone with brains, my boy; I'm sure I can't tell," replied the
King, bursting into one of his merry fits of laughter.

Bilbil rose to his hoofs and walked away in a dignified manner, leaving
Rinkitink chuckling anew at the sour expression of the animal's face.

"Oh, Bilbil, you'll be the death of me, some day--I'm sure you will!"
gasped the King, taking out his lace handkerchief to wipe his eyes;
for, as he often did, he had laughed till the tears came.

Bilbil was deeply vexed and would not even turn his head to look at his
master. To escape from Rinkitink he wandered among the ruins of the
palace, where he came upon Prince Inga.

"Good morning, Bilbil," said the boy. "I was just going to find you,
that I might consult you upon an important matter. If you will kindly
turn back with me I am sure your good judgment will be of great
assistance."

The angry goat was quite mollified by the respectful tone in which he
was addressed, but he immediately asked:

"Are you also going to consult that empty-headed King over yonder?"

"I am sorry to hear you speak of your kind master in such a way," said
the boy gravely. "All men are deserving of respect, being the highest
of living creatures, and Kings deserve respect more than others, for
they are set to rule over many people."

"Nevertheless," said Bilbil with conviction, "Rinkitink's head is
certainly empty of brains."

"That I am unwilling to believe," insisted Inga. "But anyway his heart
is kind and gentle and that is better than being wise. He is merry in
spite of misfortunes that would cause others to weep and he never
speaks harsh words that wound the feelings of his friends."

"Still," growled Bilbil, "he is--"

"Let us forget everything but his good nature, which puts new heart
into us when we are sad," advised the boy.

"But he is--"

"Come with me, please," interrupted Inga, "for the matter of which I
wish to speak is very important."

Bilbil followed him, although the boy still heard the goat muttering
that the King had no brains. Rinkitink, seeing them turn into the
ruins, also followed, and upon joining them asked for his breakfast.

Inga opened the sack of food and while he and the King ate of it the
boy said:

"If I could find a way to remove some of the blocks of marble which
have fallen in the banquet hall, I think I could find means for us to
escape from this barren island."

"Then," mumbled Rinkitink, with his mouth full, "let us move the blocks
of marble."

"But how?" inquired Prince Inga. "They are very heavy."

"Ah, how, indeed?" returned the  King, smacking his lips contentedly.
"That is a serious question. But--I have it! Let us see what my famous
parchment says about it." He wiped his fingers upon a napkin and then,
taking the scroll from a pocket inside his embroidered blouse, he
unrolled it and read the following words: 'Never step on another man's
toes.'

The goat gave a snort of contempt; Inga was silent; the King looked
from one to the other inquiringly.

"That's the idea, exactly!" declared Rinkitink.

"To be sure," said Bilbil scornfully, "it tells us exactly how to move
the blocks of marble."

"Oh, does it?" responded the King, and then for a moment he rubbed the
top of his bald head in a perplexed manner. The next moment he burst
into a peal of joyous laughter. The goat looked at Inga and sighed.

"What did I tell you?" asked the creature. "Was I right, or was I
wrong?"

"This scroll," said Rinkitink, "is indeed a masterpiece. Its advice is
of tremendous value. 'Never step on another man's toes.' Let us think
this over. The inference is that we should step upon our own toes,
which were given us for that purpose. Therefore, if I stepped upon
another man's toes, I would be the other man. Hoo, hoo, hoo!--the other
man--hee, hee, heek-keek-eek! Funny, isn't it?"

"Didn't I say--" began Bilbil.

"No matter what you said, my boy," roared the King. "No fool could have
figured that out as nicely as I did."

"We have still to decide how to remove the blocks of marble," suggested
Inga anxiously.

 "Fasten a rope to them, and pull," said Bilbil.
"Don't pay any more attention to Rinkitink, for he is no wiser than the
man who wrote that brainless scroll. Just get the rope, and we'll
fasten Rinkitink to one end of it for a weight and I'll help you pull."

"Thank you, Bilbil," replied the boy. "I'll get the rope at once."

Bilbil found it difficult to climb over the ruins to the floor of the
banquet hall, but there are few places a goat cannot get to when it
makes the attempt, so Bilbil succeeded at last, and even fat little
Rinkitink finally joined them, though much out of breath.

Inga fastened one end of the rope around a block of marble and then
made a loop at the other end to go over Bilbil's head. When all was
ready the boy seized the rope and helped the goat to pull; yet, strain
as they might, the huge block would not stir from its place. Seeing
this, King Rinkitink came forward and lent his assistance, the weight
of his body forcing the heavy marble to slide several feet from where
it had lain.

But it was hard work and all were obliged to take a long rest before
undertaking the removal of the next block.

"Admit, Bilbil," said the King, "that I am of some use in the world."

"Your weight was of considerable help," acknowledged the goat, "but if
your head were as well filled as your stomach the task would be still
easier."

When Inga went to fasten the rope a second time he was rejoiced to
discover that by moving one more block of marble he could uncover the
tile with the secret spring. So the three pulled with renewed energy
and to their joy the block moved and rolled upon its side, leaving Inga
free to remove the treasure when he pleased.

But the boy had no intention of allowing Bilbil and the King to share
the secret of the royal treasures of Pingaree; so, although both the
goat and its master demanded to know why the marble blocks had been
moved, and how it would benefit them, Inga begged them to wait until
the next morning, when he hoped to be able to satisfy them that their
hard work had not been in vain.

Having little confidence in this promise of a mere boy, the goat
grumbled and the King laughed; but Inga paid no heed to their ridicule
and set himself to work rigging up a fishing rod, with line and hook.
During the afternoon he waded out to some rocks near the shore and
fished patiently until he had captured enough yellow perch for their
supper and breakfast.

"Ah," said Rinkitink, looking at the fine catch when Inga returned to
the shore; "these will taste delicious when they are cooked; but do you
know how to cook them?"

"No," was the reply. "I have often caught fish, but never cooked them.
Perhaps Your Majesty understands cooking."

"Cooking and majesty are two different things," laughed the little
King. "I could not cook a fish to save me from starvation."

"For my part," said Bilbil, "I never eat fish, but I can tell you how
to cook them, for I have often watched the palace cooks at their work."
And so, with the goat's assistance, the boy and the King managed to
prepare the fish and cook them, after which they were eaten with good
appetite.

That night, after Rinkitink and Bilbil were both fast asleep, Inga
stole quietly through the moonlight to the desolate banquet hall.
There, kneeling down, he touched the secret spring as his father had
instructed him to do and to his joy the tile sank downward and
disclosed the opening. You may imagine how the boy's heart throbbed
with excitement as he slowly thrust his hand into the cavity and felt
around to see if the precious pearls were still there. In a moment his
fingers touched the silken bag and, without pausing to close the
recess, he pressed the treasure against his breast and ran out into the
moonlight to examine it. When he reached a bright place he started to
open the bag, but he observed Bilbil lying asleep upon the grass near
by. So, trembling with the fear of discovery, he ran to another place,
and when he paused he heard Rinkitink snoring lustily. Again he fled
and made his way to the seashore, where he squatted under a bank and
began to untie the cords that fastened the mouth of the bag. But now
another fear assailed him.

"If the pearls should slip from my hand," he thought, "and roll into
the water, they might be lost to me forever. I must find some safer
place."

Here and there he wandered, still clasping the silken bag in both
hands, and finally he went to the grove and climbed into the tall tree
where he had made his platform and seat. But here it was pitch dark, so
he found he must wait patiently until morning before he dared touch the
pearls. During those hours of waiting he had time for reflection and
reproached himself for being so frightened by the possession of his
father's treasures.

"These pearls have belonged to our family for generations," he mused,
"yet no one has ever lost them. If I use ordinary care I am sure I need
have no fears for their safety."

When the dawn came and he could see plainly, Inga opened the bag and
took out the Blue Pearl. There was no possibility of his being observed
by others, so he took time to examine it wonderingly, saying to
himself: "This will give me strength."

Taking off his right shoe he placed the Blue Pearl within it, far up in
the pointed toe. Then he tore a piece from his handkerchief and stuffed
it into the shoe to hold the pearl in place. Inga's shoes were long and
pointed, as were all the shoes worn in Pingaree, and the points curled
upward, so that there was quite a vacant space beyond the place where
the boy's toes reached when the shoe was upon his foot.

After he had put on the Shoe and laced it up he opened the bag and took
out the Pink Pearl. "This will protect me from danger," said Inga, and
removing the shoe from his left foot he carefully placed the pearl in
the hollow toe. This, also, he secured in place by means of a strip
torn from his handkerchief.

Having put on the second shoe and laced it up, the boy drew from the
silken bag the third pearl--that which was pure white--and holding it
to his ear he asked.

"Will you advise me what to do, in this my hour of misfortune?"

Clearly the small voice of the pearl made answer:

"I advise you to go to the Islands of Regos and Coregos, where you may
liberate your parents from slavery."

"How could I do that?" exclaimed Prince Inga, amazed at receiving such
advice.

"To-night," spoke the voice of the pearl, "there will be a storm, and
in the morning a boat will strand upon the shore. Take this boat and
row to Regos and Coregos."

"How can I, a weak boy, pull the boat so far?" he inquired, doubting
the possibility.

"The Blue Pearl will give you strength," was the reply.

"But I may be shipwrecked and drowned, before ever I reach Regos and
Coregos," protested the boy.

"The Pink Pearl will protect you from harm," murmured the voice, soft
and low but very distinct.

"Then I shall act as you advise me," declared Inga, speaking firmly
because this promise gave him courage, and as he removed the pearl from
his ear it whispered:

"The wise and fearless are sure to win success."

Restoring the White Pearl to the depths of the silken bag, Inga
fastened it securely around his neck and buttoned his waist above it to
hide the treasure from all prying eyes. Then he slowly climbed down
from the tree and returned to the room where King Rinkitink still slept.

The goat was browsing upon the grass but looked cross and surly. When
the boy said good morning as he passed, Bilbil made no response
whatever. As Inga entered the room the King awoke and asked:

"What is that mysterious secret of yours? I've been dreaming about it,
and I haven't got my breath yet from tugging at those heavy blocks.
Tell me the secret."

"A secret told is no longer a secret," replied Inga, with a laugh.
"Besides, this is a family secret, which it is proper I should keep to
myself. But I may tell you one thing, at least: We are going to leave
this island to-morrow morning."

The King seemed puzzled' by this statement.

"I'm not much of a swimmer," said he, "and, though I'm fat enough to
float upon the surface of the water, I'd only bob around and get
nowhere at all."

"We shall not swim, but ride comfortably in a boat," promised Inga.

"There isn't a boat on this island!" declared Rinkitink, looking upon
the boy with wonder.

"True," said Inga. "But one will come to us in the morning." He spoke
positively, for he had perfect faith in the promise of the White Pearl;
but Rinkitink, knowing nothing of the three marvelous jewels, began to
fear that the little Prince had lost his mind through grief and
misfortune.

For this reason the King did not question the boy further but tried to
cheer him by telling him witty stories. He laughed at all the stories
himself, in his merry, rollicking way, and Inga joined freely in the
laughter because his heart had been lightened by the prospect of
rescuing his dear parents. Not since the fierce warriors had descended
upon Pingaree had the boy been so hopeful and happy.

With Rinkitink riding upon Bilbil's back, the three made a tour of the
island and found in the central part some bushes and trees bearing ripe
fruit. They gathered this freely, for--aside from the fish which Inga
caught--it was the only food they now had, and the less they had, the
bigger Rinkitink's appetite seemed to grow.

"I am never more happy," said he with a sigh, "than when I am eating."

Toward evening the sky became overcast and soon a great storm began to
rage. Prince Inga and King Rinkitink took refuge within the shelter of
the room they had fitted up and there Bilbil joined them. The goat and
the King were somewhat disturbed by the violence of the storm, but Inga
did not mind it, being pleased at this evidence that the White Pearl
might be relied upon.

All night the wind shrieked around the island; thunder rolled,
lightning flashed and rain came down in torrents. But with morning the
storm abated and when the sun arose no sign of the tempest remained
save a few fallen trees.




Chapter Six

The Magic Boat


Prince Inga was up with the sun and, accompanied by Bilbil, began
walking along the shore in search of the boat which the White Pearl had
promised him. Never for an instant did he doubt that he would find it
and before he had walked any great distance a dark object at the
water's edge caught his eye.

"It is the boat, Bilbil!" he cried joyfully, and running down to it he
found it was, indeed, a large and roomy boat. Although stranded upon
the beach, it was in perfect order and had suffered in no way from the
storm.

Inga stood for some moments gazing upon the handsome craft and
wondering where it could have come from. Certainly it was unlike any
boat he had ever seen. On the outside it was painted a lustrous black,
without any other color to relieve it; but all the inside of the boat
was lined with pure silver, polished so highly that the surface
resembled a mirror and glinted brilliantly in the rays of the sun. The
seats had white velvet cushions upon them and the cushions were
splendidly embroidered with threads of gold. At one end, beneath the
broad seat, was a small barrel with silver hoops, which the boy found
was filled with fresh, sweet water. A great chest of sandalwood, bound
and ornamented with silver, stood in the other end of the boat. Inga
raised the lid and discovered the chest filled with sea-biscuits,
cakes, tinned meats and ripe, juicy melons; enough good and wholesome
food to last the party a long time.

Lying upon the bottom of the boat were two shining oars, and overhead,
but rolled back now, was a canopy of silver cloth to ward off the heat
of the sun.

It is no wonder the boy was delighted with the appearance of this
beautiful boat; but on reflection he feared it was too large for him to
row any great distance. Unless, indeed, the Blue Pearl gave him unusual
strength.

While he was considering this matter, King Rinkitink came waddling up
to him and said:

"Well, well, well, my Prince, your words have come true! Here is the
boat, for a certainty, yet how it came here--and how you knew it would
come to us--are puzzles that mystify me. I do not question our good
fortune, however, and my heart is bubbling with joy, for in this boat I
will return at once to my City of Gilgad, from which I have remained
absent altogether too long a time."

"I do not wish to go to Gilgad," said Inga.

"That is too bad, my friend, for you would be very welcome. But you may
remain upon this island, if you wish," continued Rinkitink, "and when I
get home I will send some of my people to rescue you."

"It is my boat, Your Majesty," said Inga quietly.

"May be, may be," was the careless answer, "but I am King of a great
country, while you are a boy Prince without any kingdom to speak of.
Therefore, being of greater importance than you, it is just and right
that I take, your boat and return to my own country in it."

"I am sorry to differ from Your Majesty's views," said Inga, "but
instead of going to Gilgad I consider it of greater importance that we
go to the islands of Regos and Coregos."

"Hey? What!" cried the astounded King. "To Regos and Coregos! To become
slaves of the barbarians, like the King, your father? No, no, my boy!
Your Uncle Rinki may have an empty noddle, as Bilbil claims, but he is
far too wise to put his head in the lion's mouth. It's no fun to be a
slave."

"The people of Regos and Coregos will not enslave us," declared Inga.
"On the contrary, it is my intention to set free my dear parents, as
well as all my people, and to bring them back again to Pingaree."

"Cheek-eek-eek-eek-eek! How funny!" chuckled Rinkitink, winking at the
goat, which scowled in return. "Your audacity takes my breath away,
Inga, but the adventure has its charm, I must, confess. Were I not so
fat, I'd agree to your plan at once, and could probably conquer that
horde of fierce warriors without any assistance at all--any at all--eh,
Bilbil? But I grieve to say that I am fat, and not in good fighting
trim. As for your determination to do what I admit I can't do, Inga, I
fear you forget that you are only a boy, and rather small at that."

"No, I do not forget that," was Inga's reply.

"Then please consider that you and I and Bilbil are not strong enough,
as an army, to conquer a powerful nation of skilled warriors. We could
attempt it, of course, but you are too young to die, while I am too
old. Come with me to my City of Gilgad, where you will be greatly
honored. I'll have my professors teach you how to be good. Eh? What do
you say?"

Inga was a little embarrassed how to reply to these arguments, which he
knew King Rinkitink considered were wise; so, after a period of
thought, he said:

"I will make a bargain with Your Majesty, for I do not wish to fail in
respect to so worthy a man and so great a King as yourself. This boat
is mine, as I have said, and in my father's absence you have become my
guest; therefore I claim that I am entitled to some consideration, as
well as you."

"No doubt of it," agreed Rinkitink. "What is the bargain you propose,
Inga?"

"Let us both get into the boat, and you shall first try to row us to
Gilgad. If you succeed, I will accompany you right willingly; but
should you fail, I will then row the boat to Regos, and you must come
with me without further protest."

"A fair and just bargain!" cried the King, highly pleased. "Yet,
although I am a man of mighty deeds, I do not relish the prospect of
rowing so big a boat all the way to Gilgad. But I will do my best and
abide by the result."

The matter being thus peaceably settled, they prepared to embark. A
further supply of fruits was placed in the boat and Inga also raked up
a quantity of the delicious oysters that abounded on the coast of
Pingaree but which he had before been unable to reach for lack of a
boat. This was done at the suggestion of the ever-hungry Rinkitink, and
when the oysters had been stowed in their shells behind the water
barrel and a plentiful supply of grass brought aboard for Bilbil, they
decided they were ready to start on their voyage.

It proved no easy task to get Bilbil into the boat, for he was a
remarkably clumsy goat and once, when Rinkitink gave him a push, he
tumbled into the water and nearly drowned before they could get him out
again. But there was no thought of leaving the quaint animal behind.
His power of speech made him seem almost human in the eyes of the boy,
and the fat King was so accustomed to his surly companion that nothing
could have induced him to part with him. Finally Bilbil fell sprawling
into the bottom of the boat, and Inga helped him to get to the front
end, where there was enough space for him to lie down.

Rinkitink now took his seat in the silver-lined craft and the boy came
last, pushing off the boat as he sprang aboard, so that it floated
freely upon the water.

"Well, here we go for Gilgad!" exclaimed the King, picking up the oars
and placing them in the row-locks. Then he began to row as hard as he
could, singing at the same time an odd sort of a song that ran like
this:

  "The way to Gilgad isn't bad
  For a stout old King and a brave young lad,
  For a cross old goat with a dripping coat,
  And a silver boat in which to float.
  So our hearts are merry, light and glad
  As we speed away to fair Gilgad!"


"Don't, Rinkitink; please don't! It makes me seasick," growled Bilbil.

Rinkitink stopped rowing, for by this time he was all out of breath and
his round face was covered with big drops of perspiration. And when he
looked over his shoulder he found to his dismay that the boat had
scarcely moved a foot from its former position.

Inga said nothing and appeared not to notice the King's failure. So now
Rinkitink, with a serious look on his fat, red face, took off his
purple robe and rolled up the sleeves of his tunic and tried again.

However, he succeeded no better than before and when he heard Bilbil
give a gruff laugh and saw a smile upon the boy Prince's face,
Rinkitink suddenly dropped the oars and began shouting with laughter at
his own defeat. As he wiped his brow with a yellow silk handkerchief he
sang in a merry voice:

  "A sailor bold am I, I hold,
  But boldness will not row a boat.
  So I confess I'm in distress
  And just as useless as the goat."


"Please leave me out of your verses," said Bilbil with a snort of anger.

"When I make a fool of myself, Bilbil, I'm a goat," replied Rinkitink.

"Not so," insisted Bilbil. "Nothing could make you a member of my
superior race."

"Superior? Why, Bilbil, a goat is but a beast, while I am a King!"

"I claim that superiority lies in intelligence," said the goat.

Rinkitink paid no attention to this remark, but turning to Inga he said:

"We may as well get back to the shore, for the boat is too heavy to row
to Gilgad or anywhere else. Indeed, it will be hard for us to reach
land again."

"Let me take the oars," suggested Inga. "You must not forget our
bargain."

"No, indeed," answered Rinkitink. "If you can row us to Regos, or to
any other place, I will go with you without protest."

So the King took Inga's place at the stern of the boat and the boy
grasped the oars and commenced to row. And now, to the great wonder of
Rinkitink--and even to Inga's surprise--the oars became light as
feathers as soon as the Prince took hold of them. In an instant the
boat began to glide rapidly through the water and, seeing this, the boy
turned its prow toward the north. He did not know exactly where Regos
and Coregos were located, but he did know that the islands lay to the
north of Pingaree, so he decided to trust to luck and the guidance of
the pearls to carry him to them.

Gradually the Island of Pingaree became smaller to their view as the
boat sped onward, until at the end of an hour they had lost sight of it
altogether and were wholly surrounded by the purple waters of the
Nonestic Ocean.

Prince Inga did not tire from the labor of rowing; indeed, it seemed to
him no labor at all. Once he stopped long enough to place the poles of
the canopy in the holes that had been made for them, in the edges of
the boat, and to spread the canopy of silver over the poles, for
Rinkitink had complained of the sun's heat. But the canopy shut out the
hot rays and rendered the interior of the boat cool and pleasant.

"This is a glorious ride!" cried Rinkitink, as he lay back in the
shade. "I find it a decided relief to be away from that dismal island
of Pingaree.

"It may be a relief for a short time," said Bilbil, "but you are going
to the land of your enemies, who will probably stick your fat body full
of spears and arrows."

"Oh, I hope not!" exclaimed Inga, distressed at the thought.

"Never mind," said the King calmly, "a man can die but once, you know,
and when the enemy kills me I shall beg him to kill Bilbil, also, that
we may remain together in death as in life."

"They may be cannibals, in which case they will roast and eat us,"
suggested Bilbil, who wished to terrify his master.

"Who knows?" answered Rinkitink, with a shudder. "But cheer up, Bilbil;
they may not kill us after all, or even capture us; so let us not
borrow trouble. Do not look so cross, my sprightly quadruped, and I
will sing to amuse you."

"Your song would make me more cross than ever," grumbled the goat.

"Quite impossible, dear Bilbil. You couldn't be more surly if you
tried. So here is a famous song for you."

While the boy rowed steadily on and the boat rushed fast over the
water, the jolly King, who never could be sad or serious for many
minutes at a time, lay back on his embroidered cushions and sang as
follows:

  "A merry maiden went to sea--
  Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!
  She sat upon the Captain's knee
  And looked around the sea to see
  What she could see, but she couldn't see me--
  Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!


"How do you like that, Bilbil?"

"I don't like it," complained the goat. "It reminds me of the alligator
that tried to whistle."

"Did he succeed, Bilbil?" asked the King.

"He whistled as well as you sing."

"Ha, ha, ha, ha, heek, keek, eek!" chuckled the King. "He must have
whistled most exquisitely, eh, my friend?"

"I am not your friend," returned the goat, wagging his ears in a surly
manner.

"I am yours, however," was the King's cheery reply; "and to prove it
I'll sing you another verse."

"Don't, I beg of you!"

But the King sang as follows:

  "The wind blew off the maiden's shoe--
    Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!
  And the shoe flew high to the sky so blue
  And the maiden knew 'twas a new shoe, too;
  But she couldn't pursue the shoe, 'tis true--
    Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!


"Isn't that sweet, my pretty goat?"

"Sweet, do you ask?" retorted Bilbil. "I consider it as sweet as candy
made from mustard and vinegar."

"But not as sweet as your disposition, I admit. Ah, Bilbil, your temper
would put honey itself to shame."

"Do not quarrel, I beg of you," pleaded Inga. "Are we not sad enough
already?"

"But this is a jolly quarrel," said the King, "and it is the way Bilbil
and I often amuse ourselves. Listen, now, to the last verse of all:

  "The maid who shied her shoe now cried--
    Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!
  Her tears were fried for the Captain's bride
  Who ate with pride her sobs, beside,
  And gently sighed 'I'm satisfied'--
    Sing to-ral-oo-ral-i-do!"


"Worse and worse!" grumbled Bilbil, with much scorn. "I am glad that is
the last verse, for another of the same kind might cause me to faint."

"I fear you have no ear for music," said the King.

"I have heard no music, as yet," declared the goat. "You must have a
strong imagination, King Rinkitink, if you consider your songs music.
Do you remember the story of the bear that hired out for a nursemaid?"

"I do not recall it just now," said Rinkitink, with a wink at Inga.

"Well, the bear tried to sing a lullaby to put the baby to sleep."

"And then?" said the King.

"The bear was highly pleased with its own voice, but the baby was
nearly frightened to death."

"Heh, heb, heh, heh, whoo, hoo, hoo! You are a merry rogue, Bilbil,"
laughed the King; "a merry rogue in spite of your gloomy features.
However, if I have not amused you, I have at least pleased myself, for
I am exceedingly fond of a good song. So let us say no more about it."

All this time the boy Prince was rowing the boat. He was not in the
least tired, for the oars he held seemed to move of their own accord.
He paid little heed to the conversation of Rinkitink and the goat, but
busied his thoughts with plans of what he should do when he reached the
islands of Regos and Coregos and confronted his enemies. When the
others finally became silent, Inga inquired.

"Can you fight, King Rinkitink?"

"I have never tried," was the answer. "In time of danger I have found
it much easier to run away than to face the foe."

"But could you fight?" asked the boy.

"I might try, if there was no chance to escape by running. Have you a
proper weapon for me to fight with?"

"I have no weapon at all," confessed Inga.

"Then let us use argument and persuasion instead of fighting. For
instance, if we could persuade the warriors of Regos to lie down, and
let me step on them, they would be crushed with ease."

Prince Inga had expected little support from the King, so he was not
discouraged by this answer. After all, he reflected, a conquest by
battle would be out of the question, yet the White Pearl would not have
advised him to go to Regos and Coregos had the mission been a hopeless
one. It seemed to him, on further reflection, that he must rely upon
circumstances to determine his actions when he reached the islands of
the barbarians.

By this time Inga felt perfect confidence in the Magic Pearls. It was
the White Pearl that had given him the boat, and the Blue Pearl that
had given him strength to row it. He believed that the Pink Pearl would
protect him from any danger that might arise; so his anxiety was not
for himself, but for his companions. King Rinkitink and the goat had no
magic to protect them, so Inga resolved to do all in his power to keep
them from harm.

For three days and three nights the boat with the silver lining sped
swiftly over the ocean. On the morning of the fourth day, so quickly
had they traveled, Inga saw before him the shores of the two great
islands of Regos and Coregos.

"The pearls have guided me aright!" he whispered to himself. "Now, if I
am wise, and cautious, and brave, I believe I shall be able to rescue
my father and mother and my people."




Chapter Seven

The Twin Islands


The Island of Regos was ten miles wide and forty miles long and it was
ruled by a big and powerful King named Gos. Near to the shores were
green and fertile fields, but farther back from the sea were rugged
hills and mountains, so rocky that nothing would grow there. But in
these mountains were mines of gold and silver, which the slaves of the
King were forced to work, being confined in dark underground passages
for that purpose. In the course of time huge caverns had been hollowed
out by the slaves, in which they lived and slept, never seeing the
light of day. Cruel overseers with whips stood over these poor people,
who had been captured in many countries by the raiding parties of King
Cos, and the overseers were quite willing to lash the slaves with their
whips if they faltered a moment in their work.

Between the green shores and the mountains were forests of thick,
tangled trees, between which narrow paths had been cut to lead up to
the caves of the mines. It was on the level green meadows, not far from
the ocean, that the great City of Regos had been built, wherein was
located the palace of the King. This city was inhabited by thousands of
the fierce warriors of Gos, who frequently took to their boats and
spread over the sea to the neighboring islands to conquer and pillage,
as they had done at Pingaree. When they were not absent on one of these
expeditions, the City of Regos swarmed with them and so became a
dangerous place for any peaceful person to live in, for the warriors
were as lawless as their King.

The Island of Coregos lay close beside the Island of Regos; so close,
indeed, that one might have thrown a stone from one shore to another.
But Coregos was only half the size of Regos and instead of being
mountainous it was a rich and pleasant country, covered with fields of
grain. The fields of Coregos furnished food for the warriors and
citizens of both countries, while the mines of Regos made them all rich.

Coregos was ruled by Queen Cor, who was wedded to King Gos; but so
stern and cruel was the nature of this Queen that the people could not
decide which of their sovereigns they dreaded most.

Queen Cor lived in her own City of Coregos, which lay on that side of
her island facing Regos, and her slaves, who were mostly women, were
made to plow the land and to plant and harvest the grain.

From Regos to Coregos stretched a bridge of boats, set close together,
with planks laid across their edges for people to walk upon. In this
way it was easy to pass from one island to the other and in times of
danger the bridge could be quickly removed.

The native inhabitants of Regos and Coregos consisted of the warriors,
who did nothing but fight and ravage, and the trembling servants who
waited on them. King Gos and Queen Cor were at war with all the rest of
the world. Other islanders hated and feared them, for their slaves were
badly treated and absolutely no mercy was shown to the weak or ill.

When the boats that had gone to Pingaree returned loaded with rich
plunder and a host of captives, there was much rejoicing in Regos and
Coregos and the King and Queen gave a fine feast to the warriors who
had accomplished so great a conquest. This feast was set for the
warriors in the grounds of King Gos's palace, while with them in the
great throne room all the captains and leaders of the fighting men were
assembled with King Gos and Queen Cor, who had come from her island to
attend the ceremony. Then all the goods that had been stolen from the
King of Pingaree were divided according to rank, the King and Queen
taking half, the captains a quarter, and the rest being divided amongst
the warriors.

The day following the feast King Gos sent King Kitticut and all the men
of Pingaree to work in his mines under the mountains, having first
chained them together so they could not escape. The gentle Queen of
Pingaree and all her women, together with the captured children, were
given to Queen Cor, who set them to work in her grain fields.

Then the rulers and warriors of these dreadful islands thought they had
done forever with Pingaree. Despoiled of all its wealth, its houses
torn down, its boats captured and all its people enslaved, what
likelihood was there that they might ever again hear of the desolated
island? So the people of Regos and Coregos were surprised and puzzled
when one morning they observed approaching their shores from the
direction of the south a black boat containing a boy, a fat man and a
goat. The warriors asked one another who these could be, and where they
had come from? No one ever came to those islands of their own accord,
that was certain.

Prince Inga guided his boat to the south end of the Island of Regos,
which was the landing place nearest to the city, and when the warriors
saw this action they went down to the shore to meet him, being led by a
big captain named Buzzub.

"Those people surely mean us no good," said Rinkitink uneasily to the
boy. "Without doubt they intend to capture us and make us their slaves."

"Do not fear, sir," answered Inga, in a calm voice. "Stay quietly in
the boat with Bilbil until I have spoken with these men."

He stopped the boat a dozen feet from the shore, and standing up in his
place made a grave bow to the multitude confronting him. Said the big
Captain Buzzub in a gruff voice:

"Well, little one, who may you be? And how dare you come, uninvited and
all alone, to the Island of Regos?"

"I am Inga, Prince of Pingaree," returned the boy, "and I have come
here to free my parents and my people, whom you have wrongfully
enslaved."

When they heard this bold speech a mighty laugh arose from the band of
warriors, and when it had subsided the captain said:

"You love to jest, my baby Prince, and the joke is fairly good. But why
did you willingly thrust your head into the lion's mouth? When you were
free, why did you not stay free? We did not know we had left a single
person in Pingaree! But since you managed to escape us then, it is
really kind of you to come here of your own free will, to be our slave.
Who is the funny fat person with you?"

"It is His Majesty, King Rinkitink, of the great City of Gilgad. He has
accompanied me to see that you render full restitution for all you have
stolen from Pingaree."

"Better yet!" laughed Buzzub. "He will make a fine slave for Queen Cor,
who loves to tickle fat men, and see them jump."

King Rinkitink was filled with horror when he heard this, but the
Prince answered as boldly as before, saying:

"We are not to be frightened by bluster, believe me; nor are we so weak
as you imagine. We have magic powers so great and terrible that no host
of warriors can possibly withstand us, and therefore I call upon you to
surrender your city and your island to us, before we crush you with our
mighty powers."

The boy spoke very gravely and earnestly, but his words only aroused
another shout of laughter. So while the men of Regos were laughing Inga
drove the boat we'll up onto the sandy beach and leaped out. He also
helped Rinkitink out, and when the goat had unaided sprung to the
sands, the King got upon Bilbil's back, trembling a little internally,
but striving to look as brave as possible.

There was a bunch of coarse hair between the goat's ears, and this Inga
clutched firmly in his left hand. The boy knew the Pink Pearl would
protect not only himself, but all whom he touched, from any harm, and
as Rinkitink was astride the goat and Inga had his hand upon the
animal, the three could not be injured by anything the warriors could
do. But Captain Buzzub did not know this, and the little group of three
seemed so weak and ridiculous that he believed their capture would be
easy. So he turned to his men and with a wave of his hand said:

"Seize the intruders!"

Instantly two or three of the warriors stepped forward to obey, but to
their amazement they could not reach any of the three; their hands were
arrested as if by an invisible wall of iron. Without paying any
attention to these attempts at capture, Inga advanced slowly and the
goat kept pace with him. And when Rinkitink saw that he was safe from
harm he gave one of his big, merry laughs, and it startled the warriors
and made them nervous. Captain Buzzub's eyes grew big with surprise as
the three steadily advanced and forced his men backward; nor was he
free from terror himself at the magic that protected these strange
visitors. As for the warriors, they presently became terror-stricken
and fled in a panic up the slope toward the city, and Buzzub was
obliged to chase after them and shout threats of punishment before he
could halt them and form them into a line of battle.

All the men of Regos bore spears and bows-and-arrows, and some of the
officers had swords and battle-axes; so Buzzub ordered them to stand
their ground and shoot and slay the strangers as they approached. This
they tried to do. Inga being in advance, the warriors sent a flight of
sharp arrows straight at the boy's breast, while others cast their long
spears at him.

It seemed to Rinkitink that the little Prince must surely perish as he
stood facing this hail of murderous missiles; but the power of the Pink
Pearl did not desert him, and when the arrows and spears had reached to
within an inch of his body they bounded back again and fell harmlessly
at his feet. Nor were Rinkitink or Bilbil injured in the least,
although they stood close beside Inga.

Buzzub stood for a moment looking upon the boy in silent wonder. Then,
recovering himself, he shouted in a loud voice:

"Once again! All together, my men. No one shall ever defy our might and
live!"

Again a flight of arrows and spears sped toward the three, and since
many more of the warriors of Regos had by this time joined their
fellows, the air was for a moment darkened by the deadly shafts. But
again all fell harmless before the power of the Pink Pearl, and Bilbil,
who had been growing very angry at the attempts to injure him and his
party, suddenly made a bolt forward, casting off Inga's hold, and
butted into the line of warriors, who were standing amazed at their
failure to conquer.

Taken by surprise at the goat's attack, a dozen big warriors tumbled in
a heap, yelling with fear, and their comrades, not knowing what had
happened but imagining that their foes were attacking them, turned
about and ran to the city as hard as they could go. Bilbil, still
angry, had just time to catch the big captain as he turned to follow
his men, and Buzzub first sprawled headlong upon the ground, then
rolled over two or three times, and finally jumped up and ran yelling
after his defeated warriors. This butting on the part of the goat was
very hard upon King Rinkitink, who nearly fell off Bilbil's back at the
shock of encounter; but the little fat King wound his arms around the
goat's neck and shut his eyes and clung on with all his might. It was
not until he heard Inga say triumphantly, "We have won the fight
without striking a blow!" that Rinkitink dared open his eyes again.
Then he saw the warriors rushing into the City of Regos and barring the
heavy gates, and he was very much relieved at the sight.

"Without striking a blow!" said Bilbil indignantly. "That is not quite
true, Prince Inga. You did not fight, I admit, but I struck a couple of
times to good purpose, and I claim to have conquered the cowardly
warriors unaided."

"You and I together, Bilbil," said Rinkitink mildly. "But the next time
you make a charge, please warn me in time, so that I may dismount and
give you all the credit for the attack."

There being no one now to oppose their advance, the three walked to the
gates of the city, which had been closed against them. The gates were
of iron and heavily barred, and upon the top of the high walls of the
city a host of the warriors now appeared armed with arrows and spears
and other weapons. For Buzzub had gone straight to the palace of King
Cos and reported his defeat, relating the powerful magic of the boy,
the fat King and the goat, and had asked what to do next.

The big captain still trembled with fear, but King Gos did not believe
in magic, and called Buzzub a coward and a weakling. At once the King
took command of his men personally, and he ordered the walls manned
with warriors and instructed them to shoot to kill if any of the three
strangers approached the gates.

Of course, neither Rinkitink nor Bilbil knew how they had been
protected from harm and so at first they were inclined to resent the
boy's command that the three must always keep together and touch one
another at all times. But when Inga explained that his magic would not
otherwise save them from injury, they agreed to obey, for they had now
seen enough to convince them that the Prince was really protected by
some invisible power.

As they came before the gates another shower of arrows and spears
descended upon them, and as before not a single missile touched their
bodies. King Gos, who was upon the wall, was greatly amazed and
somewhat worried, but he depended upon the strength of his gates and
commanded his men to continue shooting until all their weapons were
gone.

Inga let them shoot as much as they wished, while he stood before the
great gates and examined them carefully.

"Perhaps Bilbil can batter down the gates, suggested Rinkitink.

"No," replied the goat; "my head is hard, but not harder than iron."

"Then," returned the King, "let us stay outside; especially as we can't
get in."

But Inga was not at all sure they could not get in. The gates opened
inward, and three heavy bars were held in place by means of stout
staples riveted to the sheets of steel. The boy had been told that the
power of the Blue Pearl would enable him to accomplish any feat of
strength, and he believed that this was true.

The warriors, under the direction of King Gos, continued to hurl arrows
and darts and spears and axes and huge stones upon the invaders, all
without avail. The ground below was thickly covered with weapons, yet
not one of the three before the gates had been injured in the slightest
manner. When everything had been cast that was available and not a
single weapon of any sort remained at hand, the amazed warriors saw the
boy put his shoulder against the gates and burst asunder the huge
staples that held the bars in place. A thousand of their men could not
have accomplished this feat, yet the small, slight boy did it with
seeming ease. The gates burst open, and Inga advanced into the city
street and called upon King Gos to surrender.

But Gos was now as badly frightened as were his warriors. He and his
men were accustomed to war and pillage and they had carried terror into
many countries, but here was a small boy, a fat man and a goat who
could not be injured by all his skill in warfare, his numerous army and
thousands of death-dealing weapons. Moreover, they not only defied King
Gos's entire army but they had broken in the huge gates of the city--as
easily as if they had been made of paper--and such an exhibition of
enormous strength made the wicked King fear for his life. Like all
bullies and marauders, Gos was a coward at heart, and now a panic
seized him and he turned and fled before the calm advance of Prince
Inga of Pingaree. The warriors were like their master, and having
thrown all their weapons over the wall and being helpless to oppose the
strangers, they all swarmed after Gos, who abandoned his city and
crossed the bridge of boats to the Island of Coregos. There was a
desperate struggle among these cowardly warriors to get over the
bridge, and many were pushed into the water and obliged to swim; but
finally every fighting man of Regos had gained the shore of Coregos and
then they tore away the bridge of boats and drew them up on their own
side, hoping the stretch of open water would prevent the magic invaders
from following them.

The humble citizens and serving people of Regos, who had been terrified
and abused by the rough warriors all their lives, were not only greatly
astonished by this sudden conquest of their masters but greatly
delighted. As the King and his army fled to Coregos, the people
embraced one another and danced for very joy, and then they turned to
see what the conquerors of Regos were like.




Chapter Eight

Rinkitink Makes a Great Mistake


The fat King rode his goat through the streets of the conquered city
and the boy Prince walked proudly beside him, while all the people bent
their heads humbly to their new masters, whom they were prepared to
serve in the same manner they had King Gos.

Not a warrior remained in all Regos to oppose the triumphant three; the
bridge of boats had been destroyed; Inga and his companions were free
from danger--for a time, at least.

The jolly little King appreciated this fact and rejoiced that he had
escaped all injury during the battle. How it had all happened he could
not tell, nor even guess, but he was content in being safe and free to
take possession of the enemy's city. So, as they passed through the
lines of respectful civilians on their way to the palace, the King
tipped his crown back on his bald head and folded his arms and sang in
his best voice the following lines:

  "Oh, here comes the army of King Rinkitink!
  It isn't a big one, perhaps you may think,
  But it scattered the warriors quicker than wink--
  Rink-i-tink, tink-i-tink, tink!

  Our Bilbil's a hero and so is his King;
  Our foemen have vanished like birds on the wing;
  I guess that as fighters we're quite the real thing--
  Rink-i-tink, tink-i-tink, tink!"


"Why don't you give a little credit to Inga?" inquired the goat. "If I
remember aright, he did a little of the conquering himself."

"So he did," responded the King, "and that's the reason I'm sounding
our own praise, Bilbil. Those who do the least, often shout the loudest
and so get the most glory. Inga did so much that there is danger of his
becoming more important than we are, and so we'd best say nothing about
him."

When they reached the palace, which was an immense building, furnished
throughout in regal splendor, Inga took formal possession and ordered
the majordomo to show them the finest rooms the building contained.
There were many pleasant apartments, but Rinkitink proposed to Inga
that they share one of the largest bedrooms together.

"For," said he, "we are not sure that old Gos will not return and try
to recapture his city, and you must remember that I have no magic to
protect me. In any danger, were I alone, I might be easily killed or
captured, while if you are by my side you can save me from injury."

The boy realized the wisdom of this plan, and selected a fine big
bedroom on the second floor of the palace, in which he ordered two
golden beds placed and prepared for King Rinkitink and himself. Bilbil
was given a suite of rooms on the other side of the palace, where
servants brought the goat fresh-cut grass to eat and made him a soft
bed to lie upon.

That evening the boy Prince and the fat King dined in great state in
the lofty-domed dining hall of the palace, where forty servants waited
upon them. The royal chef, anxious to win the favor of the conquerors
of Regos, prepared his finest and most savory dishes for them, which
Rinkitink ate with much appetite and found so delicious that he ordered
the royal chef brought into the banquet hall and presented him with a
gilt button which the King cut from his own jacket.

"You are welcome to it," said he to the chef, "because I have eaten so
much that I cannot use that lower button at all."

Rinkitink was mightily pleased to live in a comfortable palace again
and to dine at a well spread table. His joy grew every moment, so that
he came in time to be as merry and cheery as before Pingaree was
despoiled. And, although he had been much frightened during Inga's
defiance of the army of King Gos, he now began to turn the matter into
a joke.

"Why, my boy," said he, "you whipped the big black-bearded King exactly
as if he were a schoolboy, even though you used no warlike weapon at
all upon him. He was cowed through fear of your magic, and that reminds
me to demand from you an explanation. How did you do it, Inga? And
where did the wonderful magic come from?"

Perhaps it would have been wise for the Prince to have explained about
the magic pearls, but at that moment he was not inclined to do so.
Instead, he replied:

"Be patient, Your Majesty. The secret is not my own, so please do not
ask me to divulge it. Is it not enough, for the present, that the magic
saved you from death to-day?"

"Do not think me ungrateful," answered the King earnestly. "A million
spears fell on me from the wall, and several stones as big as
mountains, yet none of them hurt me!"

"The stones were not as big as mountains, sire," said the Prince with a
smile. "They were, indeed, no larger than your head."

"Are you sure about that?" asked Rinkitink.

"Quite sure, Your Majesty."

"How deceptive those things are!" sighed the King. "This argument
reminds me of the story of Tom Tick, which my father used to tell."

"I have never heard that story," Inga answered.

"Well, as he told it, it ran like this:

  "When Tom walked out, the sky to spy,
  A naughty gnat flew in his eye;
  But Tom knew not it was a gnat--
  He thought, at first, it was a cat.

  "And then, it felt so very big,
  He thought it surely was a pig
  Till, standing still to hear it grunt,
  He cried: 'Why, it's an elephunt!'

  "But--when the gnat flew out again
  And Tom was free from all his pain,
  He said: 'There flew into my eye
  A leetle, teenty-tiny fly.'"


"Indeed," said Inga, laughing, "the gnat was much like your stones that
seemed as big as mountains."

After their dinner they inspected the palace, which was filled with
valuable goods stolen by King Gos from many nations. But the day's
events had tired them and they retired early to their big sleeping
apartment.

"In the morning," said the boy to Rinkitink, as he was undressing for
bed, "I shall begin the search for my father and mother and the people
of Pingaree. And, when they are found and rescued, we will all go home
again, and be as happy as we were before."

They carefully bolted the door of their room, that no one might enter,
and then got into their beds, where Rinkitink fell asleep in an
instant. The boy lay awake for a while thinking over the day's
adventures, but presently he fell sound asleep also, and so weary was
he that nothing disturbed his slumber until he awakened next morning
with a ray of sunshine in his eyes, which had crept into the room
through the open window by King Rinkitink's bed.

Resolving to begin the search for his parents without any unnecessary
delay, Inga at once got out of bed and began to dress himself, while
Rinkitink, in the other bed, was still sleeping peacefully. But when
the boy had put on both his stockings and began looking for his shoes,
he could find but one of them. The left shoe, that containing the Pink
Pearl, was missing.

Filled with anxiety at this discovery, Inga searched through the entire
room, looking underneath the beds and divans and chairs and behind the
draperies and in the corners and every other possible place a shoe
might be. He tried the door, and found it still bolted; so, with
growing uneasiness, the boy was forced to admit that the precious shoe
was not in the room.

With a throbbing heart he aroused his companion.

"King Rinkitink," said he, "do you know what has become of my left
shoe?"

"Your shoe!" exclaimed the King, giving a wide yawn and rubbing his
eyes to get the sleep out of them. "Have you lost a shoe?"

"Yes," said Inga. "I have searched everywhere in the room, and cannot
find it."

"But why bother me about such a small thing?" inquired Rinkitink. "A
shoe is only a shoe, and you can easily get another one. But, stay!
Perhaps it was your shoe which I threw at the cat last night."

"The cat!" cried Inga. "What do you mean?"

"Why, in the night," explained Rinkitink, sitting up and beginning to
dress himself, "I was wakened by the mewing of a cat that sat upon a
wall of the palace, just outside my window. As the noise disturbed me,
I reached out in the dark and caught up something and threw it at the
cat, to frighten the creature away. I did not know what it was that I
threw, and I was too sleepy to care; but probably it was your shoe,
since it is now missing."

"Then," said the boy, in a despairing tone of voice, "your carelessness
has ruined me, as well as yourself, King Rinkitink, for in that shoe
was concealed the magic power which protected us from danger."

The King's face became very serious when he heard this and he uttered a
low whistle of surprise and regret.

"Why on earth did you not warn me of this?" he demanded. "And why did
you keep such a precious power in an old shoe? And why didn't you put
the shoe under a pillow? You were very wrong, my lad, in not confiding
to me, your faithful friend, the secret, for in that case the shoe
would not now be lost."

To all this Inga had no answer. He sat on the side of his bed, with
hanging head, utterly disconsolate, and seeing this, Rinkitink had pity
for his sorrow.

"Come!" cried the King; "let us go out at once and look for the shoe
which I threw at the cat. It must even now be lying in the yard of the
palace."

This suggestion roused the boy to action. He at once threw open the
door and in his stocking feet rushed down the staircase, closely
followed by Rinkitink. But although they looked on both sides of the
palace wall and in every possible crack and corner where a shoe might
lodge, they failed to find it.

After a half hour's careful search the boy said sorrowfully:

"Someone must have passed by, as we slept, and taken the precious shoe,
not knowing its value. To us, King Rinkitink, this will be a dreadful
misfortune, for we are surrounded by dangers from which we have now no
protection. Luckily I have the other shoe left, within which is the
magic power that gives me strength; so all is not lost."

Then he told Rinkitink, in a few words, the secret of the wonderful
pearls, and how he had recovered them from the ruins and hidden them in
his shoes, and how they had enabled him to drive King Gos and his men
from Regos and to capture the city. The King was much astonished, and
when the story was concluded he said to Inga:

"What did you do with the other shoe?"

"Why, I left it in our bedroom," replied the boy.

"Then I advise you to get it at once," continued Rinkitink, "for we can
ill afford to lose the second shoe, as well as the one I threw at the
cat."

"You are right!" cried Inga, and they hastened back to their bedchamber.

On entering the room they found an old woman sweeping and raising a
great deal of dust.

"Where is my shoe?" asked the Prince, anxiously.

The old woman stopped sweeping and looked at him in a stupid way, for
she was not very intelligent.

"Do you mean the one odd shoe that was lying on the floor when I came
in?" she finally asked.

"Yes--yes!" answered the boy. "Where is it? Tell me where it is!"

"Why, I threw it on the dust-heap, outside the back gate," said she,
"for, it being but a single shoe, with no mate, it can be of no use to
anyone."

"Show us the way to the dust-heap--at once!" commanded the boy,
sternly, for he was greatly frightened by this new misfortune which
threatened him.

The old woman hobbled away and they followed her, constantly urging her
to hasten; but when they reached the dust-heap no shoe was to be seen.

"This is terrible!" wailed the young Prince, ready to weep at his loss.
"We are now absolutely ruined, and at the mercy of our enemies. Nor
shall I be able to liberate my dear father and mother."

"Well," replied Rinkitink, leaning against an old barrel and looking
quite solemn, "the thing is certainly unlucky, any way we look at it. I
suppose someone has passed along here and, seeing the shoe upon the
dust-heap, has carried it away. But no one could know the magic power
the shoe contains and so will not use it against us. I believe, Inga,
we must now depend upon our wits to get us out of the scrape we are in."

With saddened hearts they returned to the palace, and entering a small
room where no one could observe them or overhear them, the boy took the
White Pearl from its silken bag and held it to his ear, asking:

"What shall I do now?"

"Tell no one of your loss," answered the Voice of the Pearl. "If your
enemies do not know that you are powerless, they will fear you as much
as ever. Keep your secret, be patient, and fear not!"

Inga heeded this advice and also warned Rinkitink to say nothing to
anyone of the loss of the shoes and the powers they contained. He sent
for the shoemaker of King Gos, who soon brought him a new pair of red
leather shoes that fitted him quite well. When these had been put upon
his feet, the Prince, accompanied by the King, started to walk through
the city.

Wherever they went the people bowed low to the conqueror, although a
few, remembering Inga's terrible strength, ran away in fear and
trembling. They had been used to severe masters and did not yet know
how they would be treated by King Gos's successor. There being no
occasion for the boy to exercise the powers he had displayed the
previous day, his present helplessness was not suspected by any of the
citizens of Regos, who still considered him a wonderful magician.

Inga did not dare to fight his way to the mines, at present, nor could
he try to conquer the Island of Coregos, where his mother was enslaved;
so he set about the regulation of the City of Regos, and having
established himself with great state in the royal palace he began to
govern the people by kindness, having consideration for the most humble.

The King of Regos and his followers sent spies across to the island
they had abandoned in their flight, and these spies returned with the
news that the terrible boy conqueror was still occupying the city.
Therefore none of them ventured to go back to Regos but continued to
live upon the neighboring island of Coregos, where they passed the days
in fear and trembling and sought to plot and plan ways how they might
overcome the Prince of Pingaree and the fat King of Gilgad.




Chapter Nine

A Present for Zella


Now it so happened that on the morning of that same day when the Prince
of Pingaree suffered the loss of his priceless shoes, there chanced to
pass along the road that wound beside the royal palace a poor
charcoal-burner named Nikobob, who was about to return to his home in
the forest.

Nikobob carried an ax and a bundle of torches over his shoulder and he
walked with his eyes to the ground, being deep in thought as to the
strange manner in which the powerful King Gos and his city had been
conquered by a boy Prince who had come from Pingaree.

Suddenly the charcoal-burner espied a shoe lying upon the ground, just
beyond the high wall of the palace and directly in his path. He picked
it up and, seeing it was a pretty shoe, although much too small for his
own foot, he put it in his pocket.

Soon after, on turning a corner of the wall, Nikobob came to a
dust-heap where, lying amidst a mass of rubbish, was another shoe--the
mate to the one he had before found. This also he placed in his pocket,
saying to himself:

"I have now a fine pair of shoes for my daughter Zella, who will be
much pleased to find I have brought her a present from the city."

And while the charcoal-burner turned into the forest and trudged along
the path toward his home, Inga and Rinkitink were still searching for
the missing shoes. Of course, they could not know that Nikobob had
found them, nor did the honest man think he had taken anything more
than a pair of cast-off shoes which nobody wanted.

Nikobob had several miles to travel through the forest before he could
reach the little log cabin where his wife, as well as his little
daughter Zella, awaited his return, but he was used to long walks and
tramped along the path whistling cheerfully to beguile the time.

Few people, as I said before, ever passed through the dark and tangled
forests of Regos, except to go to the mines in the mountain beyond, for
many dangerous creatures lurked in the wild jungles, and King Gos never
knew, when he sent a messenger to the mines, whether he would reach
there safely or not.

The charcoal-burner, however, knew the wild forest well, and especially
this part of it lying between the city and his home. It was the
favorite haunt of the ferocious beast Choggenmugger, dreaded by every
dweller in the Island of Regos. Choggenmugger was so old that everyone
thought it must have been there since the world was made, and each year
of its life the huge scales that covered its body grew thicker and
harder and its jaws grew wider and its teeth grew sharper and its
appetite grew more keen than ever.

In former ages there had been many dragons in Regos, but Choggenmugger
was so fond of dragons that he had eaten all of them long ago. There
had also been great serpents and crocodiles in the forest marshes, but
all had gone to feed the hunger of Choggenmugger. The people of Regos
knew well there was no use opposing the Great Beast, so when one
unfortunately met with it he gave himself up for lost.

All this Nikobob knew well, but fortune had always favored him in his
journey through the forest, and although he had at times met many
savage beasts and fought them with his sharp ax, he had never to this
day encountered the terrible Choggenmugger. Indeed, he was not thinking
of the Great Beast at all as he walked along, but suddenly he heard a
crashing of broken trees and felt a trembling of the earth and saw the
immense jaws of Choggenmugger opening before him. Then Nikobob gave
himself up for lost and his heart almost ceased to beat.

He believed there was no way of escape. No one ever dared oppose
Choggenmugger. But Nikobob hated to die without showing the monster, in
some way, that he was eaten only under protest. So he raised his ax and
brought it down upon the red, protruding tongue of the monster--and cut
it clean off!

For a moment the charcoal-burner scarcely believed what his eyes saw,
for he knew nothing of the pearls he carried in his pocket or the magic
power they lent his arm. His success, however, encouraged him to strike
again, and this time the huge scaly jaw of Choggenmugger was severed in
twain and the beast howled in terrified rage.

Nikobob took off his coat, to give himself more freedom of action, and
then he earnestly renewed the attack. But now the ax seemed blunted by
the hard scales and made no impression upon them whatever. The creature
advanced with glaring, wicked eyes, and Nikobob seized his coat under
his arm and turned to flee.

That was foolish, for Choggenmugger could run like the wind. In a
moment it overtook the charcoal-burner and snapped its four rows of
sharp teeth together. But they did not touch Nikobob, because he still
held the coat in his grasp, close to his body, and in the coat pocket
were Inga's shoes, and in the points of the shoes were the magic
pearls. Finding himself uninjured, Nikobob put on his coat, again
seized his ax, and in a short time had chopped Choggenmugger into many
small pieces--a task that proved not only easy but very agreeable.

"I must be the strongest man in all the world!" thought the
charcoal-burner, as he proudly resumed his way, "for Choggenmugger has
been the terror of Regos since the world began, and I alone have been
able to destroy the beast. Yet it is singular' that never before did I
discover how powerful a man I am."

He met no further adventure and at midday reached a little clearing in
the forest where stood his humble cabin.

"Great news! I have great news for you," he shouted, as his wife and
little daughter came to greet him. "King Gos has been conquered by a
boy Prince from the far island of Pingaree, and I have this
day--unaided--destroyed Choggenmugger by the might of my strong arm."

This was, indeed, great news. They brought Nikobob into the house and
set him in an easy chair and made him tell everything he knew about the
Prince of Pingaree and the fat King of Gilgad, as well as the details
of his wonderful fight with mighty Choggenmugger.

"And now, my daughter," said the charcoalburner, when all his news had
been related for at least the third time, "here is a pretty present I
have brought you from the city."

With this he drew the shoes from the pocket of his coat and handed them
to Zella, who gave him a dozen kisses in payment and was much pleased
with her gift. The little girl had never worn shoes before, for her
parents were too poor to buy her such luxuries, so now the possession
of these, which were not much worn, filled the child's heart with joy.
She admired the red leather and the graceful curl of the pointed toes.
When she tried them on her feet, they fitted as well as if made for her.

All the afternoon, as she helped her mother with the housework, Zella
thought of her pretty shoes. They seemed more important to her than the
coming to Regos of the conquering Prince of Pingaree, or even the death
of Choggenmugger.

When Zella and her mother were not working in the cabin, cooking or
sewing, they often searched the neighboring forest for honey which the
wild bees cleverly hid in hollow trees. The day after Nikobob's return,
as they were starting out after honey, Zella decided to put on her new
shoes, as they would keep the twigs that covered the ground from
hurting her feet. She was used to the twigs, of course, but what is the
use of having nice, comfortable shoes, if you do not wear them?

So she danced along, very happily, followed by her mother, and
presently they came to a tree in which was a deep hollow. Zella thrust
her hand and arm into the space and found that the tree was full of
honey, so she began to dig it out with a wooden paddle. Her mother, who
held the pail, suddenly cried in warning:

"Look out, Zella; the bees are coming!" and then the good woman ran
fast toward the house to escape.

Zella, however, had no more than time to turn her head when a thick
swarm of bees surrounded her, angry because they had caught her
stealing their honey and intent on stinging the girl as a punishment.
She knew her danger and expected to be badly injured by the multitude
of stinging bees, but to her surprise the little creatures were unable
to fly close enough to her to stick their dart-like stingers into her
flesh. They swarmed about her in a dark cloud, and their angry buzzing
was terrible to hear, yet the little girl remained unharmed.

When she realized this, Zella was no longer afraid but continued to
ladle out the honey until she had secured all that was in the tree.
Then she returned to the cabin, where her mother was weeping and
bemoaning the fate of her darling child, and the good woman was greatly
astonished to find Zella had escaped injury.

Again they went to the woods to search for honey, and although the
mother always ran away whenever the bees came near them, Zella paid no
attention to the creatures but kept at her work, so that before supper
time came the pails were again filled to overflowing with delicious
honey.

"With such good fortune as we have had this day," said her mother, "we
shall soon gather enough honey for you to carry to Queen Cor." For it
seems the wicked Queen was very fond of honey and it had been Zella's
custom to go, once every year, to the City of Coregos, to carry the
Queen a supply of sweet honey for her table. Usually she had but one
pail.

"But now," said Zella, "I shall be able to carry two pailsful to the
Queen, who will, I am sure, give me a good price for it."

"True," answered her mother, "and, as the boy Prince may take it into
his head to conquer Coregos, as well as Regos, I think it best for you
to start on your journey to Queen Cor tomorrow morning. Do you not
agree with me, Nikobob?" she added, turning to her husband, the
charcoal-burner, who was eating his supper.

"I agree with you," he replied. "If Zella must go to the City of
Coregos, she may as well start to-morrow morning."




Chapter Ten

The Cunning of Queen Cor


You may be sure the Queen of Coregos was not well pleased to have King
Gos and all his warriors living in her city after they had fled from
their own. They were savage natured and quarrelsome men at all times,
and their tempers had not improved since their conquest by the Prince
of Pingaree. Moreover, they were eating up Queen Cor's provisions and
crowding the houses of her own people, who grumbled and complained
until their Queen was heartily tired.

"Shame on you!" she said to her husband, King Gos, "to be driven out of
your city by a boy, a roly-poly King and a billy goat! Why do you not
go back and fight them?"

"No human can fight against the powers of magic," returned the King in
a surly voice. "That boy is either a fairy or under the protection of
fairies. We escaped with our lives only because we were quick to run
away; but, should we return to Regos, the same terrible power that
burst open the city gates would crush us all to atoms."

"Bah! you are a coward," cried the Queen, tauntingly.

"I am not a coward," said the big King. "I have killed in battle scores
of my enemies; by the might of my sword and my good right arm I have
conquered many nations; all my life people have feared me. But no one
would dare face the tremendous power of the Prince of Pingaree, boy
though he is. It would not be courage, it would be folly, to attempt
it."

"Then meet his power with cunning," suggested the Queen. "Take my
advice, and steal over to Regos at night, when it is dark, and capture
or destroy the boy while he sleeps."

"No weapon can touch his body," was the answer. "He bears a charmed
life and cannot be injured."

"Does the fat King possess magic powers, or the goat?" inquired Cor.

"I think not," said Gos. "We could not injure them, indeed, any more
than we could the boy, but they did not seem to have any unusual
strength, although the goat's head is harder than a battering-ram."

"Well," mused the Queen, "there is surely some way to conquer that
slight boy. If you are afraid to undertake the job, I shall go myself.
By some stratagem I shall manage to make him my prisoner. He will not
dare to defy a Queen, and no magic can stand against a woman's cunning."

"Go ahead, if you like," replied the King, with an evil grin, "and if
you are hung up by the thumbs or cast into a dungeon, it will serve you
right for thinking you can succeed where a skilled warrior dares not
make the attempt."

"I'm not afraid," answered the Queen. "It is only soldiers and bullies
who are cowards."

In spite of this assertion, Queen Cor was not so brave as she was
cunning. For several days she thought over this plan and that, and
tried to decide which was most likely to succeed. She had never seen
the boy Prince but had heard so many tales of him from the defeated
warriors, and especially from Captain Buzzub, that she had learned to
respect his power.

Spurred on by the knowledge that she would never get rid of her
unwelcome guests until Prince Inga was overcome and Regos regained for
King Gos, the Queen of Coregos finally decided to trust to luck and her
native wit to defeat a simple-minded boy, however powerful he might be.
Inga could not suspect what she was going to do, because she did not
know herself. She intended to act boldly and trust to chance to win.

It is evident that had the cunning Queen known that Inga had lost all
his magic, she would not have devoted so much time to the simple matter
of capturing him, but like all others she was impressed by the
marvelous exhibition of power he had shown in capturing Regos, and had
no reason to believe the boy was less powerful now.

One morning Queen Cor boldly entered a boat, and, taking four men with
her as an escort and bodyguard, was rowed across the narrow channel to
Regos. Prince Inga was sitting in the palace playing checkers with King
Rinkitink when a servant came to him, saying that Queen Cor had arrived
and desired an audience with him.

With many misgivings lest the wicked Queen discover that he had now
lost his magic powers, the boy ordered her to be admitted, and she soon
entered the room and bowed low before him, in mock respect.

Cor was a big woman, almost as tall as King Gos. She had flashing black
eyes and the dark complexion you see on gypsies. Her temper, when
irritated, was something dreadful, and her face wore an evil expression
which she tried to cover by smiling sweetly--often when she meant the
most mischief.

"I have come," said she in a low voice, "to render homage to the noble
Prince of Pingaree. I am told that Your Highness is the strongest
person in the world, and invincible in battle, and therefore I wish you
to become my friend, rather than my enemy."

Now Inga did not know how to reply to this speech. He disliked the
appearance of the woman and was afraid of her and he was unused to
deception and did not know how to mask his real feelings. So he took
time to think over his answer, which he finally made in these words:

"I have no quarrel with Your Majesty, and my only reason for coming
here is to liberate my father and mother, and my people, whom you and
your husband have made your slaves, and to recover the goods King Gos
has plundered from the Island of Pingaree. This I hope soon to
accomplish, and if you really wish to be my friend, you can assist me
greatly."

While he was speaking Queen Cor had been studying the boy's face
stealthily, from the corners of her eyes, and she said to herself: "He
is so small and innocent that I believe I can capture him alone, and
with ease. He does not seem very terrible and I suspect that King Gos
and his warriors were frightened at nothing."

Then, aloud, she said to Inga:

"I wish to invite you, mighty Prince, and your friend, the great King
of Gilgad, to visit my poor palace at Coregos, where all my people
shall do you honor. Will you come?"

"At present," replied Inga, uneasily, "I must refuse your kind
invitation."

"There will be feasting, and dancing girls, and games and fireworks,"
said the Queen, speaking as if eager to entice him and at each word
coming a step nearer to where he stood.

"I could not enjoy them while my poor parents are slaves," said the
boy, sadly.

"Are you sure of that?" asked Queen Cor, and by that time she was close
beside Inga. Suddenly she leaned forward and threw both of her long
arms around Inga's body, holding him in a grasp that was like a vise.

Now Rinkitink sprang forward to rescue his friend, but Cor kicked out
viciously with her foot and struck the King squarely on his stomach--a
very tender place to be kicked, especially if one is fat. Then, still
hugging Inga tightly, the Queen called aloud:

"I've got him! Bring in the ropes."

Instantly the four men she had brought with her sprang into the room
and bound the boy hand and foot. Next they seized Rinkitink, who was
still rubbing his stomach, and bound him likewise.

With a laugh of wicked triumph, Queen Cor now led her captives down to
the boat and returned with them to Coregos.

Great was the astonishment of King Gos and his warriors when they saw
that the mighty Prince of Pingaree, who had put them all to flight, had
been captured by a woman. Cowards as they were, they now crowded around
the boy and jeered at him, and some of them would have struck him had
not the Queen cried out:

"Hands off! He is my prisoner, remember not yours."

"Well, Cor, what are you going to do with him?" inquired King Gos.

"I shall make him my slave, that he may amuse my idle hours. For he is
a pretty boy, and gentle, although he did frighten all of you big
warriors so terribly."

The King scowled at this speech, not liking to be ridiculed, but he
said nothing more. He and his men returned that same day to Regos,
after restoring the bridge of boats. And they held a wild carnival of
rejoicing, both in the King's palace and in the city, although the poor
people of Regos who were not warriors were all sorry that the kind
young Prince had been captured by his enemies and could rule them no
longer.

When her unwelcome guests had all gone back to Regos and the Queen was
alone in her palace, she ordered Inga and Rinkitink brought before her
and their bonds removed. They came sadly enough, knowing they were in
serious straits and at the mercy of a cruel mistress. Inga had taken
counsel of the White Pearl, which had advised him to bear up bravely
under his misfortune, promising a change for the better very soon. With
this promise to comfort him, Inga faced the Queen with a dignified
bearing that indicated both pride and courage.

"Well, youngster," said she, in a cheerful tone because she was pleased
with her success, "you played a clever trick on my poor husband and
frightened him badly, but for that prank I am inclined to forgive you.
Hereafter I intend you to be my page, which means that you must fetch
and carry for me at my will. And let me advise you to obey my every
whim without question or delay, for when I am angry I become ugly, and
when I am ugly someone is sure to feel the lash. Do you understand me?"

Inga bowed, but made no answer. Then she turned to Rinkitink and said:

"As for you, I cannot decide how to make you useful to me, as you are
altogether too fat and awkward to work in the fields. It may be,
however, that I can use you as a pincushion.

"What!" cried Rinkitink in horror, "would you stick pins into the King
of Gilgad?"

"Why not?" returned Queen Cor. "You are as fat as a pincushion, as you
must yourself admit, and whenever I needed a pin I could call you to
me." Then she laughed at his frightened look and asked: "By the way,
are you ticklish?"

This was the question Rinkitink had been dreading. He gave a moan of
despair and shook his head.

"I should love to tickle the bottom of your feet with a feather,"
continued the cruel woman. "Please take off your shoes."

"Oh, your Majesty!" pleaded poor Rinkitink, "I beg you to allow me to
amuse you in some other way. I can dance, or I can sing you a song."

"Well," she answered, shaking with laughter, "you may sing a song--if
it be a merry one. But you do not seem in a merry mood."

"I feel merry--indeed, Your Majesty, I do!" protested Rinkitink,
anxious to escape the tickling. But even as he professed to "feel
merry" his round, red face wore an expression of horror and anxiety
that was really comical.

"Sing, then!" commanded Queen Cor, who was greatly amused.

Rinkitink gave a sigh of relief and after clearing his throat and
trying to repress his sobs he began to sing this song-gently, at first,
but finally roaring it out at the top of his voice:

  "Oh!
  There was a Baby Tiger lived in a men-ag-er-ie--
  Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--they wouldn't set him free;
  And ev'rybody thought that he was gentle as could be--
  Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--Ba-by Ti-ger!

  "Oh!
  They patted him upon his head and shook him by the paw--
  Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--he had a bone to gnaw;
  But soon he grew the biggest Tiger that you ever saw--
  Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--what a Ti-ger!

  "Oh!
  One day they came to pet the brute and he began to fight--
  Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy-how he did scratch and bite!
  He broke the cage and in a rage he darted out of sight--
  Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy was a Ti-ger!"


"And is there a moral to the song?" asked Queen Cor, when King
Rinkitink had finished his song with great spirit.

"If there is," replied Rinkitink, "it is a warning not to fool with
tigers."

The little Prince could not help smiling at this shrewd answer, but
Queen Cor frowned and gave the King a sharp look.

"Oh," said she; "I think I know the difference between a tiger and a
lapdog. But I'll bear the warning in mind, just the same."

For, after all her success in capturing them, she was a little afraid
of these people who had once displayed such extraordinary powers.




Chapter Eleven

Zella Goes to Coregos


The forest in which Nikobob lived with his wife and daughter stood
between the mountains and the City of Regos, and a well-beaten path
wound among the trees, leading from the city to the mines. This path
was used by the King's messengers, and captured prisoners were also
sent by this way from Regos to work in the underground caverns.

Nikobob had built his cabin more than a mile away from this path, that
he might not be molested by the wild and lawless soldiers of King Gos,
but the family of the charcoal-burner was surrounded by many creatures
scarcely less dangerous to encounter, and often in the night they could
hear savage animals growling and prowling about the cabin. Because
Nikobob minded his own business and never hunted the wild creatures to
injure them, the beasts had come to regard him as one of the natural
dwellers in the forest and did not molest him or his family. Still
Zella and her mother seldom wandered far from home, except on such
errands as carrying honey to Coregos, and at these times Nikobob
cautioned them to be very careful.

So when Zella set out on her journey to Queen Cor, with the two pails
of honey in her hands, she was undertaking a dangerous adventure and
there was no certainty that she would return safely to her loving
parents. But they were poor, and Queen Cor's money, which they expected
to receive for the honey, would enable them to purchase many things
that were needed; so it was deemed best that Zella should go. She was a
brave little girl and poor people are often obliged to take chances
that rich ones are spared.

A passing woodchopper had brought news to Nikobob's cabin that Queen
Cor had made a prisoner of the conquering Prince of Pingaree and that
Gos and his warriors were again back in their city of Regos; but these
struggles and conquests were matters which, however interesting, did
not concern the poor charcoal-burner or his family. They were more
anxious over the report that the warriors had become more reckless than
ever before, and delighted in annoying all the common people; so Zella
was told to keep away from the beaten path as much as possible, that
she might not encounter any of the King's soldiers.

"When it is necessary to choose between the warriors and the wild
beasts," said Nikobob, "the beasts will be found the more merciful."

The little girl had put on her best attire for the journey and her
mother threw a blue silk shawl over her head and shoulders. Upon her
feet were the pretty red shoes her father had brought her from Regos.
Thus prepared, she kissed her parents good-bye and started out with a
light heart, carrying the pails of honey in either hand.

It was necessary for Zella to cross the path that led from the mines to
the city, but once on the other side she was not likely to meet with
anyone, for she had resolved to cut through the forest and so reach the
bridge of boats without entering the City of Regos, where she might be
interrupted. For an hour or two she found the walking easy enough, but
then the forest, which in this part was unknown to her, became badly
tangled. The trees were thicker and creeping vines intertwined between
them. She had to turn this way and that to get through at all, and
finally she came to a place where a network of vines and branches
effectually barred her farther progress.

Zella was dismayed, at first, when she encountered this obstacle, but
setting down her pails she made an endeavor to push the branches aside.
At her touch they parted as if by magic, breaking asunder like dried
twigs, and she found she could pass freely. At another place a great
log had fallen across her way, but the little girl lifted it easily and
cast it aside, although six ordinary men could scarcely have moved it.

The child was somewhat worried at this evidence of a strength she had
heretofore been ignorant that she possessed. In order to satisfy
herself that it was no delusion, she tested her new-found power in many
ways, finding that nothing was too big nor too heavy for her to lift.
And, naturally enough, the girl gained courage from these experiments
and became confident that she could protect herself in any emergency.
When, presently, a wild boar ran toward her, grunting horribly and
threatening her with its great tusks, she did not climb a tree to
escape, as she had always done before on meeting such creatures, but
stood still and faced the boar. When it had come quite close and Zella
saw that it could not injure her--a fact that astonished both the beast
and the girl--she suddenly reached down and seizing it by one ear threw
the great beast far off amongst the trees, where it fell headlong to
the earth, grunting louder than ever with surprise and fear.

The girl laughed merrily at this incident and, picking up her pails,
resumed her journey through the forest. It is not recorded whether the
wild boar told his adventure to the other beasts or they had happened
to witness his defeat, but certain it is that Zella was not again
molested. A brown bear watched her pass without making any movement in
her direction and a great puma--a beast much dreaded by all men--crept
out of her path as she approached, and disappeared among the trees.

Thus everything favored the girl's journey and she made such good speed
that by noon she emerged from the forest's edge and found she was quite
near to the bridge of boats that led to Coregos. This she crossed
safely and without meeting any of the rude warriors she so greatly
feared, and five minutes later the daughter of the charcoal-burner was
seeking admittance at the back door of Queen Cor's palace.




Chapter Twelve

The Excitement of Bilbil the Goat


Our story must now return to one of our characters whom  we have been
forced to neglect. The temper of Bilbil the goat was not sweet under
any circumstances, and whenever he had a grievance he was inclined to
be quite grumpy. So, when his master settled down in the palace of King
Gos for a quiet life with the boy Prince, and passed his time in
playing checkers and eating and otherwise enjoying himself, he had no
use whatever for Bilbil, and shut the goat in an upstairs room to
prevent his wandering through the city and quarreling with the
citizens. But this Bilbil did not like at all. He became very cross and
disagreeable at being left alone and he did not speak nicely to the
servants who came to bring him food; therefore those people decided not
to wait upon him any more, resenting his conversation and not liking to
be scolded by a lean, scraggly goat, even though it belonged to a
conqueror. The servants kept away from the room and Bilbil grew more
hungry and more angry every hour. He tried to eat the rugs and
ornaments, but found them not at all nourishing. There was no grass to
be had unless he escaped from the palace.

When Queen Cor came to capture Inga and Rinkitink, both the prisoners
were so filled with despair at their own misfortune that they gave no
thought whatever to the goat, who was left in his room. Nor did Bilbil
know anything of the changed fortunes of his comrades until he heard
shouts and boisterous laughter in the courtyard below. Looking out of a
window, with the intention of rebuking those who dared thus to disturb
him, Bilbil saw the courtyard quite filled with warriors and knew from
this that the palace had in some way again fallen into the hands of the
enemy.

Now, although Bilbil was often exceedingly disagreeable to King
Rinkitink, as well as to the Prince, and sometimes used harsh words in
addressing them, he was intelligent enough to know them to be his
friends, and to know that King Gos and his people were his foes. In
sudden anger, provoked by the sight of the warriors and the knowledge
that he was in the power of the dangerous men of Regos, Bilbil butted
his head against the door of his room and burst it open. Then he ran to
the head of the staircase and saw King Gos coming up the stairs
followed by a long line of his chief captains and warriors.

The goat lowered his head, trembling with rage and excitement, and just
as the King reached the top stair the animal dashed forward and butted
His Majesty so fiercely that the big and powerful King, who did not
expect an attack, doubled up and tumbled backward. His great weight
knocked over the man just behind him and he in turn struck the next
warrior and upset him, so that in an instant the whole line of Bilbil's
foes was tumbling heels over head to the bottom of the stairs, where
they piled up in a heap, struggling and shouting and in the mixup
hitting one another with their fists, until every man of them was
bruised and sore.

Finally King Gos scrambled out of the heap and rushed up the stairs
again, very angry indeed. Bilbil was ready for him and a second time
butted the King down the stairs; but now the goat also lost his balance
and followed the King, landing full upon the confused heap of soldiers.
Then he kicked out so viciously with his heels that he soon freed
himself and dashed out of the doorway of the palace.

"Stop him!" cried King Gos, running after.

But the goat was now so wild and excited that it was not safe for
anyone to stand in his way. None of the men were armed and when one or
two tried to head off the goat, Bilbil sent them sprawling upon the
ground. Most of the warriors, however, were wise enough not to attempt
to interfere with his flight.

Coursing down the street, Bilbil found himself approaching the bridge
of boats and without pausing to think where it might lead him he
crossed over and proceeded on his way. A few moments later a great
stone building blocked his path. It was the palace of Queen Cor, and
seeing the gates of the courtyard standing wide open, Bilbil rushed
through them without slackening his speed.




Chapter Thirteen

Zella Saves the Prince


The wicked Queen of Coregos was in a very bad humor this morning, for
one of her slave drivers had come from the fields to say that a number
of slaves had rebelled and would not work.

"Bring them here to me!" she cried savagely. "A good whipping may make
them change their minds."

So the slave driver went to fetch the rebellious ones and Queen Cor sat
down to eat her breakfast, an ugly look on her face.

Prince Inga had been ordered to stand behind his new mistress with a
big fan of peacock's feathers, but he was so unused to such service
that he awkwardly brushed her ear with the fan. At once she flew into a
terrible rage and slapped the Prince twice with her hand-blows that
tingled, too, for her hand was big and hard and she was not inclined to
be gentle. Inga took the blows without shrinking or uttering a cry,
although they stung his pride far more than his body. But King
Rinkitink, who was acting as the queen's butler and had just brought in
her coffee, was so startled at seeing the young Prince punished that he
tipped over the urn and the hot coffee streamed across the lap of the
Queen's best morning gown.

Cor sprang from her seat with a scream of anger and poor Rinkitink
would doubtless have been given a terrible beating had not the slave
driver returned at this moment and attracted the woman's attention. The
overseer had brought with him all of the women slaves from Pingaree,
who had been loaded down with chains and were so weak and ill they
could scarcely walk, much less work in the fields.

Prince Inga's eyes were dimmed with sorrowful tears when he discovered
how his poor people had been abused, but his own plight was so helpless
that he was unable to aid them. Fortunately the boy's mother, Queen
Garee, was not among these slaves, for Queen Cor had placed her in the
royal dairy to make butter.

"Why do you refuse to work?" demanded Cor in a harsh voice, as the
slaves from Pingaree stood before her, trembling and with downcast eyes.

"Because we lack strength to perform the tasks your overseers demand,"
answered one of the women.

"Then you shall be whipped until your strength returns!" exclaimed the
Queen, and turning to Inga, she commanded: "Get me the whip with the
seven lashes."

As the boy left the room, wondering how he might manage to save the
unhappy women from their undeserved punishment, he met a girl entering
by the back way, who asked:

"Can you tell me where to find Her Majesty, Queen Cor?"

"She is in the chamber with the red dome, where green dragons are
painted upon the walls," replied Inga; "but she is in an angry and
ungracious mood to-day. Why do you wish to see her?"

"I have honey to sell," answered the girl, who was Zella, just come
from the forest. "The Queen is very fond of my honey."

"You may go to her, if you so desire," said the boy, "but take care not
to anger the cruel Queen, or she may do you a mischief."

"Why should she harm me, who brings her the honey she so dearly loves?"
inquired the child innocently. "But I thank you for your warning; and I
will try not to anger the Queen."

As Zella started to go, Inga's eyes suddenly fell upon her shoes and
instantly he recognized them as his own. For only in Pingaree were
shoes shaped in this manner: high at the heel and pointed at the toes.

"Stop!" he cried in an excited voice, and the girl obeyed, wonderingly.
"Tell me," he continued, more gently, "where did you get those shoes?"

"My father brought them to me from Regos," she answered.

"From Regos!"

"Yes. Are they not pretty?" asked Zella, looking down at her feet to
admire them. "One of them my father found by the palace wall, and the
other on an ash-heap. So he brought them to me and they fit me
perfectly."

By this time Inga was trembling with eager joy, which of course the
girl could not understand.

"What is your name, little maid?" he asked.

"I am called Zella, and my father is Nikobob, the charcoal-burner."

"Zella is a pretty name. I am Inga, Prince of Pingaree," said he, "and
the shoes you are now wearing, Zella, belong to me. They were not cast
away, as your father supposed, but were lost. Will you let me have them
again?"

Zella's eyes filled with tears.

"Must I give up my pretty shoes, then?" she asked. "They are the only
ones I have ever owned."

Inga was sorry for the poor child, but he knew how important it was
that he regain possession of the Magic Pearls. So he said, pleadingly:

"Please let me have them, Zella. See! I will exchange for them the
shoes I now have on, which are newer and prettier than the others."

The girl hesitated. She wanted to please the boy Prince, yet she hated
to exchange the shoes which her father had brought her as a present.

"If you will give me the shoes," continued the boy, anxiously, "I will
promise to make you and your father and mother rich and prosperous.
Indeed, I will promise to grant any favors you may ask of me," and he
sat down upon the floor and drew off the shoes he was wearing and held
them toward the girl.

"I'll see if they will fit me," said Zella, taking off her left
shoe--the one that contained the Pink Pearl--and beginning to put on
one of Inga's.

Just then Queen Cor, angry at being made to wait for her whip with the
seven lashes, rushed into the room to find Inga. Seeing the boy sitting
upon the floor beside Zella, the woman sprang toward him to beat him
with her clenched fists; but Inga had now slipped on the shoe and the
Queen's blows could not reach his body.

Then Cor espied the whip lying beside Inga and snatching it up she
tried to lash him with it--all to no avail.

While Zella sat horrified by this scene, the Prince, who realized he
had no time to waste, reached out and pulled the right shoe from the
girl's foot, quickly placing it upon his own. Then he stood up and,
facing the furious but astonished Queen, said to her in a quiet voice:

"Madam, please give me that whip."

"I won't!" answered Cor. "I'm going to lash those Pingaree women with
it."

The boy seized hold of the whip and with irresistible strength drew it
from the Queen's hand. But she drew from her bosom a sharp dagger and
with the swiftness of lightning aimed a blow at Inga's heart. He merely
stood still and smiled, for the blade rebounded and fell clattering to
the floor.

Then, at last, Queen Cor understood the magic power that had terrified
her husband but which she had ridiculed in her ignorance, not believing
in it. She did not know that Inga's power had been lost, and found
again, but she realized the boy was no common foe and that unless she
could still manage to outwit him her reign in the Island of Coregos was
ended. To gain time, she went back to the red-domed chamber and seated
herself in her throne, before which were grouped the weeping slaves
from Pingaree.

Inga had taken Zella's hand and assisted her to put on the shoes he had
given her in exchange for his own. She found them quite comfortable and
did not know she had lost anything by the transfer.

"Come with me," then said the boy Prince, and led her into the presence
of Queen Cor, who was giving Rinkitink a scolding. To the overseer Inga
said.

"Give me the keys which unlock these chains, that I may set these poor
women at liberty."

"Don't you do it!" screamed Queen Cor.

"If you interfere, madam," said the boy, "I will put you into a
dungeon."

By this Rinkitink knew that Inga had recovered his Magic Pearls and the
little fat King was so overjoyed that he danced and capered all around
the room. But the Queen was alarmed at the threat and the slave driver,
fearing the conqueror of Regos, tremblingly gave up the keys.

Inga quickly removed all the shackles from the women of his country and
comforted them, telling them they should work no more but would soon be
restored to their homes in Pingaree. Then he commanded the slave driver
to go and get all the children who had been made slaves, and to bring
them to their mothers. The man obeyed and left at once to perform his
errand, while Queen Cor, growing more and more uneasy, suddenly sprang
from her throne and before Inga could stop her had rushed through the
room and out into the courtyard of the palace, meaning to make her
escape. Rinkitink followed her, running as fast as he could go.

It was at this moment that Bilbil, in his mad dash from Regos, turned
in at the gates of the courtyard, and as he was coming one way and
Queen Cor was going the other they bumped into each other with great
force. The woman sailed through the air, over Bilbil's head, and landed
on the ground outside the gates, where her crown rolled into a ditch
and she picked herself up, half dazed, and continued her flight. Bilbil
was also somewhat dazed by the unexpected encounter, but he continued
his rush rather blindly and so struck poor Rinkitink, who was chasing
after Queen Cor. They rolled over one another a few times and then
Rinkitink sat up and Bilbil sat up and they looked at each other in
amazement.

"Bilbil," said the King, "I'm astonished at you!"

"Your Majesty," said Bilbil, "I expected kinder treatment at your
hands."

"You interrupted me," said Rinkitink.

"There was plenty of room without your taking my path," declared the
goat.

And then Inga came running out and said. "Where is the Queen?"

"Gone," replied Rinkitink, "but she cannot go far, as this is an
island. However, I have found Bilbil, and our party is again reunited.
You have recovered your magic powers, and again we are masters of the
situation. So let us be thankful."

Saying this, the good little King got upon his feet and limped back
into the throne room to help comfort the women.

Presently the children of Pingaree, who had been gathered together by
the overseer, were brought in and restored to their mothers, and there
was great rejoicing among them, you may be sure.

"But where is Queen Garee, my dear mother?" questioned Inga; but the
women did not know and it was some time before the overseer remembered
that one of the slaves from Pingaree had been placed in the royal
dairy. Perhaps this was the woman the boy was seeking.

Inga at once commanded him to lead the way to the butter house, but
when they arrived there Queen Garee was nowhere in the place, although
the boy found a silk scarf which he recognized as one that his mother
used to wear. Then they began a search throughout the island of
Coregos, but could not find Inga's mother anywhere.

When they returned to the palace of Queen Cor, Rinkitink discovered
that the bridge of boats had again been removed, separating them from
Regos, and from this they suspected that Queen Cor had fled to her
husband's island and had taken Queen Garee with her. Inga was much
perplexed what to do and returned with his friends to the palace to
talk the matter over.

Zella was now crying because she had not sold her honey and was unable
to return to her parents on the island of Regos, but the boy prince
comforted her and promised she should be protected until she could be
restored to her home. Rinkitink found Queen Cor's purse, which she had
had no time to take with her, and gave Zella several gold pieces for
the honey. Then Inga ordered the palace servants to prepare a feast for
all the women and children of Pingaree and to prepare for them beds in
the great palace, which was large enough to accommodate them all.

Then the boy and the goat and Rinkitink and Zella went into a private
room to consider what should be done next.




Chapter Fourteen

The Escape


"Our fault," said Rinkitink, "is that we conquer only one of these twin
islands at a time. When  we conquered Regos, our foes all came to
Coregos, and now that we have conquered Coregos, the Queen has fled to
Regos. And each time they removed the bridge of boats, so that we could
not follow them."

"What has become of our own boat, in which we came from Pingaree?"
asked Bilbil.

"We left it on the shore of Regos," replied the Prince, "but I wonder
if we could not get it again."

"Why don't you ask the White Pearl?" suggested Rinkitink.

"That is a good idea," returned the boy, and at once he drew the White
Pearl from its silken bag and held it to his ear. Then he asked: "How
may I regain our boat?"

The Voice of the Pearl replied: "Go to the south end of the Island of
Coregos, and clap your hands three times and the boat will come to you.

"Very good!" cried Inga, and then he turned to his companions and said:
"We shall be able to get our boat whenever we please; but what then
shall we do?"

"Take me home in it!" pleaded Zella.

"Come with me to my City of Gilgad," said the King, "where you will be
very welcome to remain forever."

"No," answered Inga, "I must rescue my father and mother, as well as my
people. Already I have the women and children of Pingaree, but the men
are with my father in the mines of Regos, and my dear mother has been
taken away by Queen Cor. Not until all are rescued will I consent to
leave these islands."

"Quite right!" exclaimed Bilbil.

"On second thought," said Rinkitink, "I agree with you. If you are
careful to sleep in your shoes, and never take them off again, I
believe you will be able to perform the task you have undertaken."

They counseled together for a long time as to their mode of action and
it was finally considered best to make the attempt to liberate King
Kitticut first of all, and with him the men from Pingaree. This would
give them an army to assist them and afterward they could march to
Regos and compel Queen Cor to give up the Queen of Pingaree. Zella told
them that they could go in their boat along the shore of Regos to a
point opposite the mines, thus avoiding any conflict with the warriors
of King Gos.

This being considered the best course to pursue, they resolved to start
on the following morning, as night was even now approaching. The
servants being all busy in caring for the women and children, Zella
undertook to get a dinner for Inga and Rinkitink and herself and soon
prepared a fine meal in the palace kitchen, for she was a good little
cook and had often helped her mother. The dinner was served in a small
room overlooking the gardens and Rinkitink thought the best part of it
was the sweet honey, which he spread upon the biscuits that Zella had
made. As for Bilbil, he wandered through the palace grounds and found
some grass that made him a good dinner.

During the evening Inga talked with the women and cheered them,
promising soon to reunite them with their husbands who were working in
the mines and to send them back to their own island of Pingaree.

Next morning the boy rose bright and early and found that Zella had
already prepared a nice breakfast. And after the meal they went to the
most southern point of the island, which was not very far away,
Rinkitink riding upon Bilbil's back and Inga and Zella following behind
them, hand in hand.

When they reached the water's edge the boy advanced and clapped his
hands together three times, as the White Pearl had told him to do. And
in a few moments they saw in the distance the black boat with the
silver lining, coming swiftly toward them from the sea. Presently it
grounded on the beach and they all got into it.

Zella was delighted with the boat, which was the most beautiful she had
ever seen, and the marvel of its coming to them through the water
without anyone to row it, made her a little afraid of the fairy craft.
But Inga picked up the oars and began to row and at once the boat shot
swiftly in the direction of Regos. They rounded the point of that
island where the city was built and noticed that the shore was lined
with warriors who had discovered their boat but seemed undecided
whether to pursue it or not. This was probably because they had
received no commands what to do, or perhaps they had learned to fear
the magic powers of these adventurers from Pingaree and were unwilling
to attack them unless their King ordered them to.

The coast on the western side of the Island of Regos was very uneven
and Zella, who knew fairly well the location of the mines from the
inland forest path, was puzzled to decide which mountain they now
viewed from the sea was the one where the entrance to the underground
caverns was located. First she thought it was this peak, and then she
guessed it was that; so considerable time was lost through her
uncertainty.

They finally decided to land and explore the country, to see where they
were, so Inga ran the boat into a little rocky cove where they all
disembarked. For an hour they searched for the path without finding any
trace of it and now Zella believed they had gone too far to the north
and must return to another mountain that was nearer to the city.

Once again they entered the boat and followed the winding coast south
until they thought they had reached the right place. By this time,
however, it was growing dark, for the entire day had been spent in the
search for the entrance to the mines, and Zella warned them that it
would be safer to spend the night in the boat than on the land, where
wild beasts were sure to disturb them. None of them realized at this
time how fatal this day of search had been to their plans and perhaps
if Inga had realized what was going on he would have landed and fought
all the wild beasts in the forest rather than quietly remain in the
boat until morning.

However, knowing nothing of the cunning plans of Queen Cor and King
Gos, they anchored their boat in a little bay and cheerfully ate their
dinner, finding plenty of food and drink in the boat's lockers. In the
evening the stars came out in the sky and tipped the waves around their
boat with silver. All around them was delightfully still save for the
occasional snarl of a beast on the neighboring shore.

They talked together quietly of their adventures and their future plans
and Zella told them her simple history and how hard her poor father was
obliged to work, burning charcoal to sell for enough money to support
his wife and child. Nikobob might be the humblest man in all Regos, but
Zella declared he was a good man, and honest, and it was not his fault
that his country was ruled by so wicked a King.

Then Rinkitink, to amuse them, offered to sing a song, and although
Bilbil protested in his gruff way, claiming that his master's voice was
cracked and disagreeable, the little King was encouraged by the others
to sing his song, which he did.

  "A red-headed man named Ned was dead;
  Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
  In battle he had lost his head;
  Sing fiddle-cum-faddl-cum-fi-do!
  'Alas, poor Ned,' to him I said,
  'How did you lose your head so red?'
  Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!

  "Said Ned: 'I for my country bled,'
  Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
  'Instead of dying safe in bed',
  Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
  'If I had only fled, instead,
  I then had been a head ahead.'
  Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!

  "I said to Ned--"


"Do stop, Your Majesty!" pleaded Bilbil. "You're making my head ache."

"But the song isn't finished," replied Rinkitink, "and as for your head
aching, think of poor Ned, who hadn't any head at all!"

"I can think of nothing but your dismal singing," retorted Bilbil. "Why
didn't you choose a cheerful subject, instead of telling how a man who
was dead lost his red head? Really, Rinkitink, I'm surprised at you.

"I know a splendid song about a live man, said the King.

"Then don't sing it," begged Bilbil.

Zella was both astonished and grieved by the disrespectful words of the
goat, for she had quite enjoyed Rinkitink's singing and had been taught
a proper respect for Kings and those high in authority. But as it was
now getting late they decided to go to sleep, that they might rise
early the following morning, so they all reclined upon the bottom of
the big boat and covered themselves with blankets which they found
stored underneath the seats for just such occasions. They were not long
in falling asleep and did not waken until daybreak.

After a hurried breakfast, for Inga was eager to liberate his father,
the boy rowed the boat ashore and they all landed and began searching
for the path. Zella found it within the next half hour and declared
they must be very close to the entrance to the mines; so they followed
the path toward the north, Inga going first, and then Zella following
him, while Rinkitink brought up the rear riding upon Bilbil's back.

Before long they saw a great wall of rock towering before them, in
which was a low arched entrance, and on either side of this entrance
stood a guard, armed with a sword and a spear. The guards of the mines
were not so fierce as the warriors of King Gos, their duty being to
make the slaves work at their tasks and guard them from escaping; but
they were as cruel as their cruel master wished them to be, and as
cowardly as they were cruel.

Inga walked up to the two men at the entrance and said:

"Does this opening lead to the mines of King Gos?"

"It does," replied one of the guards, "but no one is allowed to pass
out who once goes in."

"Nevertheless," said the boy, "we intend to go in and we shall come out
whenever it pleases us to do so. I am the Prince of Pingaree, and I
have come to liberate my people, whom King Gos has enslaved."

Now when the two guards heard this speech they looked at one another
and laughed, and one of them said: "The King was right, for he said the
boy was likely to come here and that he would try to set his people
free. Also the King commanded that we must keep the little Prince in
the mines, and set him to work, together with his companions."

"Then let us obey the King," replied the other man.

Inga was surprised at hearing this, and asked:

"When did King Gos give you this order?"

"His Majesty was here in person last night," replied the man, "and went
away again but an hour ago. He suspected you were coming here and told
us to capture you if we could."

This report made the boy very anxious, not for himself but for his
father, for he feared the King was up to some mischief. So he hastened
to enter the mines and the guards did nothing to oppose him or his
companions, their orders being to allow him to go in but not to come
out.

The little group of adventurers passed through a long rocky corridor
and reached a low, wide cavern where they found a dozen guards and a
hundred slaves, the latter being hard at work with picks and shovels
digging for gold, while the guards stood over them with long whips.

Inga found many of the men from Pingaree among these slaves, but King
Kitticut was not in this cavern; so they passed through it and entered
another corridor that led to a second cavern. Here also hundreds of men
were working, but the boy did not find his father amongst them, and so
went on to a third cavern.

The corridors all slanted downward, so that the farther they went the
lower into the earth they descended, and now they found the air hot and
close and difficult to breathe. Flaming torches were stuck into the
walls to give light to the workers, and these added to the oppressive
heat.

The third and lowest cavern was the last in the mines, and here were
many scores of slaves and many guards to keep them at work. So far,
none of the guards had paid any attention to Inga's party, but allowed
them to proceed as they would, and while the slaves cast curious
glances at the boy and girl and man and goat, they dared say nothing.
But now the boy walked up to some of the men of Pingaree and asked news
of his father, telling them not to fear the guards as he would protect
them from the whips.

Then he Teamed that King Kitticut had indeed been working in this very
cavern until the evening before, when King Gos had come and taken him
away--still loaded with chains.

"Seems to me," said King Rinkitink, when he heard this report, "that
Gos has carried your father away to Regos, to prevent us from rescuing
him. He may hide poor Kitticut in a dungeon, where we cannot find him."

"Perhaps you are right," answered the boy, "but I am determined to find
him, wherever he may be."

Inga spoke firmly and with courage, but he was greatly disappointed to
find that King Gos had been before him at the mines and had taken his
father away. However, he tried not to feel disheartened, believing he
would succeed in the end, in spite of all opposition. Turning to the
guards, he said:

"Remove the chains from these slaves and set them free."

The guards laughed at this order, and one of them brought forward a
handful of chains, saying: "His Majesty has commanded us to make you,
also, a slave, for you are never to leave these caverns again."

Then he attempted to place the chains on Inga, but the boy indignantly
seized them and broke them apart as easily as if they had been cotton
cords. When a dozen or more of the guards made a dash to capture him,
the Prince swung the end of the chain like a whip and drove them into a
corner, where they cowered and begged for mercy.

Stories of the marvelous strength of the boy Prince had already spread
to the mines of Regos, and although King Gos had told them that Inga
had been deprived of all his magic power, the guards now saw this was
not true, so they deemed it wise not to attempt to oppose him.

The chains of the slaves had all been riveted fast to their ankles and
wrists, but Inga broke the bonds of steel with his hands and set the
poor men free--not only those from Pingaree but all who had been
captured in the many wars and raids of King Gos. They were very
grateful, as you may suppose, and agreed to support Prince Inga in
whatever action he commanded.

He led them to the middle cavern, where all the guards and overseers
fled in terror at his approach, and soon he had broken apart the chains
of the slaves who had been working in that part of the mines. Then they
approached the first cavern and liberated all there.

The slaves had been treated so cruelly by the servants of King Gos that
they were eager to pursue and slay them, in revenge; but Inga held them
back and formed them into companies, each company having its own
leader. Then he called the leaders together and instructed them to
march in good order along the path to the City of Regos, where he would
meet them and tell them what to do next.

They readily agreed to obey him, and, arming themselves with iron bars
and pick-axes which they brought from the mines, the slaves began their
march to the city.

Zella at first wished to be left behind, that she might make her way to
her home, but neither Rinkitink nor Inga thought it was safe for her to
wander alone through the forest, so they induced her to return with
them to the city.

The boy beached his boat this time at the same place as when he first
landed at Regos, and while many of the warriors stood on the shore and
before the walls of the city, not one of them attempted to interfere
with the boy in any way. Indeed, they seemed uneasy and anxious, and
when Inga met Captain Buzzub the boy asked if anything had happened in
his absence.

"A great deal has happened," replied Buzzub. "Our King and Queen have
run away and left us, and we don't know what to do."

"Run away!" exclaimed Inga. "Where did they go to?"

"Who knows?" said the man, shaking his head despondently. "They
departed together a few hours ago, in a boat with forty rowers, and
they took with them the King and Queen of Pingaree!"




Chapter Fifteen

The Flight of the Rulers


Now it seems that when Queen Cor fled from her island to Regos, she had
wit enough, although greatly frightened, to make a stop at the royal
dairy, which was near to the bridge, and to drag poor Queen Garee from
the butter-house and across to Regos with her. The warriors of King Gos
had never before seen the terrible Queen Cor frightened, and therefore
when she came running across the bridge of boats, dragging the Queen of
Pingaree after her by one arm, the woman's great fright had the effect
of terrifying the waiting warriors.

"Quick!" cried Cor. "Destroy the bridge, or we are lost."

While the men were tearing away the bridge of boats the Queen ran up to
the palace of Gos, where she met her husband.

"That boy is a wizard!" she gasped. "There is no standing against him."

"Oh, have you discovered his magic at last?" replied Gos, laughing in
her face. "Who, now, is the coward?"

"Don't laugh!" cried Queen Cor. "It is no laughing matter. Both our
islands are as good as conquered, this very minute. What shall we do,
Gos?"

"Come in," he said, growing serious, "and let us talk it over."

So they went into a room of the palace and talked long and earnestly.

"The boy intends to liberate his father and mother, and all the people
of Pingaree, and to take them back to their island," said Cor. "He may
also destroy our palaces and make us his slaves. I can see but one way,
Gos, to prevent him from doing all this, and whatever else he pleases
to do."

"What way is that?" asked King Gos.

"We must take the boy's parents away from here as quickly as possible.
I have with me the Queen of Pingaree, and you can run up to the mines
and get the King. Then we will carry them away in a boat and hide them
where the boy cannot find them, with all his magic. We will use the
King and Queen of Pingaree as hostages, and send word to the boy wizard
that if he does not go away from our islands and allow us to rule them
undisturbed, in our own way, we will put his father and mother to
death. Also we will say that as long as we are let alone his parents
will be safe, although still safely hidden. I believe, Gos, that in
this way we can compel Prince Ingato obey us, for he seems very fond of
his parents."

"It isn't a bad idea," said Gos, reflectively; "but where can we hide
the King and Queen, so that the boy cannot find them?"

"In the country of the Nome King, on the mainland away at the south,"
she replied. "The nomes are our friends, and they possess magic powers
that will enable them to protect the prisoners from discovery. If we
can manage to get the King and Queen of Pingaree to the Nome Kingdom
before the boy knows what we are doing, I am sure our plot will
succeed."

Gos gave the plan considerable thought in the next five minutes, and
the more he thought about it the more clever and reasonable it seemed.
So he agreed to do as Queen Cor suggested and at once hurried away to
the mines, where he arrived before Prince Inga did. The next morning he
carried King Kitticut back to Regos.

While Gos was gone, Queen Cor busied herself in preparing a large and
swift boat for the journey. She placed in it several bags of gold and
jewels with which to bribe the nomes, and selected forty of the
strongest oarsmen in Regos to row the boat. The instant King Gos
returned with his royal prisoner all was ready for departure. They
quickly entered the boat with their two important captives and without
a word of explanation to any of their people they commanded the oarsmen
to start, and were soon out of sight upon the broad expanse of the
Nonestic Ocean.

Inga arrived at the city some hours later and was much distressed when
he learned that his father and mother had been spirited away from the
islands.

"I shall follow them, of course," said the boy to Rinkitink, "and if I
cannot overtake them on the ocean I will search the world over until I
find them. But before I leave here I must arrange to send our people
back to Pingaree."




Chapter Sixteen

Nikobob Refuses a Crown


Almost the first persons that Zella saw when she landed from the
silver-lined boat at Regos were her father and mother. Nikobob and his
wife had been greatly worried when their little daughter failed to
return from Coregos, so they had set out to discover what had become of
her. When they reached the City of Regos, that very morning, they were
astonished to hear news of all the strange events that had taken place;
still, they found comfort when told that Zella had been seen in the
boat of Prince Inga, which had gone to the north. Then, while they
wondered what this could mean, the silver-lined boat appeared again,
with their daughter in it, and they ran down to the shore to give her a
welcome and many joyful kisses.

Inga invited the good people to the palace of King Gos, where he
conferred with them, as well as with Rinkitink and Bilbil.

"Now that the King and Queen of Regos and Coregos have run away," he
said, "there is no one to rule these islands. So it is my duty to
appoint a new ruler, and as Nikobob, Zella's father, is an honest and
worthy man, I shall make him the King of the Twin Islands."

"Me?" cried Nikobob, astounded by this speech. "I beg Your Highness, on
my bended knees, not to do so cruel a thing as to make me King!"

"Why not?" inquired Rinkitink. "I'm a King, and I know how it feels. I
assure you, good Nikobob, that I quite enjoy my high rank, although a
jeweled crown is rather heavy to wear in hot weather."

"With you, noble sir, it is different," said Nikobob, "for you are far
from your kingdom and its trials and worries and may do as you please.
But to remain in Regos, as King over these fierce and unruly warriors,
would be to live in constant anxiety and peril, and the chances are
that they would murder me within a month. As I have done no harm to
anyone and have tried to be a good and upright man, I do not think that
I should be condemned to such a dreadful fate."

"Very well," replied Inga, "we will say no more about your being King.
I merely wanted to make you rich and prosperous, as I had promised
Zella."

"Please forget that promise," pleaded the charcoal-burner, earnestly;
"I have been safe from molestation for many years, because I was poor
and possessed nothing that anyone else could envy. But if you make me
rich and prosperous I shall at once become the prey of thieves and
marauders and probably will lose my life in the attempt to protect my
fortune."

Inga looked at the man in surprise.

"What, then, can I do to please you?" he inquired.

"Nothing more than to allow me to go home to my poor cabin," said
Nikobob.

"Perhaps," remarked King Rinkitink, "the charcoal-burner has more
wisdom concealed in that hard head of his than we gave him credit for.
But let us use that wisdom, for the present, to counsel us what to do
in this emergency."

"What you call my wisdom," said Nikobob, "is merely common sense. I
have noticed that some men become rich, and are scorned by some and
robbed by others. Other men become famous, and are mocked at and
derided by their fellows. But the poor and humble man who lives
unnoticed and unknown escapes all these troubles and is the only one
who can appreciate the joy of living."

"If I had a hand, instead of a cloven hoof, I'd like to shake hands
with you, Nikobob," said Bilbil the goat. "But the poor man must not
have a cruel master, or he is undone."

During the council they found, indeed, that the advice of the
charcoal-burner was both shrewd and sensible, and they profited much by
his words.

Inga gave Captain Buzzub the command of the warriors and made him
promise to keep his men quiet and orderly--if he could. Then the boy
allowed all of King Gos's former slaves, except those who came from
Pingaree, to choose what boats they required and to stock them with
provisions and row away to their own countries. When these had
departed, with grateful thanks and many blessings showered upon the boy
Prince who had set them free, Inga made preparations to send his own
people home, where they were told to rebuild their houses and then
erect a new royal palace. They were then to await patiently the coming
of King Kitticut or Prince Inga.

"My greatest worry," said the boy to his friends, "is to know whom to
appoint to take charge of this work of restoring Pingaree to its former
condition. My men are all pearl fishers, and although willing and
honest, have no talent for directing others how to work."

While the preparations for departure were being made, Nikobob offered
to direct the men of Pingaree, and did so in a very capable manner. As
the island had been despoiled of all its valuable furniture and
draperies and rich cloths and paintings and statuary and the like, as
well as gold and silver and ornaments, Inga thought it no more than
just that they be replaced by the spoilers. So he directed his people
to search through the storehouses of King Gos and to regain all their
goods and chattels that could be found. Also he instructed them to take
as much else as they required to make their new homes comfortable, so
that many boats were loaded full of goods that would enable the people
to restore Pingaree to its former state of comfort.

For his father's new palace the boy plundered the palaces of both Queen
Cor and King Gos, sending enough wares away with his people to make
King Kitticut's new residence as handsomely fitted and furnished as had
been the one which the ruthless invaders from Regos had destroyed.

It was a great fleet of boats that set out one bright, sunny morning on
the voyage to Pingaree, carrying all the men, women and children and
all the goods for refitting their homes. As he saw the fleet depart,
Prince Inga felt that he had already successfully accomplished a part
of his mission, but he vowed he would never return to Pingaree in
person until he could take his father and mother there with him;
unless, indeed, King Gos wickedly destroyed his beloved parents, in
which case Inga would become the King of Pingaree and it would be his
duty to go to his people and rule over them.

It was while the last of the boats were preparing to sail for Pingaree
that Nikobob, who had been of great service in getting them ready, came
to Inga in a thoughtful mood and said:

"Your Highness, my wife and my daughter Zella have been urging me to
leave Regos and settle down in your island, in a new home. From what
your people have told me, Pingaree is a better place to live than
Regos, and there are no cruel warriors or savage beasts there to keep
one in constant fear for the safety of those he loves. Therefore, I
have come to ask to go with my family in one of the boats."

Inga was much pleased with this proposal and not only granted Nikobob
permission to go to Pingaree to live, but instructed him to take with
him sufficient goods to furnish his new home in a comfortable manner.
In addition to this, he appointed Nikobob general manager of the
buildings and of the pearl fisheries, until his father or he himself
arrived, and the people approved this order because they liked Nikobob
and knew him to be just and honest.

Soon as the last boat of the great flotilla had disappeared from the
view of those left at Regos, Inga and Rinkitink prepared to leave the
island themselves. The boy was anxious to overtake the boat of King
Gos, if possible, and Rinkitink had no desire to remain in Regos.

Buzzub and the warriors stood silently on the shore and watched the
black boat with its silver lining depart, and I am sure they were as
glad to be rid of their unwelcome visitors as Inga and Rinkitink and
Bilbil were to leave.

The boy asked the White Pearl what direction the boat of King Gos had
taken and then he followed after it, rowing hard and steadily for eight
days without becoming at all weary. But, although the black boat moved
very swiftly, it failed to overtake the barge which was rowed by Queen
Cor's forty picked oarsmen.




Chapter Seventeen

The Nome King


The Kingdom of the Nomes does not border on the Nonestic Ocean, from
which it is separated by the Kingdom of Rinkitink and the Country of
the Wheelers, which is a part of the Land of Ev. Rinkitink's country is
separated from the country of the Nomes by a row of high and steep
mountains, from which it extends to the sea. The Country of the
Wheelers is a sandy waste that is open on one side to the Nonestic
Ocean and on the other side has no barrier to separate it from the Nome
Country, therefore it was on the coast of the Wheelers that King Cos
landed--in a spot quite deserted by any of the curious inhabitants of
that country.

The Nome Country is very large in extent, and is only separated from
the Land of Oz, on its eastern borders, by a Deadly Desert that can not
be crossed by mortals, unless they are aided by the fairies or by magic.

The nomes are a numerous and mischievous people, living in underground
caverns of wide extent, connected one with another by arches and
passages. The word "nome" means "one who knows," and these people are
so called because they know where all the gold and silver and precious
stones are hidden in the earth--a knowledge that no other living
creatures share with them. The nomes are busy people, constantly
digging up gold in one place and taking it to another place, where they
secretly bury it, and perhaps this is the reason they alone know where
to find it. The nomes were ruled, at the time of which I write, by a
King named Kaliko.

King Gos had expected to be pursued by Inga in his magic boat, so he
made all the haste possible, urging his forty rowers to their best
efforts night and day. To his joy he was not overtaken but landed on
the sandy beach of the Wheelers on the morning of the eighth day.

The forty rowers were left with the boat, while Queen Cor and King Cos,
with their royal prisoners, who were still chained, began the journey
to the Nome King.

It was not long before they passed the sands and reached the rocky
country belonging to the nomes, but they were still a long way from the
entrance to the underground caverns in which lived the Nome King. There
was a dim path, winding between stones and boulders, over which the
walking was quite difficult, especially as the path led up hills that
were small mountains, and then down steep and abrupt slopes where any
misstep might mean a broken leg. Therefore it was the second day of
their journey before they climbed halfway up a rugged mountain and
found themselves at the entrance of the Nome King's caverns.

On their arrival, the entrance seemed free and unguarded, but Gos and
Cor had been there before, and they were too wise to attempt to enter
without announcing themselves, for the passage to the caves was full of
traps and pitfalls. So King Gos stood still and shouted, and in an
instant they were surrounded by a group of crooked nomes, who seemed to
have sprung from the ground.

One of these had very long ears and was called The Long-Eared Hearer.
He said: "I heard you coming early this morning."

Another had eyes that looked in different directions at the same time
and were curiously bright and penetrating. He could look over a hill or
around a corner and was called The Lookout. Said he: "I saw you coming
yesterday."

"Then," said King Gos, "perhaps King Kaliko is expecting us."

"It is true," replied another nome, who wore a gold collar around his
neck and carried a bunch of golden keys. "The mighty Nome King expects
you, and bids you follow me to his presence."

With this he led the way into the caverns and Gos and Cor followed,
dragging their weary prisoners with them, for poor King Kitticut and
his gentle Queen had been obliged to carry, all through the tedious
journey, the bags of gold and jewels which were to bribe the Nome King
to accept them as slaves.

Through several long passages the guide led them and at last they
entered a small cavern which was beautifully decorated and set with
rare jewels that flashed from every part of the wall, floor and
ceiling. This was a waiting-room for visitors, and there their guide
left them while he went to inform King Kaliko of their arrival.

Before long they were ushered into a great domed chamber, cut from the
solid rock and so magnificent that all of them--the King and Queen of
Pingaree and the King and Queen of Regos and Coregos--drew long breaths
of astonishment and opened their eyes as wide as they could.

In an ivory throne sat a little round man who had a pointed beard and
hair that rose to a tall curl on top of his head. He was dressed in
silken robes, richly embroidered, which had large buttons of cut
rubies. On his head was a diamond crown and in his hand he held a
golden sceptre with a big jeweled ball at one end of it. This was
Kaliko, the King and ruler of all the nomes. He nodded pleasantly
enough to his visitors and said in a cheery voice:

"Well, Your Majesties, what can I do for you?"

"It is my desire," answered King Gos, respectfully, "to place in your
care two prisoners, whom you now see before you. They must be carefully
guarded, to prevent them from escaping, for they have the cunning of
foxes and are not to be trusted. In return for the favor I am asking
you to grant, I have brought Your Majesty valuable presents of gold and
precious gems."

He then commanded Kitticut and Garee to lay before the Nome King the
bags of gold and jewels, and they obeyed, being helpless.

"Very good," said King Kaliko, nodding approval, for like all the nomes
he loved treasures of gold and jewels. "But who are the prisoners you
have brought here, and why do you place them in my charge instead of
guarding them, yourself? They seem gentle enough, I'm sure."

"The prisoners," returned King Gos, "are the King and Queen of
Pingaree, a small island north of here. They are very evil people and
came to our islands of Regos and Coregos to conquer them and slay our
poor people. Also they intended to plunder us of all our riches, but by
good fortune we were able to defeat and capture them. However, they
have a son who is a terrible wizard and who by magic art is trying to
find this awful King and Queen of Pingaree, and to set them free, that
they may continue their wicked deeds. Therefore, as we have no magic to
defend ourselves with, we have brought the prisoners to you for safe
keeping."

"Your Majesty," spoke up King Kitticut, addressing the Nome King with
great indignation, "do not believe this tale, I implore you. It is all
a lie!"

"I know it," said Kaliko. "I consider it a clever lie, though, because
it is woven without a thread of truth. However, that is none of my
business. The fact remains that my good friend King Gos wishes to put
you in my underground caverns, so that you will be unable to escape.
And why should I not please him in this little matter? Gos is a mighty
King and a great warrior, while your island of Pingaree is desolated
and your people scattered. In my heart, King Kitticut, I sympathize
with you, but as a matter of business policy we powerful Kings must
stand together and trample the weaker ones under our feet."

King Kitticut was surprised to find the King of the nomes so candid and
so well informed, and he tried to argue that he and his gentle wife did
not deserve their cruel fate and that it would be wiser for Kaliko to
side with them than with the evil King of Regos. But Kaliko only shook
his head and smiled, saying:

"The fact that you are a prisoner, my poor Kitticut, is evidence that
you are weaker than King Cos, and I prefer to deal with the strong. By
the way," he added, turning to the King of Regos, "have these prisoners
any connection with the Land of Oz?"

"Why do you ask?" said Gos.

"Because I dare not offend the Oz people," was the reply. "I am very
powerful, as you know, but Ozma of Oz is far more powerful than I;
therefore, if this King and Queen of Pingaree happened to be under
Ozma's protection, I would have nothing to do with them."

"I assure Your Majesty that the prisoners have nothing to do with the
Oz people," Gos hastened to say. And Kitticut, being questioned,
admitted that this was true.

"But how about that wizard you mentioned?" asked the Nome King.

"Oh, he is merely a boy; but he is very ferocious and obstinate and he
is assisted by a little fat sorcerer called Rinkitink and a talking
goat."

"Oho! A talking goat, do you say? That certainly sounds like magic; and
it also sounds like the Land of Oz, where all the animals talk," said
Kaliko, with a doubtful expression.

But King Gos assured him the talking goat had never been to Oz.

"As for Rinkitink, whom you call a sorcerer," continued the Nome King,
"he is a neighbor of mine, you must know, but as we are cut off from
each other by high mountains beneath which a powerful river runs, I
have never yet met King Rinkitink. But I have heard of him, and from
all reports he is a jolly rogue, and perfectly harmless. However, in
spite of your false statements and misrepresentations, I will earn the
treasure you have brought me, by keeping your prisoners safe in my
caverns.

"Make them work," advised Queen Cor. "They are rather delicate, and to
make them work will make them suffer delightfully."

"I'll do as I please about that," said the Nome King sternly. "Be
content that I agree to keep them safe."

The bargain being thus made and concluded, Kaliko first examined the
gold and jewels and then sent it away to his royal storehouse, which
was well filled with like treasure. Next the captives were sent away in
charge of the nome with the golden collar and keys, whose name was
Klik, and he escorted them to a small cavern and gave them a good
supper.

"I shall lock your door," said Klik, "so there is no need of your
wearing those heavy chains any longer." He therefore removed the chains
and left King Kitticut and his Queen alone. This was the first time
since the Northmen had carried them away from Pingaree that the good
King and Queen had been alone together and free of all bonds, and as
they embraced lovingly and mingled their tears over their sad fate they
were also grateful that they had passed from the control of the
heartless King Gos into the more considerate care of King Kaliko. They
were still captives but they believed they would be happier in the
underground caverns of the nomes than in Regos and Coregos.

Meantime, in the King's royal cavern a great feast had been spread.
King Gos and Queen Cor, having triumphed in their plot, were so well
pleased that they held high revelry with the jolly Nome King until a
late hour that night. And the next morning, having cautioned Kaliko not
to release the prisoners under any consideration without their orders,
the King and Queen of Regos and Coregos left the caverns of the nomes
to return to the shore of the ocean where they had left their boat.




Chapter Eighteen

Inga Parts with his Pink Pearl


The White Pearl guided Inga truly in his pursuit of the boat of King
Gos, but the boy had been so delayed in sending his people home to
Pingaree that it was a full day after Gos and Cor landed on the shore
of the Wheeler Country that Inga's boat arrived at the same place.

There he found the forty rowers guarding the barge of Queen Cor, and
although they would not or could not tell the boy where the King and
Queen had taken his father and mother, the White Pearl advised him to
follow the path to the country and the caverns of the nomes.

Rinkitink didn't like to undertake the rocky and mountainous journey,
even with Bilbil to carry him, but he would not desert Inga, even
though his own kingdom lay just beyond a range of mountains which could
be seen towering southwest of them. So the King bravely mounted the
goat, who always grumbled but always obeyed his master, and the three
set off at once for the caverns of the nomes.

They traveled just as slowly as Queen Cor and King Gos had done, so
when they were about halfway they discovered the King and Queen coming
back to their boat. The fact that Gos and Cor were now alone proved
that they had left Inga's father and mother behind them; so, at the
suggestion of Rinkitink, the three hid behind a high rock until the
King of Regos and the Queen of Coregos, who had not observed them, had
passed them by. Then they continued their journey, glad that they had
not again been forced to fight or quarrel with their wicked enemies.

"We might have asked them, however, what they had done with your poor
parents," said Rinkitink.

"Never mind," answered Inga. "I am sure the White Pearl will guide us
aright."

For a time they proceeded in silence and then Rinkitink began to
chuckle with laughter in the pleasant way he was wont to do before his
misfortunes came upon him.

"What amuses Your Majesty?" inquired the boy.

"The thought of how surprised my dear subjects would be if they
realized how near to them I am, and yet how far away. I have always
wanted to visit the Nome Country, which is full of mystery and magic
and all sorts of adventures, but my devoted subjects forbade me to
think of such a thing, fearing I would get hurt or enchanted."

"Are you afraid, now that you are here?" asked Inga.

"A little, but not much, for they say the new Nome King is not as
wicked as the old King used to be. Still, we are undertaking a
dangerous journey and I think you ought to protect me by lending me one
of your pearls."

Inga thought this over and it seemed a reasonable request.

"Which pearl would you like to have?" asked the boy.

"Well, let us see," returned Rinkitink; "you may need strength to
liberate your captive parents, so you must keep the Blue Pearl. And you
will need the advice of the White Pearl, so you had best keep that
also. But in case we should be separated I would have nothing to
protect me from harm, so you ought to lend me the Pink Pearl."

"Very well," agreed Inga, and sitting down upon a rock he removed his
right shoe and after withdrawing the cloth from the pointed toe took
out the Pink Pearl--the one which protected from any harm the person
who carried it.

"Where can you put it, to keep it safely?" he asked.

"In my vest pocket," replied the King. "The pocket has a flap to it and
I can pin it down in such a way that the pearl cannot get out and
become lost. As for robbery, no one with evil intent can touch my
person while I have the pearl."

So Inga gave Rinkitink the Pink Pearl and the little King placed it in
the pocket of his red-and-green brocaded velvet vest, pinning the flap
of the pocket down tightly.

They now resumed their journey and finally reached the entrance to the
Nome King's caverns. Placing the White Pearl to his ear, Inga asked:
"What shall I do now?" and the Voice of the Pearl replied: "Clap your
hands together four times and call aloud the word 'Klik.' Then allow
yourselves to be conducted to the Nome King, who is now holding your
father and mother captive."

Inga followed these instructions and when Klik appeared in answer to
his summons the boy requested an audience of the Nome King. So Klik led
them into the presence of King Kaliko, who was suffering from a severe
headache, due to his revelry the night before, and therefore was
unusually cross and grumpy.

"I know what you've come for," said he, before Inga could speak. "You
want to get the captives from Regos away from me; but you can't do it,
so you'd best go away again."

"The captives are my father and mother, and I intend to liberate them,"
said the boy firmly.

The King stared hard at Inga, wondering at his audacity. Then he turned
to look at King Rinkitink and said:

"I suppose you are the King of Gilgad, which is in the Kingdom of
Rinkitink."

"You've guessed it the first time," replied Rinkitink.

"How round and fat you are!" exclaimed Kaliko.

"I was just thinking how fat and round you are," said Rinkitink.
"Really, King Kaliko, we ought to be friends, we're so much alike in
everything but disposition and intelligence."

Then he began to chuckle, while Kaliko stared hard at him, not knowing
whether to accept his speech as a compliment or not. And now the nome's
eyes wandered to Bilbil, and he asked:

"Is that your talking goat?"

Bilbil met the Nome King's glowering look with a gaze equally surly and
defiant, while Rinkitink answered: "It is, Your Majesty."

"Can he really talk?" asked Kaliko, curiously.

"He can. But the best thing he does is to scold. Talk to His Majesty,
Bilbil."

But Bilbil remained silent and would not speak.

"Do you always ride upon his back?" continued Kaliko, questioning
Rinkitink.

"Yes," was the answer, "because it is difficult for a fat man to walk
far, as perhaps you know from experience.

"That is true," said Kaliko. "Get off the goat's back and let me ride
him a while, to see how I like it. Perhaps I'll take him away from you,
to ride through my caverns."

Rinkitink chuckled softly as he heard this, but at once got off
Bilbil's back and let Kaliko get on. The Nome King was a little
awkward, but when he was firmly astride the saddle he called in a loud
voice: "Giddap!"

When Bilbil paid no attention to the command and refused to stir,
Kaliko kicked his heels viciously against the goat's body, and then
Bilbil made a sudden start. He ran swiftly across the great cavern,
until he had almost reached the opposite wall, when he stopped so
abruptly that King Kaliko sailed over his head and bumped against the
jeweled wall. He bumped so hard that the points of his crown were all
mashed out of shape and his head was driven far into the
diamond-studded band of the crown, so that it covered one eye and a
part of his nose. Perhaps this saved Kaliko's head from being cracked
against the rock wall, but it was hard on the crown.

Bilbil was highly pleased at the success of his feat and Rinkitink
laughed merrily at the Nome King's comical appearance; but Kaliko was
muttering and growling as he picked himself up and struggled to pull
the battered crown from his head, and it was evident that he was not in
the least amused. Indeed, Inga could see that the King was very angry,
and the boy knew that the incident was likely to turn Kaliko against
the entire party.

The Nome King sent Klik for another crown and ordered his workmen to
repair the one that was damaged. While he waited for the new crown he
sat regarding his visitors with a scowling face, and this made Inga
more uneasy than ever. Finally, when the new crown was placed upon his
head, King Kaliko said: "Follow me, strangers!" and led the way to a
small door at one end of the cavern.

Inga and Rinkitink followed him through the doorway and found
themselves standing on a balcony that overlooked an enormous domed
cave--so extensive that it seemed miles to the other side of it. All
around this circular cave, which was brilliantly lighted from an
unknown source, were arches connected with other caverns.

Kaliko took a gold whistle from his pocket and blew a shrill note that
echoed through every part of the cave. Instantly nomes began to pour in
through the side arches in great numbers, until the immense space was
packed with them as far as the eye could reach. All were armed with
glittering weapons of polished silver and gold, and Inga was amazed
that any King could command so great an army.

They began marching and countermarching in very orderly array until
another blast of the gold whistle sent them scurrying away as quickly
as they had appeared. And as soon as the great cave was again empty
Kaliko returned with his visitors to his own royal chamber, where he
once more seated himself upon his ivory throne.

"I have shown you," said he to Inga, "a part of my bodyguard. The royal
armies, of which this is only a part, are as numerous as the sands of
the ocean, and live in many thousands of my underground caverns. You
have come here thinking to force me to give up the captives of King Gos
and Queen Cor, and I wanted to convince you that my power is too mighty
for anyone to oppose. I am told that you are a wizard, and depend upon
magic to aid you; but you must know that the nomes are not mortals, and
understand magic pretty well themselves, so if we are obliged to fight
magic with magic the chances are that we are a hundred times more
powerful than you can be. Think this over carefully, my boy, and try to
realize that you are in my power. I do not believe you can force me to
liberate King Kitticut and Queen Garee, and I know that you cannot coax
me to do so, for I have given my promise to King Gos. Therefore, as I
do not wish to hurt you, I ask you to go away peaceably and let me
alone."

"Forgive me if I do not agree with you, King Kaliko," answered the boy.
"However difficult and dangerous my task may be, I cannot leave your
dominions until every effort to release my parents has failed and left
me completely discouraged."

"Very well," said the King, evidently displeased. "I have warned you,
and now if evil overtakes you it is your own fault. I've a headache
to-day, so I cannot entertain you properly, according to your rank; but
Klik will attend you to my guest chambers and to-morrow I will talk
with you again."

This seemed a fair and courteous way to treat one's declared enemies,
so they politely expressed the wish that Kaliko's headache would be
better, and followed their guide, Klik, down a well-lighted passage and
through several archways until they finally reached three nicely
furnished bedchambers which were cut from solid gray rock and well
lighted and aired by some mysterious method known to the nomes.

The first of these rooms was given King Rinkitink, the second was
Inga's and the third was assigned to Bilbil the goat. There was a
swinging rock door between the third and second rooms and another
between the second and first, which also had a door that opened upon
the passage. Rinkitink's room was the largest, so it was here that an
excellent dinner was spread by some of the nome servants, who, in spite
of their crooked shapes, proved to be well trained and competent.

"You are not prisoners, you know," said Klik; "neither are you welcome
guests, having declared your purpose to oppose our mighty King and all
his hosts. But we bear you no ill will, and you are to be well fed and
cared for as long as you remain in our caverns. Eat hearty, sleep
tight, and pleasant dreams to you."

Saying this, he left them alone and at once Rinkitink and Inga began to
counsel together as to the best means to liberate King Kitticut and
Queen Garee. The White Pearl's advice was rather unsatisfactory to the
boy, just now, for all that the Voice said in answer to his questions
was: "Be patient, brave and determined."

Rinkitink suggested that they try to discover in what part of the
series of underground caverns Inga's parents had been confined, as that
knowledge was necessary before they could take any action; so together
they started out, leaving Bilbil asleep in his room, and made their way
unopposed through many corridors and caverns. In some places were great
furnaces, where gold dust was being melted into bricks. In other rooms
workmen were fashioning the gold into various articles and ornaments.
In one cavern immense wheels revolved which polished precious gems, and
they found many caverns used as storerooms, where treasure of every
sort was piled high. Also they came to the barracks of the army and the
great kitchens.

There were nomes everywhere--countless thousands of them--but none paid
the slightest heed to the visitors from the earth's surface. Yet,
although Inga and Rinkitink walked until they were weary, they were
unable to locate the place where the boy's father and mother had been
confined, and when they tried to return to their own rooms they found
that they had hopelessly lost themselves amid the labyrinth of
passages. However, Klik presently came to them, laughing at their
discomfiture, and led them back to their bedchambers.

Before they went to sleep they carefully barred the door from
Rinkitink's room to the corridor, but the doors that connected the
three rooms one with another were left wide open.

In the night Inga was awakened by a soft grating sound that filled him
with anxiety because he could not account for it. It was dark in his
room, the light having disappeared as soon as he got into bed, but he
managed to feel his way to the door that led to Rinkitink's room and
found it tightly closed and immovable. Then he made his way to the
opposite door, leading to Bilbil's room, to discover that also had been
closed and fastened.

The boy had a curious sensation that all of his room--the walls, floor
and ceiling--was slowly whirling as if on a pivot, and it was such an
uncomfortable feeling that he got into bed again, not knowing what else
to do. And as the grating noise had ceased and the room now seemed
stationary, he soon fell asleep again.

When the boy wakened, after many hours, he found the room again light.
So he dressed himself and discovered that a small table, containing a
breakfast that was smoking hot, had suddenly appeared in the center of
his room. He tried the two doors, but finding that he could not open
them he ate some breakfast, thoughtfully wondering who had locked him
in and why he had been made a prisoner. Then he again went to the door
which he thought led to Rinkitink's chamber and to his surprise the
latch lifted easily and the door swung open.

Before him was a rude corridor hewn in the rock and dimly lighted. It
did not look inviting, so Inga closed the door, puzzled to know what
had become of Rinkitink's room and the King, and went to the opposite
door. Opening this, he found a solid wall of rock confronting him,
which effectually prevented his escape in that direction.

The boy now realized that King Kaliko had tricked him, and while
professing to receive him as a guest had plotted to separate him from
his comrades. One way had been left, however, by which he might escape
and he decided to see where it led to.

So, going to the first door, he opened it and ventured slowly into the
dimly lighted corridor. When he had advanced a few steps he heard the
door of his room slam shut behind him. He ran back at once, but the
door of rock fitted so closely into the wall that he found it
impossible to open it again. That did not matter so much, however, for
the room was a prison and the only way of escape seemed ahead of him.

Along the corridor he crept until, turning a corner, he found himself
in a large domed cavern that was empty and deserted. Here also was a
dim light that permitted him to see another corridor at the opposite
side; so he crossed the rocky floor of the cavern and entered a second
corridor. This one twisted and turned in every direction but was not
very long, so soon the boy reached a second cavern, not so large as the
first. This he found vacant also, but it had another corridor leading
out of it, so Inga entered that. It was straight and short and beyond
was a third cavern, which differed little from the others except that
it had a strong iron grating at one side of it.

All three of these caverns had been roughly hewn from the rock and it
seemed they had never been put to use, as had all the other caverns of
the nomes he had visited. Standing in the third cavern, Inga saw what
he thought was still another corridor at its farther side, so he walked
toward it. This opening was dark, and that fact, and the solemn silence
all around him, made him hesitate for a while to enter it. Upon
reflection, however, he realized that unless he explored the place to
the very end he could not hope to escape from it, so he boldly entered
the dark corridor and felt his way cautiously as he moved forward.

Scarcely had he taken two paces when a crash resounded back of him and
a heavy sheet of steel closed the opening into the cavern from which he
had just come. He paused a moment, but it still seemed best to proceed,
and as Inga advanced in the dark, holding his hands outstretched before
him to feel his way, handcuffs fell upon his wrists and locked
themselves with a sharp click, and an instant later he found he was
chained to a stout iron post set firmly in the rock floor.

The chains were long enough to permit him to move a yard or so in any
direction and by feeling the walls he found he was in a small circular
room that had no outlet except the passage by which he had entered, and
that was now closed by the door of steel. This was the end of the
series of caverns and corridors.

It was now that the horror of his situation occurred to the boy with
full force. But he resolved not to submit to his fate without a
struggle, and realizing that he possessed the Blue Pearl, which gave
him marvelous strength, he quickly broke the chains and set himself
free of the handcuffs. Next he twisted the steel door from its hinges,
and creeping along the short passage, found himself in the third cave.

But now the dim light, which had before guided him, had vanished; yet
on peering into the gloom of the cave he saw what appeared to be two
round disks of flame, which cast a subdued glow over the floor and
walls. By this dull glow he made out the form of an enormous man,
seated in the center of the cave, and he saw that the iron grating had
been removed, permitting the man to enter.

The giant was unclothed and its limbs were thickly covered with coarse
red hair. The round disks of flame were its two eyes and when it opened
its mouth to yawn Inga saw that its jaws were wide enough to crush a
dozen men between the great rows of teeth.

Presently the giant looked up and perceived the boy crouching at the
other side of the cavern, so he called out in a hoarse, rude voice:

"Come hither, my pretty one. We will wrestle together, you and I, and
if you succeed in throwing me I will let you pass through my cave."

The boy made no reply to the challenge. He realized he was in dire
peril and regretted that he had lent the Pink Pearl to King Rinkitink.
But it was now too late for vain regrets, although he feared that even
his great strength would avail him little against this hairy monster.
For his arms were not long enough to span a fourth of the giant's huge
body, while the monster's powerful limbs would be likely to crush out
Inga's life before he could gain the mastery.

Therefore the Prince resolved to employ other means to combat this foe,
who had doubtless been placed there to bar his return. Retreating
through the passage he reached the room where he had been chained and
wrenched the iron post from its socket. It was a foot thick and four
feet long, and being of solid iron was so heavy that three ordinary men
would have found it hard to lift.

Returning to the cavern, the boy swung the great bar above his head and
dashed it with mighty force full at the giant. The end of the bar
struck the monster upon its forehead, and with a single groan it fell
full length upon the floor and lay still.

When the giant fell, the glow from its eyes faded away, and all was
dark. Cautiously, for Inga was not sure the giant was dead, the boy
felt his way toward the opening that led to the middle cavern. The
entrance was narrow and the darkness was intense, but, feeling braver
now, the boy stepped boldly forward. Instantly the floor began to sink
beneath him and in great alarm he turned and made a leap that enabled
him to grasp the rocky sides of the wall and regain a footing in the
passage through which he had just come.

Scarcely had he obtained this place of refuge when a mighty crash
resounded throughout the cavern and the sound of a rushing torrent came
from far below. Inga felt in his pocket and found several matches, one
of which he lighted and held before him. While it flickered he saw that
the entire floor of the cavern had fallen away, and knew that had he
not instantly regained his footing in the passage he would have plunged
into the abyss that lay beneath him.

By the light of another match he saw the opening at the other side of
the cave and the thought came to him that possibly he might leap across
the gulf. Of course, this could never be accomplished without the
marvelous strength lent him by the Blue Pearl, but Inga had the feeling
that one powerful spring might carry him over the chasm into safety. He
could not stay where he was, that was certain, so he resolved to make
the attempt.

He took a long run through the first cave and the short corridor; then,
exerting all his strength, he launched himself over the black gulf of
the second cave. Swiftly he flew and, although his heart stood still
with fear, only a few seconds elapsed before his feet touched the ledge
of the opposite passageway and he knew he had safely accomplished the
wonderful feat.

Only pausing to draw one long breath of relief, Inga quickly traversed
the crooked corridor that led to the last cavern of the three. But when
he came in sight of it he paused abruptly, his eyes nearly blinded by a
glare of strong light which burst upon them. Covering his face with his
hands, Inga retreated behind a projecting corner of rock and by
gradually getting his eyes used to the light he was finally able to
gaze without blinking upon the strange glare that had so quickly
changed the condition of the cavern. When he had passed through this
vault it had been entirely empty. Now the flat floor of rock was
covered everywhere with a bed of glowing coals, which shot up little
tongues of red and white flames. Indeed, the entire cave was one
monster furnace and the heat that came from it was fearful.

Inga's heart sank within him as he realized the terrible obstacle
placed by the cunning Nome King between him and the safety of the other
caverns. There was no turning back, for it would be impossible for him
again to leap over the gulf of the second cave, the corridor at this
side being so crooked that he could get no run before he jumped.
Neither could he leap over the glowing coals of the cavern that faced
him, for it was much larger than the middle cavern. In this dilemma he
feared his great strength would avail him nothing and he bitterly
reproached himself for parting with the Pink Pearl, which would have
preserved him from injury.

However, it was not in the nature of Prince Inga to despair for long,
his past adventures having taught him confidence and courage, sharpened
his wits and given him the genius of invention. He sat down and thought
earnestly on the means of escape from his danger and at last a clever
idea came to his mind. This is the way to get ideas: never to let
adverse circumstances discourage you, but to believe there is a way out
of every difficulty, which may be found by earnest thought.

There were many points and projections of rock in the walls of the
crooked corridor in which Inga stood and some of these rocks had become
cracked and loosened, although still clinging to their places. The boy
picked out one large piece, and, exerting all his strength, tore it
away from the wall. He then carried it to the cavern and tossed it upon
the burning coals, about ten feet away from the end of the passage.
Then he returned for another fragment of rock, and wrenching it free
from its place, he threw it ten feet beyond the first one, toward the
opposite side of the cave. The boy continued this work until he had
made a series of stepping-stones reaching straight across the cavern to
the dark passageway beyond, which he hoped would lead him back to
safety if not to liberty.

When his work had been completed, Inga did not long hesitate to take
advantage of his stepping-stones, for he knew his best chance of escape
lay in his crossing the bed of coals before the rocks became so heated
that they would burn his feet. So he leaped to the first rock and from
there began jumping from one to the other in quick succession. A
withering wave of heat at once enveloped him, and for a time he feared
he would suffocate before he could cross the cavern; but he held his
breath, to keep the hot air from his lungs, and maintained his leaps
with desperate resolve.

Then, before he realized it, his feet were pressing the cooler rocks of
the passage beyond and he rolled helpless upon the floor, gasping for
breath. His skin was so red that it resembled the shell of a boiled
lobster, but his swift motion had prevented his being burned, and his
shoes had thick soles, which saved his feet.

After resting a few minutes, the boy felt strong enough to go on. He
went to the end of the passage and found that the rock door by which he
had left his room was still closed, so he returned to about the middle
of the corridor and was thinking what he should do next, when suddenly
the solid rock before him began to move and an opening appeared through
which shone a brilliant light. Shielding his eyes, which were somewhat
dazzled, Inga sprang through the opening and found himself in one of
the Nome King's inhabited caverns, where before him stood King Kaliko,
with a broad grin upon his features, and Klik, the King's chamberlain,
who looked surprised, and King Rinkitink seated astride Bilbil the
goat, both of whom seemed pleased that Inga had rejoined them.




Chapter Nineteen

Rinkitink Chuckles


We will now relate what happened to Rinkitink and Bilbil that morning,
while Inga was undergoing his trying experience in escaping the fearful
dangers of the three caverns.

The King of Gilgad wakened to find the door of Inga's room fast shut
and locked, but he had no trouble in opening his own door into the
corridor, for it seems that the boy's room, which was the middle one,
whirled around on a pivot, while the adjoining rooms occupied by Bilbil
and Rinkitink remained stationary. The little King also found a
breakfast magically served in his room, and while he was eating it,
Klik came to him and stated that His Majesty, King Kaliko, desired his
presence in the royal cavern.

So Rinkitink, having first made sure that the Pink Pearl was still in
his vest pocket, willingly followed Klik, who ran on some distance
ahead. But no sooner had Rinkitink set foot in the passage than a great
rock, weighing at least a ton, became dislodged and dropped from the
roof directly over his head. Of course, it could not harm him,
protected as he was by the Pink Pearl, and it bounded aside and crashed
upon the floor, where it was shattered by its own weight.

"How careless!" exclaimed the little King, and waddled after Klik, who
seemed amazed at his escape.

Presently another rock above Rinkitink plunged downward, and then
another, but none touched his body. Klik seemed much perplexed at these
continued escapes and certainly Kaliko was surprised when Rinkitink,
safe and sound, entered the royal cavern.

"Good morning," said the King of Gilgad. "Your rocks are getting loose,
Kaliko, and you'd better have them glued in place before they hurt
someone." Then he began to chuckle: "Hoo, hoo, hoo-hee, hee-heek, keek,
eek!" and Kaliko sat and frowned because he realized that the little
fat King was poking fun at him.

"I asked Your Majesty to come here," said the Nome King, "to show you a
curious skein of golden thread which my workmen have made. If it
pleases you, I will make you a present of it."

With this he held out a small skein of glittering gold twine, which was
really pretty and curious. Rinkitink took it in his hand and at once
the golden thread began to unwind--so swiftly that the eye could not
follow its motion. And, as it unwound, it coiled itself around
Rinkitink's body, at the same time weaving itself into a net, until it
had enveloped the little King from head to foot and placed him in a
prison of gold.

"Aha!" cried Kaliko; "this magic worked all right, it seems.

"Oh, did it?" replied Rinkitink, and stepping forward he walked right
through the golden net, which fell to the floor in a tangled mass.

Kaliko rubbed his chin thoughtfully and stared hard at Rinkitink.

"I understand a good bit of magic," said he, "but Your Majesty has a
sort of magic that greatly puzzles me, because it is unlike anything of
the sort that I ever met with before."

"Now, see here, Kaliko," said Rinkitink; "if you are trying to harm me
or my companions, give it up, for you will never succeed. We're
harm-proof, so to speak, and you are merely wasting your time trying to
injure us.

"You may be right, and I hope I am not so impolite as to argue with a
guest," returned the Nome King. "But you will pardon me if I am not yet
satisfied that you are stronger than my famous magic. However, I beg
you to believe that I bear you no ill will, King Rinkitink; but it is
my duty to destroy you, if possible, because you and that insignificant
boy Prince have openly threatened to take away my captives and have
positively refused to go back to the earth's surface and let me alone.
I'm very tender-hearted, as a matter of fact, and I like you immensely,
and would enjoy having you as a friend, but--" Here he pressed a button
on the arm of his throne chair and the section of the floor where
Rinkitink stood suddenly opened and disclosed a black pit beneath,
which was a part of 'the terrible Bottomless Gulf.

But Rinkitink did not fall into the pit; his body remained suspended in
the air until he put out his foot and stepped to the solid floor, when
the opening suddenly closed again.

"I appreciate Your Majesty's friendship," remarked Rinkitink, as calmly
as if nothing had happened, "but I am getting tired with standing. Will
you kindly send for my goat, Bilbil, that I may sit upon his back to
rest?"

"Indeed I will!" promised Kaliko. "I have not yet completed my test of
your magic, and as I owe that goat a slight grudge for bumping my head
and smashing my second-best crown, I will be glad to discover if the
beast can also escape my delightful little sorceries."

So Klik was sent to fetch Bilbil and presently returned with the goat,
which was very cross this morning because it had not slept well in the
underground caverns.

Rinkitink lost no time in getting upon the red velvet saddle which the
goat constantly wore, for he feared the Nome King would try to destroy
Bilbil and knew that as long as his body touched that of the goat the
Pink Pearl would protect them both; whereas, if Bilbil stood alone,
there was no magic to save him.

Bilbil glared wickedly at King Kaliko, who moved uneasily in his ivory
throne. Then the Nome King whispered a moment in the ear of Klik, who
nodded and left the room.

"Please make yourselves at home here for a few minutes, while I attend
to an errand," said the Nome King, getting up from the throne. "I shall
return pretty soon, when I hope to find you pieceful--ha, ha,
ha!--that's a joke you can't appreciate now but will later. Be
pieceful--that's the idea. Ho, ho, ho! How funny." Then he waddled from
the cavern, closing the door behind him.

"Well, why didn't you laugh when Kaliko laughed?" demanded the goat,
when they were left alone in the cavern.

"Because he means mischief of some sort," replied Rinkitink, "and we'll
laugh after the danger is over, Bilbil. There's an old adage that says:
'He laughs best who laughs last,' and the only way to laugh last is to
give the other fellow a chance. Where did that knife come from, I
wonder."

For a long, sharp knife suddenly appeared in the air near them,
twisting and turning from side to side and darting here and there in a
dangerous manner, without any support whatever. Then another knife
became visible--and another and another--until all the space in the
royal cavern seemed filled with them. Their sharp points and edges
darted toward Rinkitink and Bilbil perpetually and nothing could have
saved them from being cut to pieces except the protecting power of the
Pink Pearl. As it was, not a knife touched them and even Bilbil gave a
gruff laugh at the failure of Kaliko's clever magic.

The goat wandered here and there in the cavern, carrying Rinkitink upon
his back, and neither of them paid the slightest heed to the knives,
although the glitter of the hundreds of polished blades was rather
trying to their eyes. Perhaps for ten minutes the knives darted about
them in bewildering fury; then they disappeared as suddenly as they had
appeared.

Kaliko cautiously stuck his head through the doorway and found the goat
chewing the embroidery of his royal cloak, which he had left lying over
the throne, while Rinkitink was reading his manuscript on "How to be
Good" and chuckling over its advice. The Nome King seemed greatly
disappointed as he came in and resumed his seat on the throne. Said
Rinkitink with a chuckle:

"We've really had a peaceful time, Kaliko, although not the pieceful
time you expected. Forgive me if I indulge in a laugh--hoo, hoo,
hoo-hee, heek-keek-eek! And now, tell me; aren't you getting tired of
trying to injure us?"

"Eh--heh," said the Nome King. "I see now that your magic can protect
you from all my arts. But is the boy Inga as, well protected as Your
Majesty and the goat?'

"Why do you ask?" inquired Rinkitink, uneasy at the question because he
remembered he had not seen the little Prince of Pingaree that morning.

"Because," said Kaliko, "the boy has been undergoing trials far greater
and more dangerous than any you have encountered, and it has been
hundreds of years since anyone has been able to escape alive from the
perils of my Three Trick Caverns."

King Rinkitink was much alarmed at hearing this, for although he knew
that Inga possessed the Blue Pearl, that would only give to him
marvelous strength, and perhaps strength alone would not enable him to
escape from danger. But he would not let Kaliko see the fear he felt
for Inga's safety, so he said in a careless way:

"You're a mighty poor magician, Kaliko, and I'll give you my crown if
Inga hasn't escaped any danger you have threatened him with."

"Your whole crown is not worth one of the valuable diamonds in my
crown," answered the Nome King, "but I'll take it. Let us go at once,
therefore, and see what has become of the boy Prince, for if he is not
destroyed by this time I will admit he cannot be injured by any of the
magic arts which I have at my command."

He left the room, accompanied by Klik, who had now rejoined his master,
and by Rinkitink riding upon Bilbil. After traversing several of the
huge caverns they entered one that was somewhat more bright and
cheerful than the others, where the Nome King paused before a wall of
rock. Then Klik pressed a secret spring and a section of the wall
opened and disclosed the corridor where Prince Inga stood facing them.

"Tarts and tadpoles!" cried Kaliko in surprise. "The boy is still
alive!"




Chapter Twenty

Dorothy to the Rescue


One day when Princess Dorothy of Oz was visiting Glinda the Good, who
is Ozma's Royal Sorceress, she was looking through Glinda's Great Book
of Records--wherein is inscribed all important events that happen in
every part of the world--when she came upon the record of the
destruction of Pingaree, the capture of King Kitticut and Queen Garee
and all their people, and the curious escape of Inga, the boy Prince,
and of King Rinkitink and the talking goat. Turning over some of the
following pages, Dorothy read how Inga had found the Magic Pearls and
was rowing the silver-lined boat to Regos to try to rescue his parents.

The little girl was much interested to know how well Inga succeeded,
but she returned to the palace of Ozma at the Emerald City of Oz the
next day and other events made her forget the boy Prince of Pingaree
for a time. However, she was one day idly looking at Ozma's Magic
Picture, which shows any scene you may wish to see, when the girl
thought of Inga and commanded the Magic Picture to show what the boy
was doing at that moment.

It was the time when Inga and Rinkitink had followed the King of Regos
and Queen of Coregos to the Nome King's country and she saw them hiding
behind the rock as Cor and Gos passed them by after having placed the
King and Queen of Pingaree in the keeping of the Nome King. From that
time Dorothy followed, by means of the Magic Picture, the adventures of
Inga and his friend in the Nome King's caverns, and the danger and
helplessness of the poor boy aroused the little girl's pity and
indignation.

So she went to Ozma and told the lovely girl Ruler of Oz all about Inga
and Rinkitink.

"I think Kaliko is treating them dreadfully mean," declared Dorothy,
"and I wish you'd let me go to the Nome Country and help them out of
their troubles."

"Go, my dear, if you wish to," replied Ozma, "but I think it would be
best for you to take the Wizard with you."

"Oh, I'm not afraid of the nomes," said Dorothy, "but I'll be glad to
take the Wizard, for company. And may we use your Magic Carpet, Ozma?"

"Of course. Put the Magic Carpet in the Red Wagon and have the Sawhorse
take you and the Wizard to the edge of the desert. While you are gone,
Dorothy, I'll watch you in the Magic Picture, and if any danger
threatens you I'll see you are not harmed."

Dorothy thanked the Ruler of Oz and kissed her good-bye, for she was
determined to start at once. She found the Wizard of Oz, who was
planting shoetrees in the garden, and when she told him Inga's story he
willingly agreed to accompany the little girl to the Nome King's
caverns. They had both been there before and had conquered the nomes
with ease, so they were not at all afraid.

The Wizard, who was a cheery little man with a bald head and a winning
smile, harnessed the Wooden Sawhorse to the Red Wagon and loaded on
Ozma's Magic Carpet. Then he and Dorothy climbed to the seat and the
Sawhorse started off and carried them swiftly through the beautiful
Land of Oz to the edge of the Deadly Desert that separated their
fairyland from the Nome Country.

Even Dorothy and the clever Wizard would not have dared to cross this
desert without the aid of the Magic Carpet, for it would have quickly
destroyed them; but when the roll of carpet had been placed upon the
edge of the sands, leaving just enough lying flat for them to stand
upon, the carpet straightway began to unroll before them and as they
walked on it continued to unroll, until they had safely passed over the
stretch of Deadly Desert and were on the border of the Nome King's
dominions.

This journey had been accomplished in a few minutes, although such a
distance would have required several days travel had they not been
walking on the Magic Carpet. On arriving they at once walked toward the
entrance to the caverns of the nomes.

The Wizard carried a little black bag containing his tools of wizardry,
while Dorothy carried over her arm a covered basket in which she had
placed a dozen eggs, with which to conquer the nomes if she had any
trouble with them.

Eggs may seem to you to be a queer weapon with which to fight, but the
little girl well knew their value. The nomes are immortal; that is,
they do not perish, as mortals do, unless they happen to come in
contact with an egg. If an egg touches them--either the outer shell or
the inside of the egg--the nomes lose their charm of perpetual life and
thereafter are liable to die through accident or old age, just as all
humans are.

For this reason the sight of an egg fills a nome with terror and he
will do anything to prevent an egg from touching him, even for an
instant. So, when Dorothy took her basket of eggs with her, she knew
that she was more powerfully armed than if she had a regiment of
soldiers at her back.




Chapter Twenty-One

The Wizard Finds an Enchantment


After Kaliko had failed in his attempts to destroy his guests, as has
been related, the Nome King did nothing more to injure them but treated
them in a friendly manner. He refused, however, to permit Inga to see
or to speak with his father and mother, or even to know in what part of
the underground caverns they were confined.

"You are able to protect your lives and persons, I freely admit," said
Kaliko; "but I firmly believe you have no power, either of magic or
otherwise, to take from me the captives I have agreed to keep for King
Gos."

Inga would not agree to this. He determined not to leave the caverns
until he had liberated his father and mother, although he did not then
know how that could be accomplished. As for Rinkitink, the jolly King
was well fed and had a good bed to sleep upon, so he was not worrying
about anything and seemed in no hurry to go away.

Kaliko and Rinkitink were engaged in pitching a game with solid gold
quoits, on the floor of the royal chamber, and Inga and Bilbil were
watching them, when Klik came running in, his hair standing on end with
excitement, and cried out that the Wizard of Oz and Dorothy were
approaching.

Kaliko turned pale on hearing this unwelcome news and, abandoning his
game, went to sit in his ivory throne and try to think what had brought
these fearful visitors to his domain.

"Who is Dorothy?" asked Inga.

"She is a little girl who once lived in Kansas," replied Klik, with a
shudder, "but she now lives in Ozma's palace at the Emerald City and is
a Princess of Oz--which means that she is a terrible foe to deal with."

"Doesn't she like the nomes?" inquired the boy.

"It isn't that," said King Kaliko, with a groan, "but she insists on
the nomes being goody-goody, which is contrary to their natures.
Dorothy gets angry if I do the least thing that is wicked, and tries to
make me stop it, and that naturally makes me downhearted. I can't
imagine why she has come here just now, for I've been behaving very
well lately. As for that Wizard of Oz, he's chock-full of magic that I
can't overcome, for he learned it from Glinda, who is the most powerful
sorceress in the world. Woe is me! Why didn't Dorothy and the Wizard
stay in Oz, where they belong?"

Inga and Rinkitink listened to this with much joy, for at once the idea
came to them both to plead with Dorothy to help them. Even Bilbil
pricked up his ears when he heard the Wizard of Oz mentioned, and the
goat seemed much less surly, and more thoughtful than usual.

A few minutes later a nome came to say that Dorothy and the Wizard had
arrived and demanded admittance, so Klik was sent to usher them into
the royal presence of the Nome King.

As soon as she came in the little girl ran up to the boy Prince and
seized both his hands.

"Oh, Inga!" she exclaimed, "I'm so glad to find you alive and well."

Inga was astonished at so warm a greeting. Making a low bow he said:

"I don't think we have met before, Princess."

"No, indeed," replied Dorothy, "but I know all about you and I've come
to help you and King Rinkitink out of your troubles." Then she turned
to the Nome King and continued: "You ought to be ashamed of yourself,
King Kaliko, to treat an honest Prince and an honest King so badly."

"I haven't done anything to them," whined Kaliko, trembling as her eyes
flashed upon him.

"No; but you tried to, an' that's just as bad, if not worse," said
Dorothy, who was very indignant. "And now I want you to send for the
King and Queen of Pingaree and have them brought here immejitly!"

"I won't," said Kaliko.

"Yes, you will!" cried Dorothy, stamping her foot at him. "I won't have
those poor people made unhappy any longer, or separated from their
little boy. Why, it's dreadful, Kaliko, an' I'm su'prised at you. You
must be more wicked than I thought you were."

"I can't do it, Dorothy," said the Nome King, almost weeping with
despair. "I promised King Gos I'd keep them captives. You wouldn't ask
me to break my promise, would you?"

"King Gos was a robber and an outlaw," she said, "and p'r'aps you don't
know that a storm at sea wrecked his boat, while he was going back to
Regos, and that he and Queen Cor were both drowned."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Kaliko. "Is that so?"

"I saw it in Glinda's Record Book," said Dorothy. "So now you trot out
the King and Queen of Pingaree as quick as you can."

"No," persisted the contrary Nome King, shaking his head. "I won't do
it. Ask me anything else and I'll try to please you, but I can't allow
these friendly enemies to triumph over me.

"In that case," said Dorothy, beginning to remove the cover from her
basket, "I'll show you some eggs."

"Eggs!" screamed the Nome King in horror. "Have you eggs in that
basket?"

"A dozen of 'em," replied Dorothy.

"Then keep them there--I beg--I implore you!--and I'll do anything you
say," pleaded Kaliko, his teeth chattering so that he could hardly
speak.

"Send for the King and Queen of Pingaree," said Dorothy.

"Go, Klik," commanded the Nome King, and Klik ran away in great haste,
for he was almost as much frightened as his master.

It was an affecting scene when the unfortunate King and Queen of
Pingaree entered the chamber and with sobs and tears of joy embraced
their brave and adventurous son. All the others stood silent until
greetings and kisses had been exchanged and Inga had told his parents
in a few words of his vain struggles to rescue them and how Princess
Dorothy had finally come to his assistance.

Then King Kitticut shook the hands of his friend King Rinkitink and
thanked him for so loyally supporting his son Inga, and Queen Garee
kissed little Dorothy's forehead and blessed her for restoring her
husband and herself to freedom.

The Wizard had been standing near Bilbil the goat and now he was
surprised to hear the animal say:

"Joyful reunion, isn't it? But it makes me tired to see grown people
cry like children."

"Oho!" exclaimed the Wizard. "How does it happen, Mr. Goat, that you,
who have never been to the Land of Oz, are able to talk?"

"That's my business," returned Bilbil in a surly tone.

The Wizard stooped down and gazed fixedly into the animal's eyes. Then
he said, with a pitying sigh: "I see; you are under an enchantment.
Indeed, I believe you to be Prince Bobo of Boboland."

Bilbil made no reply but dropped his head as if ashamed.

"This is a great discovery," said the Wizard, addressing Dorothy and
the others of the party. "A good many years ago a cruel magician
transformed the gallant Prince of Boboland into a talking goat, and
this goat, being ashamed of his condition, ran away and was never after
seen in Boboland, which is a country far to the south of here but
bordering on the Deadly Desert, opposite the Land of Oz. I heard of
this story long ago and know that a diligent search has been made for
the enchanted Prince, without result. But I am well assured that, in
the animal you call Bilbil, I have discovered the unhappy Prince of
Boboland."

"Dear me, Bilbil," said Rinkitink, "why have you never told me this?"

"What would be the use?" asked Bilbil in a low voice and still refusing
to look up.

"The use?" repeated Rinkitink, puzzled.

"Yes, that's the trouble," said the Wizard. "It is one of the most
powerful enchantments ever accomplished, and the magician is now dead
and the secret of the anti-charm lost. Even I, with all my skill,
cannot restore Prince Bobo to his proper form. But I think Glinda might
be able to do so and if you will all return with Dorothy and me to the
Land of Oz, where Ozma will make you welcome, I will ask Glinda to try
to break this enchantment."

This was willingly agreed to, for they all welcomed the chance to visit
the famous Land of Oz. So they bade good-bye to King Kaliko, whom
Dorothy warned not to be wicked any more if he could help it, and the
entire party returned over the Magic Carpet to the Land of Oz. They
filled the Red Wagon, which was still waiting for them, pretty full;
but the Sawhorse didn't mind that and with wonderful speed carried them
safely to the Emerald City.




Chapter Twenty Two

Ozma's Banquet


Ozma had seen in her Magic Picture the liberation of Inga's parents and
the departure of the entire party for the Emerald City, so with her
usual hospitality she ordered a splendid banquet prepared and invited
all her quaint friends who were then in the Emerald City to be present
that evening to meet the strangers who were to become her guests.

Glinda, also, in her wonderful Record Book had learned of the events
that had taken place in the caverns of the Nome King and she became
especially interested in the enchantment of the Prince of Boboland. So
she hastily prepared several of her most powerful charms and then
summoned her flock of sixteen white storks, which swiftly bore her to
Ozma's palace. She arrived there before the Red Wagon did and was
warmly greeted by the girl Ruler.

Realizing that the costume of Queen Garee of Pingaree must have become
sadly worn and frayed, owing to her hardships and adventures, Ozma
ordered a royal outfit prepared for the good Queen and had it laid in
her chamber ready for her to put on as soon as she arrived, so she
would not be shamed at the banquet. New costumes were also provided for
King Kitticut and King Rinkitink and Prince Inga, all cut and made and
embellished in the elaborate and becoming style then prevalent in the
Land of Oz, and as soon as the party arrived at the palace Ozma's
guests were escorted by her servants to their rooms, that they might
bathe and dress themselves.

Glinda the Sorceress and the Wizard of Oz took charge of Bilbil the
goat and went to a private room where they were not likely to be
interrupted. Glinda first questioned Bilbil long and earnestly about
the manner of his enchantment and the ceremony that had been used by
the magician who enchanted him. At first Bilbil protested that he did
not want to be restored to his natural shape, saying that he had been
forever disgraced in the eyes of his people and of the entire world by
being obliged to exist as a scrawny, scraggly goat. But Glinda pointed
out that any person who incurred the enmity of a wicked magician was
liable to suffer a similar fate, and assured him that his misfortune
would make him better beloved by his subjects when he returned to them
freed from his dire enchantment.

Bilbil was finally convinced of the truth of this assertion and agreed
to submit to the experiments of Glinda and the Wizard, who knew they
had a hard task before them and were not at all sure they could
succeed. We know that Glinda is the most complete mistress of magic who
has ever existed, and she was wise enough to guess that the clever but
evil magician who had enchanted Prince Bobo had used a spell that would
puzzle any ordinary wizard or sorcerer to break; therefore she had
given the matter much shrewd thought and hoped she had conceived a plan
that would succeed. But because she was not positive of success she
would have no one present at the incantation except her assistant, the
Wizard of Oz.

First she transformed Bilbil the goat into a lamb, and this was done
quite easily. Next she transformed the lamb into an ostrich, giving it
two legs and feet instead of four. Then she tried to transform the
ostrich into the original Prince Bobo, but this incantation was an
utter failure. Glinda was not discouraged, however, but by a powerful
spell transformed the ostrich into a tottenhot--which is a lower form
of a man. Then the tottenhot was transformed into a mifket, which was a
great step in advance and, finally, Glinda transformed the mifket into
a handsome young man, tall and shapely, who fell on his knees before
the great Sorceress and gratefully kissed her hand, admitting that he
had now recovered his proper shape and was indeed Prince Bobo of
Boboland.

This process of magic, successful though it was in the end, had
required so much time that the banquet was now awaiting their presence.
Bobo was already dressed in princely raiment and although he seemed
very much humbled by his recent lowly condition, they finally persuaded
him to join the festivities.

When Rinkitink saw that his goat had now become a Prince, he did not
know whether to be sorry or glad, for he felt that he would miss the
companionship of the quarrelsome animal he had so long been accustomed
to ride upon, while at the same time he rejoiced that poor Bilbil had
come to his own again.

Prince Bobo humbly begged Rinkitink's forgiveness for having been so
disagreeable to him, at times, saying that the nature of a goat had
influenced him and the surly disposition he had shown was a part of his
enchantment. But the jolly King assured the Prince that he had really
enjoyed Bilbil's grumpy speeches and forgave him readily. Indeed, they
all discovered the young Prince Bobo to be an exceedingly courteous and
pleasant person, although he was somewhat reserved and dignified.

Ah, but it was a great feast that Ozma served in her gorgeous banquet
hall that night and everyone was as happy as could be. The Shaggy Man
was there, and so was Jack Pumpkinhead and the Tin Woodman and Cap'n
Bill. Beside Princess Dorothy sat Tiny Trot and Betsy Bobbin, and the
three little girls were almost as sweet to look upon as was Ozma, who
sat at the head of her table and outshone all her guests in loveliness.

King Rinkitink was delighted with the quaint people of Oz and laughed
and joked with the tin man and the pumpkin-headed man and found Cap'n
Bill a very agreeable companion. But what amused the jolly King most
were the animal guests, which Ozma always invited to her banquets and
seated at a table by themselves, where they talked and chatted together
as people do but were served the sort of food their natures required.
The Hungry Tiger and Cowardly Lion and the Glass Cat were much admired
by Rinkitink, but when he met a mule named Hank, which Betsy Bobbin had
brought to Oz, the King found the creature so comical that he laughed
and chuckled until his friends thought he would choke. Then while the
banquet was still in progress, Rinkitink composed and sang a song to
the mule and they all joined in the chorus, which was something like
this:

  "It's very queer how big an ear
    Is worn by Mr. Donkey;
  And yet I fear he could not hear
    If it were on a monkey.

  'Tis thick and strong and broad and long
    And also very hairy;
  It's quite becoming to our Hank
    But might disgrace a fairy!"


This song was received with so much enthusiasm that Rinkitink was
prevailed upon to sing another. They gave him a little time to compose
the rhyme, which he declared would be better if he could devote a month
or two to its composition, but the sentiment he expressed was so
admirable that no one criticized the song or the manner in which the
jolly little King sang it.

Dorothy wrote down the words on a piece of paper, and here they are:

  "We're merry comrades all, to-night,
  Because we've won a gallant fight
    And conquered all our foes.
  We're not afraid of anything,
  So let us gayly laugh and sing
    Until we seek repose.

  "We've all our grateful hearts can wish;
  King Gos has gone to feed the fish,
    Queen Cor has gone, as well;
  King Kitticut has found his own,
  Prince Bobo soon will have a throne
    Relieved of magic spell.

  "So let's forget the horrid strife
  That fell upon our peaceful life
    And caused distress and pain;
  For very soon across the sea
  We'll all be sailing merrily
    To Pingaree again."




Chapter Twenty Three

The Pearl Kingdom


It was unfortunate that the famous Scarecrow--the most popular person
in all Oz, next to Ozma--was absent at the time of the banquet, for he
happened just then to be making one of his trips through the country;
but the Scarecrow had a chance later to meet Rinkitink and Inga and the
King and Queen of Pingaree and Prince Bobo, for the party remained
several weeks at the Emerald City, where they were royally entertained,
and where both the gentle Queen Garee and the noble King Kitticut
recovered much of their good spirits and composure and tried to forget
their dreadful experiences.

At last, however, the King and Queen desired to return to their own
Pingaree, as they longed to be with their people again and see how well
they had rebuilt their homes. Inga also was anxious to return, although
he had been very happy in Oz, and King Rinkitink, who was happy
anywhere except at Gilgad, decided to go with his former friends to
Pingaree. As for prince Bobo, he had become so greatly attached to King
Rinkitink that he was loth to leave him.

On a certain day they all bade good-bye to Ozma and Dorothy and Glinda
and the Wizard and all their good friends in Oz, and were driven in the
Red Wagon to the edge of the Deadly Desert, which they crossed safely
on the Magic Carpet. They then made their way across the Nome Kingdom
and the Wheeler Country, where no one molested them, to the shores of
the Nonestic Ocean. There they found the boat with the silver lining
still lying undisturbed on the beach.

There were no important adventures during the trip and on their arrival
at the pearl kingdom they were amazed at the beautiful appearance of
the island they had left in ruins. All the houses of the people had
been rebuilt and were prettier than before, with green lawns before
them and flower gardens in the back yards. The marble towers of King
Kitticut's new palace were very striking and impressive, while the
palace itself proved far more magnificent than it had been before the
warriors from Regos destroyed it.

Nikobob had been very active and skillful in directing all this work,
and he had also built a pretty cottage for himself, not far from the
King's palace, and there Inga found Zella, who was living very happy
and contented in her new home. Not only had Nikobob accomplished all
this in a comparatively brief space of time, but he had started the
pearl fisheries again and when King Kitticut returned to Pingaree he
found a quantity of fine pearls already in the royal treasury.

So pleased was Kitticut with the good judgment, industry and honesty of
the former charcoal-burner of Regos, that he made Nikobob his Lord High
Chamberlain and put him in charge of the pearl fisheries and all the
business matters of the island kingdom.

They all settled down very comfortably in the new palace and the Queen
gathered her maids about her once more and set them to work
embroidering new draperies for the royal throne. Inga placed the three
Magic Pearls in their silken bag and again deposited them in the secret
cavity under the tiled flooring of the banquet hall, where they could
be quickly secured if danger ever threatened the now prosperous island.

King Rinkitink occupied a royal guest chamber built especially for his
use and seemed in no hurry to leave his friends in Pingaree. The fat
little King had to walk wherever he went and so missed Bilbil more and
more; but he seldom walked far and he was so fond of Prince BoBo that
he never regretted Bilbil's disenchantment.

Indeed, the jolly monarch was welcome to remain forever in Pingaree, if
he wished to, for his merry disposition set smiles on the faces of all
his friends and made everyone near him as jolly as he was himself. When
King Kitticut was not too busy with affairs of state he loved to join
his guest and listen to his brother monarch's songs and stories. For he
found Rinkitink to be, with all his careless disposition, a shrewd
philosopher, and in talking over their adventures one day the King of
Gilgad said:

"The beauty of life is its sudden changes. No one knows what is going
to happen next, and so we are constantly being surprised and
entertained. The many ups and downs should not discourage us, for if we
are down, we know that a change is coming and we will go up again;
while those who are up are almost certain to go down. My grandfather
had a song which well expresses this and if you will listen I will sing
it."

"Of course I will listen to your song," returned Kitticut, "for it
would be impolite not to."

So Rinkitink sang his grandfather's song:

  "A mighty King once ruled the land--
    But now he's baking pies.
  A pauper, on the other hand,
    Is ruling, strong and wise.

  A tiger once in jungles raged--
    But now he's in a zoo;
  A lion, captive-born and caged,
    Now roams the forest through.

  A man once slapped a poor boy's pate
    And made him weep and wail.
  The boy became a magistrate
    And put the man in jail.

  A sunny day succeeds the night;
    It's summer--then it snows!
  Right oft goes wrong and wrong comes right,
    As ev'ry wise man knows."




Chapter Twenty-Four

The Captive King


One morning, just as the royal party was finishing breakfast, a servant
came running to say that a great fleet of boats was approaching the
island from the south. King Kitticut sprang up at once, in great alarm,
for he had much cause to fear strange boats. The others quickly
followed him to the shore to see what invasion might be coming upon
them.

Inga was there with the first, and Nikobob and Zella soon joined the
watchers. And presently, while all were gazing eagerly at the
approaching fleet, King Rinkitink suddenly cried out:

"Get your pearls, Prince Inga--get them quick!"

"Are these our enemies, then?" asked the boy, looking with surprise
upon the fat little King, who had begun to tremble violently.

"They are my people of Gilgad!" answered Rinkitink, wiping a tear from
his eye. "I recognize my royal standards flying from the boats. So,
please, dear Inga, get out your pearls to protect me!"

"What can you fear at the hands of your own subjects?" asked Kitticut,
astonished.

But before his frightened guest could answer the question Prince Bobo,
who was standing beside his friend, gave an amused laugh and said:

"You are caught at last, dear Rinkitink. Your people will take you home
again and oblige you to reign as King."

Rinkitink groaned aloud and clasped his hands together with a gesture
of despair, an attitude so comical that the others could scarcely
forbear laughing.

But now the boats were landing upon the beach. They were fifty in
number, beautifully decorated and upholstered and rowed by men clad in
the gay uniforms of the King of Gilgad. One splendid boat had a throne
of gold in the center, over which was draped the King's royal robe of
purple velvet, embroidered with gold buttercups.

Rinkitink shuddered when he saw this throne; but now a tall man,
handsomely dressed, approached and knelt upon the grass before his
King, while all the other occupants of the boats shouted joyfully and
waved their plumed hats in the air.

"Thanks to our good fortune," said the man who kneeled, "we have found
Your Majesty at last!"

"Pinkerbloo," answered Rinkitink sternly, "I must have you hanged, for
thus finding me against my will."

"You think so now, Your Majesty, but you will never do it," returned
Pinkerbloo, rising and kissing the King's hand.

"Why won't I?" asked Rinkitink.

"Because you are much too tender-hearted, Your Majesty."

"It may be--it may be," agreed Rinkitink, sadly. "It is one of my
greatest failings. But what chance brought you here, my Lord
Pinkerbloo?"

"We have searched for you everywhere, sire, and all the people of
Gilgad have been in despair since you so mysteriously disappeared. We
could not appoint a new King, because we did not know but that you
still lived; so we set out to find you, dead or alive. After visiting
many islands of the Nonestic Ocean we at last thought of Pingaree, from
where come the precious pearls; and now our faithful quest has been
rewarded."

"And what now?" asked Rinkitink.

"Now, Your Majesty, you must come home with us, like a good and dutiful
King, and rule over your people," declared the man in a firm voice.

"I will not."

"But you must--begging Your Majesty's pardon for the contradiction."

"Kitticut," cried poor Rinkitink, "you must save me from being captured
by these, my subjects. What! must I return to Gilgad and be forced to
reign in splendid state when I much prefer to eat and sleep and sing in
my own quiet way? They will make me sit in a throne three hours a day
and listen to dry and tedious affairs of state; and I must stand up for
hours at the court receptions, till I get corns on my heels; and
forever must I listen to tiresome speeches and endless petitions and
complaints!"

"But someone must do this, Your Majesty," said Pinkerbloo respectfully,
"and since you were born to be our King you cannot escape your duty."

"'Tis a horrid fate!" moaned Rinkitink. "I would die willingly, rather
than be a King--if it did not hurt so terribly to die."

"You will find it much more comfortable to reign than to die, although
I fully appreciate Your Majesty's difficult position and am truly sorry
for you," said Pinkerbloo.

King Kitticut had listened to this conversation thoughtfully, so now he
said to his friend:

"The man is right, dear Rinkitink. It is your duty to reign, since fate
has made you a King, and I see no honorable escape for you. I shall
grieve to lose your companionship, but I feel the separation cannot be
avoided."

Rinkitink sighed.

"Then," said he, turning to Lord Pinkerbloo, "in three days I will
depart with you for Gilgad; but during those three days I propose to
feast and make merry with my good friend King Kitticut."

Then all the people of Gilgad shouted with delight and eagerly
scrambled ashore to take their part in the festival.

Those three days were long remembered in Pingaree, for never--before
nor since--has such feasting and jollity been known upon that island.
Rinkitink made the most of his time and everyone laughed and sang with
him by day and by night.

Then, at last, the hour of parting arrived and the King of Gilgad and
Ruler of the Dominion of Rinkitink was escorted by a grand procession
to his boat and seated upon his golden throne. The rowers of the fifty
boats paused, with their glittering oars pointed into the air like
gigantic uplifted sabres, while the people of Pingaree--men, women and
children--stood upon the shore shouting a royal farewell to the jolly
King.

Then came a sudden hush, while Rinkitink stood up and, with a bow to
those assembled to witness his departure, sang the following song,
which he had just composed for the occasion.

  "Farewell, dear Isle of Pingaree--
  The fairest land in all the sea!
  No living mortals, kings or churls,
  Would scorn to wear thy precious pearls.

  "King Kitticut, 'tis with regret
  I'm forced to say farewell; and yet
  Abroad no longer can I roam
  When fifty boats would drag me home.

  "Good-bye, my Prince of Pingaree;
  A noble King some time you'll be
  And long and wisely may you reign
  And never face a foe again!"


They cheered him from the shore; they cheered him from the boats; and
then all the oars of the fifty boats swept downward with a single
motion and dipped their blades into the purple-hued waters of the
Nonestic Ocean.

As the boats shot swiftly over the ripples of the sea Rinkitink turned
to Prince Bobo, who had decided not to desert his former master and his
present friend, and asked anxiously:

"How did you like that song, Bilbil--I mean Bobo? Is it a masterpiece,
do you think?"

And Bobo replied with a smile:

"Like all your songs, dear Rinkitink, the sentiment far excels the
poetry."





The Wonderful Oz Books

by L. Frank Baum

   1 The Wizard of Oz
   2 The Land of Oz
   3 Ozma of Oz
   4 Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz
   5 The Road to Oz
   6 The Emerald City of Oz
   7 The Patchwork Girl of Oz
   8 Tik-Tok of Oz
   9 The Scarecrow of Oz
  10 Rinkitink in Oz
  11 The Lost Princess of Oz
  12 The Tin Woodman of Oz
  13 The Magic of Oz
  14 Glinda of Oz

========================================
========================================

THE SCARECROW of OZ


by

L. Frank Baum




  Dedicated to

  "The uplifters" of Los Angeles, California, in
  grateful appreciation of the pleasure I have derived
  from association with them, and in recognition of
  their sincere endeavor to uplift humanity through
  kindness, consideration and good-fellowship. They are
  big men--all of them--and all with the generous
  hearts of little children.

  L. Frank Baum





'TWIXT YOU AND ME

The Army of Children which besieged the Postoffice, conquered the
Postmen and delivered to me its imperious Commands, insisted that Trot
and Cap'n Bill be admitted to the Land of Oz, where Trot could enjoy
the society of Dorothy, Betsy Bobbin and Ozma, while the one-legged
sailor-man might become a comrade of the Tin Woodman, the Shaggy Man,
Tik-Tok and all the other quaint people who inhabit this wonderful
fairyland.

It was no easy task to obey this order and land Trot and Cap'n Bill
safely in Oz, as you will discover by reading this book. Indeed, it
required the best efforts of our dear old friend, the Scarecrow, to
save them from a dreadful fate on the journey; but the story leaves
them happily located in Ozma's splendid palace and Dorothy has promised
me that Button-Bright and the three girls are sure to encounter, in the
near future, some marvelous adventures in the Land of Oz, which I hope
to be permitted to relate to you in the next Oz Book.

Meantime, I am deeply grateful to my little readers for their continued
enthusiasm over the Oz stories, as evinced in the many letters they
send me, all of which are lovingly cherished. It takes more and more Oz
Books every year to satisfy the demands of old and new readers, and
there have been formed many "Oz Reading Societies," where the Oz Books
owned by different members are read aloud.  All this is very gratifying
to me and encourages me to write more stories. When the children have
had enough of them, I hope they will let me know, and then I'll try to
write something different.

L. Frank Baum
  "Royal Historian of Oz."
    "OZCOT"
      at HOLLYWOOD
        in CALIFORNIA, 1915.




LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1 - The Great Whirlpool
   2 - The Cavern Under the Sea
   3 - The Ork
   4 - Daylight at Last
   5 - The Little Old Man of the Island
   6 - The Flight of the Midgets
   7 - The Bumpy Man
   8 - Button-Bright is Lost, and Found Again
   9 - The Kingdom of Jinxland
  10 - Pon, the Gardener's Boy
  11 - The Wicked King and Googly-Goo
  12 - The Wooden-Legged Grass-Hopper
  13 - Glinda the Good and the Scarecrow of Oz
  14 - The Frozen Heart
  15 - Trot Meets the Scarecrow
  16 - Pon Summons the King to Surrender
  17 - The Ork Rescues Button-Bright
  18 - The Scarecrow Meets an Enemy
  19 - The Conquest of the Witch
  20 - Queen Gloria
  21 - Dorothy, Betsy and Ozma
  22 - The Waterfall
  23 - The Land of Oz
  24 - The Royal Reception




Chapter One

The Great Whirlpool


"Seems to me," said Cap'n Bill, as he sat beside Trot under the big
acacia tree, looking out over the blue ocean, "seems to me, Trot, as
how the more we know, the more we find we don't know."

"I can't quite make that out, Cap'n Bill," answered the little girl in
a serious voice, after a moment's thought, during which her eyes
followed those of the old sailor-man across the glassy surface of the
sea. "Seems to me that all we learn is jus' so much gained."

"I know; it looks that way at first sight," said the sailor, nodding
his head; "but those as knows the least have a habit of thinkin' they
know all there is to know, while them as knows the most admits what a
turr'ble big world this is. It's the knowing ones that realize one
lifetime ain't long enough to git more'n a few dips o' the oars of
knowledge."

Trot didn't answer. She was a very little girl, with big, solemn eyes
and an earnest, simple manner. Cap'n Bill had been her faithful
companion for years and had taught her almost everything she knew.

He was a wonderful man, this Cap'n Bill. Not so very old, although his
hair was grizzled--what there was of it. Most of his head was bald as
an egg and as shiny as oilcloth, and this made his big ears stick out
in a funny way. His eyes had a gentle look and were pale blue in color,
and his round face was rugged and bronzed. Cap'n Bill's left leg was
missing, from the knee down, and that was why the sailor no longer
sailed the seas. The wooden leg he wore was good enough to stump around
with on land, or even to take Trot out for a row or a sail on the
ocean, but when it came to "runnin' up aloft" or performing active
duties on shipboard, the old sailor was not equal to the task. The loss
of his leg had ruined his career and the old sailor found comfort in
devoting himself to the education and companionship of the little girl.

The accident to Cap'n Bill's leg bad happened at about the time Trot
was born, and ever since that he had lived with Trot's mother as "a
star boarder," having enough money saved up to pay for his weekly
"keep."  He loved the baby and often held her on his lap; her first
ride was on Cap'n Bill's shoulders, for she had no baby-carriage; and
when she began to toddle around, the child and the sailor became close
comrades and enjoyed many strange adventures together. It is said the
fairies had been present at Trot's birth and had marked her forehead
with their invisible mystic signs, so that she was able to see and do
many wonderful things.

The acacia tree was on top of a high bluff, but a path ran down the
bank in a zigzag way to the water's edge, where Cap'n Bill's boat was
moored to a rock by means of a stout cable. It had been a hot, sultry
afternoon, with scarcely a breath of air stirring, so Cap'n Bill and
Trot had been quietly sitting beneath the shade of the tree, waiting
for the sun to get low enough for them to take a row.

They had decided to visit one of the great caves which the waves had
washed out of the rocky coast during many years of steady effort. The
caves were a source of continual delight to both the girl and the
sailor, who loved to explore their awesome depths.

"I b'lieve, Cap'n," remarked Trot, at last, "that it's time for us to
start."

The old man cast a shrewd glance at the sky, the sea and the motionless
boat. Then he shook his head.

"Mebbe it's time, Trot," he answered, "but I don't jes' like the looks
o' things this afternoon."

"What's wrong?" she asked wonderingly.

"Can't say as to that. Things is too quiet to suit me, that's all. No
breeze, not a ripple a-top the water, nary a gull a-flyin' anywhere,
an' the end o' the hottest day o' the year. I ain't no weather-prophet,
Trot, but any sailor would know the signs is ominous."

"There's nothing wrong that I can see," said Trot.

"If there was a cloud in the sky even as big as my thumb, we might
worry about it; but--look, Cap'n!--the sky is as clear as can be."

He looked again and nodded.

"P'r'aps we can make the cave, all right," he agreed, not wishing to
disappoint her.  "It's only a little way out, an' we'll be on the
watch; so come along, Trot."

Together they descended the winding path to the beach. It was no
trouble for the girl to keep her footing on the steep way, but Cap'n
Bill, because of his wooden leg, had to hold on to rocks and roots now
and then to save himself from tumbling. On a level path he was as spry
as anyone, but to climb up hill or down required some care.

They reached the boat safely and while Trot was untying the rope Cap'n
Bill reached into a crevice of the rock and drew out several tallow
candles and a box of wax matches, which he thrust into the capacious
pockets of his "sou'wester."  This sou'wester was a short coat of
oilskin which the old sailor wore on all occasions--when he wore a coat
at all--and the pockets always contained a variety of objects, useful
and ornamental, which made even Trot wonder where they all came from
and why Cap'n Bill should treasure them. The jackknives--a big one and
a little one--the bits of cord, the fishhooks, the nails: these were
handy to have on certain occasions. But bits of shell, and tin boxes
with unknown contents, buttons, pincers, bottles of curious stones and
the like, seemed quite unnecessary to carry around. That was Cap'n
Bill's business, however, and now that he added the candles and the
matches to his collection Trot made no comment, for she knew these last
were to light their way through the caves. The sailor always rowed the
boat, for he handled the oars with strength and skill. Trot sat in the
stern and steered. The place where they embarked was a little bight or
circular bay, and the boat cut across a much larger bay toward a
distant headland where the caves were located, right at the water's
edge. They were nearly a mile from shore and about halfway across the
bay when Trot suddenly sat up straight and exclaimed: "What's that,
Cap'n?"

He stopped rowing and turned half around to look.

"That, Trot," he slowly replied, "looks to me mighty like a whirlpool."

"What makes it, Cap'n?"

"A whirl in the air makes the whirl in the water. I was afraid as we'd
meet with trouble, Trot. Things didn't look right. The air was too
still."

"It's coming closer," said the girl.

The old man grabbed the oars and began rowing with all his strength.

"'Tain't comin' closer to us, Trot," he gasped; "it's we that are
comin' closer to the whirlpool. The thing is drawin' us to it like a
magnet!"

Trot's sun-bronzed face was a little paler as she grasped the tiller
firmly and tried to steer the boat away; but she said not a word to
indicate fear.

The swirl of the water as they came nearer made a roaring sound that
was fearful to listen to. So fierce and powerful was the whirlpool that
it drew the surface of the sea into the form of a great basin, slanting
downward toward the center, where a big hole had been made in the
ocean--a hole with walls of water that were kept in place by the rapid
whirling of the air.

The boat in which Trot and Cap'n Bill were riding was just on the outer
edge of this saucer-like slant, and the old sailor knew very well that
unless he could quickly force the little craft away from the rushing
current they would soon be drawn into the great black hole that yawned
in the middle. So he exerted all his might and pulled as he had never
pulled before. He pulled so hard that the left oar snapped in two and
sent Cap'n Bill sprawling upon the bottom of the boat.

He scrambled up quickly enough and glanced over the side. Then he
looked at Trot, who sat quite still, with a serious, far-away look in
her sweet eyes. The boat was now speeding swiftly of its own accord,
following the line of the circular basin round and round and gradually
drawing nearer to the great hole in the center. Any further effort to
escape the whirlpool was useless, and realizing this fact Cap'n Bill
turned toward Trot and put an arm around her, as if to shield her from
the awful fate before them.  He did not try to speak, because the roar
of the waters would have drowned the sound of his voice.

These two faithful comrades had faced dangers before, but nothing to
equal that which now faced them. Yet Cap'n Bill, noting the look in
Trot's eyes and remembering how often she had been protected by unseen
powers, did not quite give way to despair.

The great hole in the dark water--now growing nearer and nearer--looked
very terrifying; but they were both brave enough to face it and await
the result of the adventure.




Chapter Two

The Cavern Under the Sea


The circles were so much smaller at the bottom of the basin, and the
boat moved so much more swiftly, that Trot was beginning to get dizzy
with the motion, when suddenly the boat made a leap and dived headlong
into the murky depths of the hole. Whirling like tops, but still
clinging together, the sailor and the girl were separated from their
boat and plunged down--down--down--into the farthermost recesses of the
great ocean.

At first their fall was swift as an arrow, but presently they seemed to
be going more moderately and Trot was almost sure that unseen arms were
about her, supporting her and protecting her. She could see nothing,
because the water filled her eyes and blurred her vision, but she clung
fast to Cap'n Bill's sou'wester, while other arms clung fast to her,
and so they gradually sank down and down until a full stop was made,
when they began to ascend again.

But it seemed to Trot that they were not rising straight to the surface
from where they had come. The water was no longer whirling them and
they seemed to be drawn in a slanting direction through still, cool
ocean depths. And then--in much quicker time than I have told it--up
they popped to the surface and were cast at full length upon a sandy
beach, where they lay choking and gasping for breath and wondering what
had happened to them.

Trot was the first to recover. Disengaging herself from Cap'n Bill's
wet embrace and sitting up, she rubbed the water from her eyes and then
looked around her.  A soft, bluish-green glow lighted the place, which
seemed to be a sort of cavern, for above and on either side of her were
rugged rocks. They had been cast upon a beach of clear sand, which
slanted upward from the pool of water at their feet--a pool which
doubtless led into the big ocean that fed it. Above the reach of the
waves of the pool were more rocks, and still more and more, into the
dim windings and recesses of which the glowing light from the water did
not penetrate.

The place looked grim and lonely, but Trot was thankful that she was
still alive and had suffered no severe injury during her trying
adventure under water. At her side Cap'n Bill was sputtering and
coughing, trying to get rid of the water he had swallowed. Both of them
were soaked through, yet the cavern was warm and comfortable and a
wetting did not dismay the little girl in the least.

She crawled up the slant of sand and gathered in her hand a bunch of
dried seaweed, with which she mopped the face of Cap'n Bill and cleared
the water from his eyes and ears. Presently the old man sat up and
stared at her intently. Then he nodded his bald head three times and
said in a gurgling voice:

"Mighty good, Trot; mighty good! We didn't reach Davy Jones's locker
that time, did we? Though why we didn't, an' why we're here, is more'n
I kin make out."

"Take it easy, Cap'n," she replied. "We're safe enough, I guess, at
least for the time being."

He squeezed the water out of the bottoms of his loose trousers and felt
of his wooden leg and arms and head, and finding he had brought all of
his person with him he gathered courage to examine closely their
surroundings.

"Where d'ye think we are, Trot?" he presently asked.

"Can't say, Cap'n. P'r'aps in one of our caves."

He shook his head. "No," said he, "I don't think that, at all.  The
distance we came up didn't seem half as far as the distance we went
down; an' you'll notice there ain't any outside entrance to this cavern
whatever. It's a reg'lar dome over this pool o' water, and unless
there's some passage at the back, up yonder, we're fast pris'ners."

Trot looked thoughtfully over her shoulder.

"When we're rested," she said, "we will crawl up there and see if
there's a way to get out."

Cap'n Bill reached in the pocket of his oilskin coat and took out his
pipe. It was still dry, for he kept it in an oilskin pouch with his
tobacco. His matches were in a tight tin box, so in a few moments the
old sailor was smoking contentedly. Trot knew it helped him to think
when he was in any difficulty. Also, the pipe did much to restore the
old sailor's composure, after his long ducking and his terrible
fright--a fright that was more on Trot's account than his own.

The sand was dry where they sat, and soaked up the water that dripped
from their clothing. When Trot had squeezed the wet out of her hair she
began to feel much like her old self again. By and by they got upon
their feet and crept up the incline to the scattered boulders above.
Some of these were of huge size, but by passing between some and around
others, they were able to reach the extreme rear of the cavern.

"Yes," said Trot, with interest, "here's a round hole."

"And it's black as night inside it," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"Just the same," answered the girl, "we ought to explore it, and see
where it goes, 'cause it's the only poss'ble way we can get out of this
place."

Cap'n Bill eyed the hole doubtfully

"It may be a way out o' here, Trot," he said, "but it may be a way into
a far worse place than this. I'm not sure but our best plan is to stay
right here."

Trot wasn't sure, either, when she thought of it in that light. After
awhile she made her way back to the sands again, and Cap'n Bill
followed her. As they sat down, the child looked thoughtfully at the
sailor's bulging pockets.

"How much food have we got, Cap'n?" she asked.

"Half a dozen ship's biscuits an' a hunk o' cheese," he replied. "Want
some now, Trot?"

She shook her head, saying:

"That ought to keep us alive 'bout three days if we're careful of it."

"Longer'n that, Trot," said Cap'n Bill, but his voice was a little
troubled and unsteady.

"But if we stay here we're bound to starve in time," continued the
girl, "while if we go into the dark hole--"

"Some things are more hard to face than starvation," said the
sailor-man, gravely. "We don't know what's inside that dark hole: Trot,
nor where it might lead us to."

"There's a way to find that out," she persisted.

Instead of replying, Cap'n Bill began searching in his pockets. He soon
drew out a little package of fish-hooks and a long line. Trot watched
him join them together. Then he crept a little way up the slope and
turned over a big rock. Two or three small crabs began scurrying away
over the sands and the old sailor caught them and put one on his hook
and the others in his pocket. Coming back to the pool he swung the hook
over his shoulder and circled it around his head and cast it nearly
into the center of the water, where he allowed it to sink gradually,
paying out the line as far as it would go. When the end was reached, he
began drawing it in again, until the crab bait was floating on the
surface.

Trot watched him cast the line a second time, and a third. She decided
that either there were no fishes in the pool or they would not bite the
crab bait. But Cap'n Bill was an old fisherman and not easily
discouraged. When the crab got away he put another on the hook. When
the crabs were all gone he climbed up the rocks and found some more.

Meantime Trot tired of watching him and lay down upon the sands, where
she fell fast asleep. During the next two hours her clothing dried
completely, as did that of the old sailor. They were both so used to
salt water that there was no danger of taking cold.

Finally the little girl was wakened by a splash beside her and a grunt
of satisfaction from Cap'n Bill. She opened her eyes to find that the
Cap'n had landed a silver-scaled fish weighing about two pounds. This
cheered her considerably and she hurried to scrape together a heap of
seaweed, while Cap'n Bill cut up the fish with his jackknife and got it
ready for cooking.

They had cooked fish with seaweed before. Cap'n Bill wrapped his fish
in some of the weed and dipped it in the water to dampen it. Then he
lighted a match and set fire to Trot's heap, which speedily burned down
to a glowing bed of ashes. Then they laid the wrapped fish on the
ashes, covered it with more seaweed, and allowed this to catch fire and
burn to embers. After feeding the fire with seaweed for some time, the
sailor finally decided that their supper was ready, so he scattered the
ashes and drew out the bits of fish, still encased in their smoking
wrappings.

When these wrappings were removed, the fish was found thoroughly cooked
and both Trot and Cap'n Bill ate of it freely. It had a slight flavor
of seaweed and would have been better with a sprinkling of salt.

The soft glow which until now had lighted the cavern, began to grow
dim, but there was a great quantity of seaweed in the place, so after
they had eaten their fish they kept the fire alive for a time by giving
it a handful of fuel now and then.

From an inner pocket the sailor drew a small flask of battered metal
and unscrewing the cap handed it to Trot.  She took but one swallow of
the water although she wanted more, and she noticed that Cap'n Bill
merely wet his lips with it.

"S'pose," said she, staring at the glowing seaweed fire and speaking
slowly, "that we can catch all the fish we need; how 'bout the
drinking-water, Cap'n?"

He moved uneasily but did not reply. Both of them were thinking about
the dark hole, but while Trot had little fear of it the old man could
not overcome his dislike to enter the place. He knew that Trot was
right, though. To remain in the cavern, where they now were, could only
result in slow but sure death.

It was nighttime up on the earth's surface, so the little girl became
drowsy and soon fell asleep. After a time the old sailor slumbered on
the sands beside her. It was very still and nothing disturbed them for
hours. When at last they awoke the cavern was light again.

They had divided one of the biscuits and were munching it for breakfast
when they were startled by a sudden splash in the pool. Looking toward
it they saw emerging from the water the most curious creature either of
them had ever beheld. It wasn't a fish, Trot decided, nor was it a
beast. It had wings, though, and queer wings they were: shaped like an
inverted chopping-bowl and covered with tough skin instead of feathers.
It had four legs--much like the legs of a stork, only double the
number--and its head was shaped a good deal like that of a poll parrot,
with a beak that curved downward in front and upward at the edges, and
was half bill and half mouth. But to call it a bird was out of the
question, because it had no feathers whatever except a crest of wavy
plumes of a scarlet color on the very top of its head. The strange
creature must have weighed as much as Cap'n Bill, and as it floundered
and struggled to get out of the water to the sandy beach it was so big
and unusual that both Trot and her companion stared at it in wonder--in
wonder that was not unmixed with fear.




Chapter Three

The Ork


The eyes that regarded them, as the creature stood dripping before
them, were bright and mild in expression, and the queer addition to
their party made no attempt to attack them and seemed quite as
surprised by the meeting as they were.

"I wonder," whispered Trot, "what it is."

"Who, me?" exclaimed the creature in a shrill, high-pitched voice.
"Why, I'm an Ork."

"Oh!" said the girl. "But what is an Ork?"

"I am," he repeated, a little proudly, as he shook the water from his
funny wings; "and if ever an Ork was glad to be out of the water and on
dry land again, you can be mighty sure that I'm that especial,
individual Ork!"

"Have you been in the water long?" inquired Cap'n Bill, thinking it
only polite to show an interest in the strange creature.

"Why, this last ducking was about ten minutes, I believe, and that's
about nine minutes and sixty seconds too long for comfort," was the
reply. "But last night I was in an awful pickle, I assure you. The
whirlpool caught me, and--"

"Oh, were you in the whirlpool, too?" asked Trot eagerly.

He gave her a glance that was somewhat reproachful.

"I believe I was mentioning the fact, young lady, when your desire to
talk interrupted me," said the Ork. "I am not usually careless in my
actions, but that whirlpool was so busy yesterday that I thought I'd
see what mischief it was up to. So I flew a little too near it and the
suction of the air drew me down into the depths of the ocean. Water and
I are natural enemies, and it would have conquered me this time had not
a bevy of pretty mermaids come to my assistance and dragged me away
from the whirling water and far up into a cavern, where they deserted
me."

"Why, that's about the same thing that happened to us," cried Trot.
"Was your cavern like this one?"

"I haven't examined this one yet," answered the Ork; "but if they
happen to be alike I shudder at our fate, for the other one was a
prison, with no outlet except by means of the water.  I stayed there
all night, however, and this morning I plunged into the pool, as far
down as I could go, and then swam as hard and as far as I could. The
rocks scraped my back, now and then, and I barely escaped the clutches
of an ugly sea-monster; but by and by I came to the surface to catch my
breath, and found myself here. That's the whole story, and as I see you
have something to eat I entreat you to give me a share of it. The truth
is, I'm half starved."

With these words the Ork squatted down beside them. Very reluctantly
Cap'n Bill drew another biscuit from his pocket and held it out. The
Ork promptly seized it in one of its front claws and began to nibble
the biscuit in much the same manner a parrot might have done.

"We haven't much grub," said the sailor-man, "but we're willin' to
share it with a comrade in distress."

"That's right," returned the Ork, cocking its head sidewise in a
cheerful manner, and then for a few minutes there was silence while
they all ate of the biscuits. After a while Trot said:

"I've never seen or heard of an Ork before. Are there many of you?"

"We are rather few and exclusive, I believe," was the reply. "In the
country where I was born we are the absolute rulers of all living
things, from ants to elephants."

"What country is that?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Orkland."

"Where does it lie?"

"I don't know, exactly. You see, I have a restless nature, for some
reason, while all the rest of my race are quiet and contented Orks and
seldom stray far from home. From childhood days I loved to fly long
distances away, although father often warned me that I would get into
trouble by so doing.

"'It's a big world, Flipper, my son,' he would say, 'and I've heard
that in parts of it live queer two-legged creatures called Men, who war
upon all other living things and would have little respect for even an
Ork.'

"This naturally aroused my curiosity and after I had completed my
education and left school I decided to fly out into the world and try
to get a glimpse of the creatures called Men. So I left home without
saying good-bye, an act I shall always regret. Adventures were many, I
found. I sighted men several times, but have never before been so close
to them as now. Also I had to fight my way through the air, for I met
gigantic birds, with fluffy feathers all over them, which attacked me
fiercely. Besides, it kept me busy escaping from floating airships. In
my rambling I had lost all track of distance or direction, so that when
I wanted to go home I had no idea where my country was located. I've
now been trying to find it for several months and it was during one of
my flights over the ocean that I met the whirlpool and became its
victim."

Trot and Cap'n Bill listened to this recital with much interest, and
from the friendly tone and harmless appearance of the Ork they judged
he was not likely to prove so disagreeable a companion as at first they
had feared he might be.

The Ork sat upon its haunches much as a cat does, but used the
finger-like claws of its front legs almost as cleverly as if they were
hands. Perhaps the most curious thing about the creature was its tail,
or what ought to have been its tail. This queer arrangement of skin,
bones and muscle was shaped like the propellers used on boats and
airships, having fan-like surfaces and being pivoted to its body. Cap'n
Bill knew something of mechanics, and observing the propeller-like tail
of the Ork he said:

"I s'pose you're a pretty swift flyer?"

"Yes, indeed; the Orks are admitted to be Kings of the Air."

"Your wings don't seem to amount to much," remarked Trot.

"Well, they are not very big," admitted the Ork, waving the four hollow
skins gently to and fro, "but they serve to support my body in the air
while I speed along by means of my tail. Still, taken altogether, I'm
very handsomely formed, don't you think?"

Trot did not like to reply, but Cap'n Bill nodded gravely. "For an
Ork," said he, "you're a wonder. I've never seen one afore, but I can
imagine you're as good as any."

That seemed to please the creature and it began walking around the
cavern, making its way easily up the slope. While it was gone, Trot and
Cap'n Bill each took another sip from the water-flask, to wash down
their breakfast.

"Why, here's a hole--an exit--an outlet!" exclaimed the Ork from above.

"We know," said Trot. "We found it last night."

"Well, then, let's be off," continued the Ork, after sticking its head
into the black hole and sniffing once or twice. "The air seems fresh
and sweet, and it can't lead us to any worse place than this."

The girl and the sailor-man got up and climbed to the side of the Ork.

"We'd about decided to explore this hole before you came," explained
Cap'n Bill; "but it's a dangerous place to navigate in the dark, so
wait till I light a candle."

"What is a candle?" inquired the Ork.

"You'll see in a minute," said Trot.

The old sailor drew one of the candles from his right-side pocket and
the tin matchbox from his left-side pocket. When he lighted the match
the Ork gave a startled jump and eyed the flame suspiciously; but Cap'n
Bill proceeded to light the candle and the action interested the Ork
very much.

"Light," it said, somewhat nervously, "is valuable in a hole of this
sort. The candle is not dangerous, I hope?"

"Sometimes it burns your fingers," answered Trot, "but that's about the
worst it can do--'cept to blow out when you don't want it to."

Cap'n Bill shielded the flame with his hand and crept into the hole. It
wasn't any too big for a grown man, but after he had crawled a few feet
it grew larger.  Trot came close behind him and then the Ork followed.

"Seems like a reg'lar tunnel," muttered the sailor-man, who was
creeping along awkwardly because of his wooden leg. The rocks, too,
hurt his knees.

For nearly half an hour the three moved slowly along the tunnel, which
made many twists and turns and sometimes slanted downward and sometimes
upward. Finally Cap'n Bill stopped short, with an exclamation of
disappointment, and held the flickering candle far ahead to light the
scene.

"What's wrong?" demanded Trot, who could see nothing because the
sailor's form completely filled the hole.

"Why, we've come to the end of our travels, I guess," he replied.

"Is the hole blocked?" inquired the Ork.

"No; it's wuss nor that," replied Cap'n Bill sadly. "I'm on the edge of
a precipice. Wait a minute an' I'll move along and let you see for
yourselves. Be careful, Trot, not to fall."

Then he crept forward a little and moved to one side, holding the
candle so that the girl could see to follow him. The Ork came next and
now all three knelt on a narrow ledge of rock which dropped straight
away and left a huge black space which the tiny flame of the candle
could not illuminate.

"H-m!" said the Ork, peering over the edge; "this doesn't look very
promising, I'll admit. But let me take your candle, and I'll fly down
and see what's below us."

"Aren't you afraid?" asked Trot.

"Certainly I'm afraid," responded the Ork. "But if we intend to escape
we can't stay on this shelf forever. So, as I notice you poor creatures
cannot fly, it is my duty to explore the place for you."

Cap'n Bill handed the Ork the candle, which had now burned to about
half its length. The Ork took it in one claw rather cautiously and then
tipped its body forward and slipped over the edge. They heard a queer
buzzing sound, as the tail revolved, and a brisk flapping of the
peculiar wings, but they were more interested just then in following
with their eyes the tiny speck of light which marked the location of
the candle. This light first made a great circle, then dropped slowly
downward and suddenly was extinguished, leaving everything before them
black as ink.

"Hi, there! How did that happen?" cried the Ork.

"It blew out, I guess," shouted Cap'n Bill. "Fetch it here."

"I can't see where you are," said the Ork.

So Cap'n Bill got out another candle and lighted it, and its flame
enabled the Ork to fly back to them. It alighted on the edge and held
out the bit of candle.

"What made it stop burning?" asked the creature.

"The wind," said Trot. "You must be more careful, this time."

"What's the place like?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"I don't know, yet; but there must be a bottom to it, so I'll try to
find it."

With this the Ork started out again and this time sank downward more
slowly. Down, down, down it went, till the candle was a mere spark, and
then it headed away to the left and Trot and Cap'n Bill lost all sight
of it.

In a few minutes, however, they saw the spark of light again, and as
the sailor still held the second lighted candle the Ork made straight
toward them. It was only a few yards distant when suddenly it dropped
the candle with a cry of pain and next moment alighted, fluttering
wildly, upon the rocky ledge.

"What's the matter?" asked Trot.

"It bit me!" wailed the Ork. "I don't like your candles. The thing
began to disappear slowly as soon as I took it in my claw, and it grew
smaller and smaller until just now it turned and bit me--a most
unfriendly thing to do. Oh--oh! Ouch, what a bite!"

"That's the nature of candles, I'm sorry to say," explained Cap'n Bill,
with a grin. "You have to handle 'em mighty keerful. But tell us, what
did you find down there?"

"I found a way to continue our journey," said the Ork, nursing tenderly
the claw which had been burned. "Just below us is a great lake of black
water, which looked so cold and wicked that it made me shudder; but
away at the left there's a big tunnel, which we can easily walk
through. I don't know where it leads to, of course, but we must follow
it and find out." "why, we can't get to it," protested the little girl.
"We can't fly, as you do, you must remember."

"No, that's true," replied the Ork musingly. "Your bodies are built
very poorly, it seems to me, since all you can do is crawl upon the
earth's surface. But you may ride upon my back, and in that way I can
promise you a safe journey to the tunnel."

"Are you strong enough to carry us?" asked Cap'n Bill, doubtfully.

"Yes, indeed; I'm strong enough to carry a dozen of you, if you could
find a place to sit," was the reply; "but there's only room between my
wings for one at a time, so I'll have to make two trips."

"All right; I'll go first," decided Cap'n Bill.

He lit another candle for Trot to hold while they were gone and to
light the Ork on his return to her, and then the old sailor got upon
the Ork's back, where he sat with his wooden leg sticking straight out
sidewise.

"If you start to fall, clasp your arms around my neck," advised the
creature.

"If I start to fall, it's good night an' pleasant dreams," said Cap'n
Bill.

"All ready?" asked the Ork.

"Start the buzz-tail," said Cap'n Bill, with a tremble in his voice.
But the Ork flew away so gently that the old man never even tottered in
his seat. Trot watched the light of Cap'n Bill's candle till it
disappeared in the far distance. She didn't like to be left alone on
this dangerous ledge, with a lake of black water hundreds of feet below
her; but she was a brave little girl and waited patiently for the
return of the Ork. It came even sooner than she had expected and the
creature said to her:

"Your friend is safe in the tunnel. Now, then, get aboard and I'll
carry you to him in a jiffy."

I'm sure not many little girls would have cared to take that awful ride
through the huge black cavern on the back of a skinny Ork. Trot didn't
care for it, herself, but it just had to be done and so she did it as
courageously as possible. Her heart beat fast and she was so nervous
she could scarcely hold the candle in her fingers as the Ork sped
swiftly through the darkness.

It seemed like a long ride to her, yet in reality the Ork covered the
distance in a wonderfully brief period of time and soon Trot stood
safely beside Cap'n Bill on the level floor of a big arched tunnel. The
sailor-man was very glad to greet his little comrade again and both
were grateful to the Ork for his assistance.

"I dunno where this tunnel leads to," remarked Cap'n Bill, "but it
surely looks more promisin' than that other hole we crept through."

"When the Ork is rested," said Trot, "we'll travel on and see what
happens."

"Rested!" cried the Ork, as scornfully as his shrill voice would allow.
"That bit of flying didn't tire me at all. I'm used to flying days at a
time, without ever once stopping."

"Then let's move on," proposed Cap'n Bill. He still held in his hand
one lighted candle, so Trot blew out the other flame and placed her
candle in the sailor's big pocket. She knew it was not wise to burn two
candles at once.

The tunnel was straight and smooth and very easy to walk through, so
they made good progress. Trot thought that the tunnel began about two
miles from the cavern where they had been cast by the whirlpool, but
now it was impossible to guess the miles traveled, for they walked
steadily for hours and hours without any change in their surroundings.

Finally Cap'n Bill stopped to rest.

"There's somethin' queer about this 'ere tunnel, I'm certain," he
declared, wagging his head dolefully. "Here's three candles gone
a'ready, an' only three more left us, yet the tunnel's the same as it
was when we started. An' how long it's goin' to keep up, no one knows."

"Couldn't we walk without a light?" asked Trot. "The way seems safe
enough."

"It does right now," was the reply, "but we can't tell when we are
likely to come to another gulf, or somethin' jes' as dangerous. In that
case we'd be killed afore we knew it."

"Suppose I go ahead?" suggested the Ork.  "I don't fear a fall, you
know, and if anything happens I'll call out and warn you."

"That's a good idea," declared Trot, and Cap'n Bill thought so, too. So
the Ork started off ahead, quite in the dark, and hand in band the two
followed him.

When they had walked in this way for a good long time the Ork halted
and demanded food. Cap'n Bill had not mentioned food because there was
so little left--only three biscuits and a lump of cheese about as big
as his two fingers--but he gave the Ork half of a biscuit, sighing as
he did so. The creature didn't care for the cheese, so the sailor
divided it between himself and Trot. They lighted a candle and sat down
in the tunnel while they ate.

"My feet hurt me," grumbled the Ork.  "I'm not used to walking and this
rocky passage is so uneven and lumpy that it hurts me to walk upon it."

"Can't you fly along?" asked Trot.

"No; the roof is too low," said the Ork.

After the meal they resumed their journey, which Trot began to fear
would never end. When Cap'n Bill noticed how tired the little girl was,
he paused and lighted a match and looked at his big silver watch.

"Why, it's night!" he exclaimed. "We've tramped all day, an' still
we're in this awful passage, which mebbe goes straight through the
middle of the world, an' mebbe is a circle--in which case we can keep
walkin' till doomsday. Not knowin' what's before us so well as we know
what's behind us, I propose we make a stop, now, an' try to sleep till
mornin'."

"That will suit me," asserted the Ork, with a groan. "My feet are
hurting me dreadfully and for the last few miles I've been limping with
pain."

"My foot hurts, too," said the sailor, looking for a smooth place on
the rocky floor to sit down.

"Your foot!" cried the Ork. "why, you've only one to hurt you, while I
have four. So I suffer four times as much as you possibly can. Here;
hold the candle while I look at the bottoms of my claws. I declare," he
said, examining them by the flickering light, "there are bunches of
pain all over them!"

"P'r'aps," said Trot, who was very glad to sit down beside her
companions, "you've got corns."

"Corns? Nonsense! Orks never have corns," protested the creature,
rubbing its sore feet tenderly.

"Then mebbe they're--they're-- What do you call 'em, Cap'n Bill?
Something 'bout the Pilgrim's Progress, you know."

"Bunions," said Cap'n Bill.

"Oh, yes; mebbe you've got bunions."

"It is possible," moaned the Ork.  "But whatever they are, another day
of such walking on them would drive me crazy."

"I'm sure they'll feel better by mornin'," said Cap'n Bill,
encouragingly. "Go to sleep an' try to forget your sore feet."

The Ork cast a reproachful look at the sailor-man, who didn't see it.
Then the creature asked plaintively: "Do we eat now, or do we starve?"

"There's only half a biscuit left for you," answered Cap'n Bill. "No
one knows how long we'll have to stay in this dark tunnel, where
there's nothing whatever to eat; so I advise you to save that morsel o'
food till later."

"Give it me now!" demanded the Ork. "If I'm going to starve, I'll do it
all at once--not by degrees."

Cap'n Bill produced the biscuit and the creature ate it in a trice.
Trot was rather hungry and whispered to Cap'n Bill that she'd take part
of her share; but the old man secretly broke his own half-biscuit in
two, saving Trot's share for a time of greater need.

He was beginning to be worried over the little girl's plight and long
after she was asleep and the Ork was snoring in a rather disagreeable
manner, Cap'n Bill sat with his back to a rock and smoked his pipe and
tried to think of some way to escape from this seemingly endless
tunnel. But after a time he also slept, for hobbling on a wooden leg
all day was tiresome, and there in the dark slumbered the three
adventurers for many hours, until the Ork roused itself and kicked the
old sailor with one foot.

"It must be another day," said he.




Chapter Four

Daylight at Last


Cap'n Bill rubbed his eyes, lit a match and consulted his watch.

"Nine o'clock.  Yes, I guess it's another day, sure enough. Shall we go
on?" he asked.

"Of course," replied the Ork. "Unless this tunnel is different from
everything else in the world, and has no end, we'll find a way out of
it sooner or later."

The sailor gently wakened Trot. She felt much rested by her long sleep
and sprang to her feet eagerly.

"Let's start, Cap'n," was all she said.

They resumed the journey and had only taken a few steps when the Ork
cried "Wow!" and made a great fluttering of its wings and whirling of
its tail. The others, who were following a short distance behind,
stopped abruptly.

"What's the matter?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Give us a light," was the reply. "I think we've come to the end of the
tunnel." Then, while Cap'n Bill lighted a candle, the creature added:
"If that is true, we needn't have wakened so soon, for we were almost
at the end of this place when we went to sleep."

The sailor-man and Trot came forward with a light. A wall of rock
really faced the tunnel, but now they saw that the opening made a sharp
turn to the left. So they followed on, by a narrower passage, and then
made another sharp turn this time to the right.

"Blow out the light, Cap'n," said the Ork, in a pleased voice. "We've
struck daylight."

Daylight at last! A shaft of mellow light fell almost at their feet as
Trot and the sailor turned the corner of the passage, but it came from
above, and raising their eyes they found they were at the bottom of a
deep, rocky well, with the top far, far above their heads. And here the
passage ended.

For a while they gazed in silence, at least two of them being filled
with dismay at the sight. But the Ork merely whistled softly and said
cheerfully:

"That was the toughest journey I ever had the misfortune to undertake,
and I'm glad it's over. Yet, unless I can manage to fly to the top of
this pit, we are entombed here forever."

"Do you think there is room enough for you to fly in?" asked the little
girl anxiously; and Cap'n Bill added:

"It's a straight-up shaft, so I don't see how you'll ever manage it."

"Were I an ordinary bird--one of those horrid feathered things--I
wouldn't even make the attempt to fly out," said the Ork.  "But my
mechanical propeller tail can accomplish wonders, and whenever you're
ready I'll show you a trick that is worth while."

"Oh!" exclaimed Trot; "do you intend to take us up, too?"

"Why not?"

"I thought," said Cap'n Bill, "as you'd go first, an' then send
somebody to help us by lettin' down a rope."

"Ropes are dangerous," replied the Ork, "and I might not be able to
find one to reach all this distance. Besides, it stands to reason that
if I can get out myself I can also carry you two with me."

"Well, I'm not afraid," said Trot, who longed to be on the earth's
surface again.

"S'pose we fall?" suggested Cap'n Bill, doubtfully.

"Why, in that case we would all fall together," returned the Ork. "Get
aboard, little girl; sit across my shoulders and put both your arms
around my neck."

Trot obeyed and when she was seated on the Ork, Cap'n Bill inquired:

"How 'bout me, Mr. Ork?"

"Why, I think you'd best grab hold of my rear legs and let me carry you
up in that manner," was the reply.

Cap'n Bill looked way up at the top of the well, and then he looked at
the Ork's slender, skinny legs and heaved a deep sigh.

"It's goin' to be some dangle, I guess; but if you don't waste too much
time on the way up, I may be able to hang on," said he.

"All ready, then!" cried the Ork, and at once his whirling tail began
to revolve. Trot felt herself rising into the air; when the creature's
legs left the ground Cap'n Bill grasped two of them firmly and held on
for dear life.  The Ork's body was tipped straight upward, and Trot had
to embrace the neck very tightly to keep from sliding off. Even in this
position the Ork had trouble in escaping the rough sides of the well.
Several times it exclaimed "Wow!" as it bumped its back, or a wing hit
against some jagged projection; but the tail kept whirling with
remarkable swiftness and the daylight grew brighter and brighter. It
was, indeed, a long journey from the bottom to the top, yet almost
before Trot realized they had come so far, they popped out of the hole
into the clear air and sunshine and a moment later the Ork alighted
gently upon the ground.

The release was so sudden that even with the creature's care for its
passengers Cap'n Bill struck the earth with a shock that sent him
rolling heel over head; but by the time Trot had slid down from her
seat the old sailor-man was sitting up and looking around him with much
satisfaction.

"It's sort o' pretty here," said he.

"Earth is a beautiful place!" cried Trot.

"I wonder where on earth we are?" pondered the Ork, turning first one
bright eye and then the other to this side and that. Trees there were,
in plenty, and shrubs and flowers and green turf. But there were no
houses; there were no paths; there was no sign of civilization whatever.

"Just before I settled down on the ground I thought I caught a view of
the ocean," said the Ork. "Let's see if I was right." Then he flew to a
little hill, near by, and Trot and Cap'n Bill followed him more slowly.
When they stood on the top of the hill they could see the blue waves of
the ocean in front of them, to the right of them, and at the left of
them. Behind the hill was a forest that shut out the view.

"I hope it ain't an island, Trot," said Cap'n Bill gravely.

"If it is, I s'pose we're prisoners," she replied.

"Ezzackly so, Trot."

"But, 'even so, it's better than those terr'ble underground tunnels and
caverns," declared the girl.

"You are right, little one," agreed the Ork. "Anything above ground is
better than the best that lies under ground. So let's not quarrel with
our fate but be thankful we've escaped."

"We are, indeed!" she replied. "But I wonder if we can find something
to eat in this place?"

"Let's explore an' find out," proposed Cap'n Bill. "Those trees over at
the left look like cherry-trees."

On the way to them the explorers had to walk through a tangle of vines
and Cap'n Bill, who went first, stumbled and pitched forward on his
face.

"Why, it's a melon!" cried Trot delightedly, as she saw what had caused
the sailor to fall.

Cap'n Bill rose to his foot, for he was not at all hurt, and examined
the melon. Then he took his big jackknife from his pocket and cut the
melon open. It was quite ripe and looked delicious; but the old man
tasted it before he permitted Trot to eat any. Deciding it was good he
gave her a big slice and then offered the Ork some. The creature looked
at the fruit somewhat disdainfully, at first, but once he had tasted
its flavor he ate of it as heartily as did the others. Among the vines
they discovered many other melons, and Trot said gratefully: "Well,
there's no danger of our starving, even if this is an island."

"Melons," remarked Cap'n Bill, "are both food an' water. We couldn't
have struck anything better."

Farther on they came to the cherry trees, where they obtained some of
the fruit, and at the edge of the little forest were wild plums. The
forest itself consisted entirely of nut trees--walnuts, filberts,
almonds and chestnuts--so there would be plenty of wholesome food for
them while they remained there.

Cap'n Bill and Trot decided to walk through the forest, to discover
what was on the other side of it, but the Ork's feet were still so sore
and "lumpy" from walking on the rocks that the creature said he
preferred to fly over the tree-tops and meet them on the other side.
The forest was not large, so by walking briskly for fifteen minutes
they reached its farthest edge and saw before them the shore of the
ocean.

"It's an island, all right," said Trot, with a sigh.

"Yes, and a pretty island, too," said Cap'n Bill, trying to conceal his
disappointment on Trot's account. "I guess, partner, if the wuss comes
to the wuss, I could build a raft--or even a boat--from those trees,
so's we could sail away in it."

The little girl brightened at this suggestion. "I don't see the Ork
anywhere," she remarked, looking around. Then her eyes lighted upon
something and she exclaimed: "Oh, Cap'n Bill! Isn't that a house, over
there to the left?"

Cap'n Bill, looking closely, saw a shed-like structure built at one
edge of the forest.

"Seems like it, Trot. Not that I'd call it much of a house, but it's a
buildin', all right. Let's go over an' see if it's occypied."




Chapter Five

The Little Old Man of the Island


A few steps brought them to the shed, which was merely a roof of boughs
built over a square space, with some branches of trees fastened to the
sides to keep off the wind. The front was quite open and faced the sea,
and as our friends came nearer they observed a little man, with a long
pointed beard, sitting motionless on a stool and staring thoughtfully
out over the water.

"Get out of the way, please," he called in a fretful voice. "Can't you
see you are obstructing my view?"

"Good morning," said Cap'n Bill, politely.

"It isn't a good morning!" snapped the little man. "I've seen plenty of
mornings better than this.  Do you call it a good morning when I'm
pestered with such a crowd as you?"

Trot was astonished to hear such words from a stranger whom they had
greeted quite properly, and Cap'n Bill grew red at the little man's
rudeness. But the sailor said, in a quiet tone of voice:

"Are you the only one as lives on this 'ere island?"

"Your grammar's bad," was the reply. "But this is my own exclusive
island, and I'll thank you to get off it as soon as possible."

"We'd like to do that," said Trot, and then she and Cap'n Bill turned
away and walked down to the shore, to see if any other land was in
sight.

The little man rose and followed them, although both were now too
provoked to pay any attention to him.

"Nothin' in sight, partner," reported Cap'n Bill, shading his eyes with
his hand; "so we'll have to stay here for a time, anyhow. It isn't a
bad place, Trot, by any means."

"That's all you know about it!" broke in the little man. "The trees are
altogether too green and the rocks are harder than they ought to be. I
find the sand very grainy and the water dreadfully wet. Every breeze
makes a draught and the sun shines in the daytime, when there's no need
of it, and disappears just as soon as it begins to get dark. If you
remain here you'll find the island very unsatisfactory."

Trot turned to look at him, and her sweet face was grave and curious.

"I wonder who you are," she said.

"My name is Pessim," said he, with an air of pride. "I'm called the
Observer."

"Oh. What do you observe?" asked the little girl.

"Everything I see," was the reply, in a more surly tone. Then Pessim
drew back with a startled exclamation and looked at some footprints in
the sand. "Why, good gracious me!" he cried in distress.

"What's the matter now?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Someone has pushed the earth in!  Don't you see it?

"It isn't pushed in far enough to hurt anything," said Trot, examining
the footprints.

"Everything hurts that isn't right," insisted the man. "If the earth
were pushed in a mile, it would be a great calamity, wouldn't it?"

"I s'pose so," admitted the little girl.

"Well, here it is pushed in a full inch!  That's a twelfth of a foot,
or a little more than a millionth part of a mile.  Therefore it is
one-millionth part of a calamity--Oh, dear! How dreadful!" said Pessim
in a wailing voice.

"Try to forget it, sir," advised Cap'n Bill, soothingly. "It's
beginning to rain. Let's get under your shed and keep dry."

"Raining!  Is it really raining?" asked Pessim, beginning to weep.

"It is," answered Cap'n Bill, as the drops began to descend, "and I
don't see any way to stop it--although I'm some observer myself."

"No; we can't stop it, I fear," said the man. "Are you very busy just
now?"

"I won't be after I get to the shed," replied the sailor-man.

"Then do me a favor, please," begged Pessim, walking briskly along
behind them, for they were hastening to the shed.

"Depends on what it is," said Cap'n Bill.

"I wish you would take my umbrella down to the shore and hold it over
the poor fishes till it stops raining. I'm afraid they'll get wet,"
said Pessim.

Trot laughed, but Cap'n Bill thought the little man was poking fun at
him and so he scowled upon Pessim in a way that showed he was angry.

They reached the shed before getting very wet, although the rain was
now coming down in big drops. The roof of the shed protected them and
while they stood watching the rainstorm something buzzed in and circled
around Pessim's head. At once the Observer began beating it away with
his hands, crying out:

"A bumblebee! A bumblebee! The queerest bumblebee I ever saw!"

Cap'n Bill and Trot both looked at it and the little girl said in
surprise:

"Dear me! It's a wee little Ork!"

"That's what it is, sure enough," exclaimed Cap'n Bill.

Really, it wasn't much bigger than a big bumblebee, and when it came
toward Trot she allowed it to alight on her shoulder.

"It's me, all right," said a very small voice in her ear; "but I'm in
an awful pickle, just the same!"

"What, are you our Ork, then?" demanded the girl, much amazed.

"No, I'm my own Ork. But I'm the only Ork you know," replied the tiny
creature.

"What's happened to you?" asked the sailor, putting his head close to
Trot's shoulder in order to hear the reply better. Pessim also put his
head close, and the Ork said:

"You will remember that when I left you I started to fly over the
trees, and just as I got to this side of the forest I saw a bush that
was loaded down with the most luscious fruit you can imagine.  The
fruit was about the size of a gooseberry and of a lovely lavender
color. So I swooped down and picked off one in my bill and ate it. At
once I began to grow small. I could feel myself shrinking, shrinking
away, and it frightened me terribly, so that I lighted on the ground to
think over what was happening. In a few seconds I had shrunk to the
size you now see me; but there I remained, getting no smaller, indeed,
but no larger. It is certainly a dreadful affliction! After I had
recovered somewhat from the shock I began to search for you. It is not
so easy to find one's way when a creature is so small, but fortunately
I spied you here in this shed and came to you at once."

Cap'n Bill and Trot were much astonished at this story and felt grieved
for the poor Ork, but the little man Pessim seemed to think it a good
joke. He began laughing when he heard the story and laughed until he
choked, after which he lay down on the ground and rolled and laughed
again, while the tears of merriment coursed down his wrinkled cheeks.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" he finally gasped, sitting up and wiping his
eyes. "This is too rich! It's almost too joyful to be true."

"I don't see anything funny about it," remarked Trot indignantly.

"You would if you'd had my experience," said Pessim, getting upon his
feet and gradually resuming his solemn and dissatisfied expression of
countenance. "The same thing happened to me."

"Oh, did it?  And how did you happen to come to this island?" asked the
girl.

"I didn't come; the neighbors brought me," replied the little man, with
a frown at the recollection. "They said I was quarrelsome and
fault-finding and blamed me because I told them all the things that
went wrong, or never were right, and because I told them how things
ought to be. So they brought me here and left me all alone, saying that
if I quarreled with myself, no one else would be made unhappy. Absurd,
wasn't it?"

"Seems to me," said Cap'n Bill, "those neighbors did the proper thing."

"Well," resumed Pessim, "when I found myself King of this island I was
obliged to live upon fruits, and I found many fruits growing here that
I had never seen before. I tasted several and found them good and
wholesome. But one day I ate a lavender berry--as the Ork did--and
immediately I grew so small that I was scarcely two inches high. It was
a very unpleasant condition and like the Ork I became frightened. I
could not walk very well nor very far, for every lump of earth in my
way seemed a mountain, every blade of grass a tree and every grain of
sand a rocky boulder. For several days I stumbled around in an agony of
fear. Once a tree toad nearly gobbled me up, and if I ran out from the
shelter of the bushes the gulls and cormorants swooped down upon me.
Finally I decided to eat another berry and become nothing at all, since
life, to one as small as I was, had become a dreary nightmare.

"At last I found a small tree that I thought bore the same fruit as
that I had eaten. The berry was dark purple instead of light lavender,
but otherwise it was quite similar. Being unable to climb the tree, I
was obliged to wait underneath it until a sharp breeze arose and shook
the limbs so that a berry fell. Instantly I seized it and taking a last
view of the world--as I then thought--I ate the berry in a twinkling.
Then, to my surprise, I began to grow big again, until I became of my
former stature, and so I have since remained. Needless to say, I have
never eaten again of the lavender fruit, nor do any of the beasts or
birds that live upon this island eat it."

They had all three listened eagerly to this amazing tale, and when it
was finished the Ork exclaimed:

"Do you think, then, that the deep purple berry is the antidote for the
lavender one?"

"I'm sure of it," answered Pessim.

"Then lead me to the tree at once!" begged the Ork, "for this tiny form
I now have terrifies me greatly."

Pessim examined the Ork closely

"You are ugly enough as you are," said he. "Were you any larger you
might be dangerous."

"Oh, no," Trot assured him; "the Ork has been our good friend. Please
take us to the tree."

Then Pessim consented, although rather reluctantly. He led them to the
right, which was the east side of the island, and in a few minutes
brought them near to the edge of the grove which faced the shore of the
ocean. Here stood a small tree bearing berries of a deep purple color.
The fruit looked very enticing and Cap'n Bill reached up and selected
one that seemed especially plump and ripe.

The Ork had remained perched upon Trot's shoulder but now it flew down
to the ground. It was so difficult for Cap'n Bill to kneel down, with
his wooden leg, that the little girl took the berry from him and held
it close to the Ork's head.

"It's too big to go into my mouth," said the little creature, looking
at the fruit sidewise.

"You'll have to make sev'ral mouthfuls of it, I guess," said Trot; and
that is what the Ork did. He pecked at the soft, ripe fruit with his
bill and ate it up very quickly, because it was good.

Even before he had finished the berry they could see the Ork begin to
grow. In a few minutes he had regained his natural size and was
strutting before them, quite delighted with his transformation.

"Well, well! What do you think of me now?" he asked proudly.

"You are very skinny and remarkably ugly," declared Pessim.

"You are a poor judge of Orks," was the reply. "Anyone can see that I'm
much handsomer than those dreadful things called birds, which are all
fluff and feathers."

"Their feathers make soft beds," asserted Pessim. "And my skin would
make excellent drumheads," retorted the Ork. "Nevertheless, a plucked
bird or a skinned Ork would be of no value to himself, so we needn't
brag of our usefulness after we are dead. But for the sake of argument,
friend Pessim, I'd like to know what good you would be, were you not
alive?"

"Never mind that," said Cap'n Bill. "He isn't much good as he is."

"I am King of this Island, allow me to say, and you're intruding on my
property," declared the little man, scowling upon them. "If you don't
like me--and I'm sure you don't, for no one else does--why don't you go
away and leave me to myself?"

"Well, the Ork can fly, but we can't," explained Trot, in answer. "We
don't want to stay here a bit, but I don't see how we can get away."

"You can go back into the hole you came from."

Cap'n Bill shook his head; Trot shuddered at the thought; the Ork
laughed aloud.

"You may be King here," the creature said to Pessim, "but we intend to
run this island to suit ourselves, for we are three and you are one,
and the balance of power lies with us."

The little man made no reply to this, although as they walked back to
the shed his face wore its fiercest scowl. Cap'n Bill gathered a lot of
leaves and, assisted by Trot, prepared two nice beds in opposite
corners of the shed. Pessim slept in a hammock which he swung between
two trees.

They required no dishes, as all their food consisted of fruits and nuts
picked from the trees; they made no fire, for the weather was warm and
there was nothing to cook; the shed had no furniture other than the
rude stool which the little man was accustomed to sit upon. He called
it his "throne" and they let him keep it.

So they lived upon the island for three days, and rested and ate to
their hearts' content. Still, they were not at all happy in this life
because of Pessim. He continually found fault with them, and all that
they did, and all their surroundings. He could see nothing good or
admirable in all the world and Trot soon came to understand why the
little man's former neighbors had brought him to this island and left
him there, all alone, so he could not annoy anyone. It was their
misfortune that they had been led to this place by their adventures,
for often they would have preferred the company of a wild beast to that
of Pessim.

On the fourth day a happy thought came to the Ork. They had all been
racking their brains for a possible way to leave the island, and
discussing this or that method, without finding a plan that was
practical. Cap'n Bill had said he could make a raft of the trees, big
enough to float them all, but he had no tools except those two
pocketknives and it was not possible to chop down tree with such small
blades.

"And s'pose we got afloat on the ocean," said Trot, "where would we
drift to, and how long would it take us to get there?"

Cap'n Bill was forced to admit he didn't know. The Ork could fly away
from the island any time it wished to, but the queer creature was loyal
to his new friends and refused to leave them in such a lonely, forsaken
place.

It was when Trot urged him to go, on this fourth morning, that the Ork
had his happy thought.

"I will go," said he, "if you two will agree to ride upon my back."

"We are too heavy; you might drop us," objected Cap'n Bill.

"Yes, you are rather heavy for a long journey," acknowledged the Ork,
"but you might eat of those lavender berries and become so small that I
could carry you with ease."

This quaint suggestion startled Trot and she looked gravely at the
speaker while she considered it, but Cap'n Bill gave a scornful snort
and asked:

"What would become of us afterward? We wouldn't be much good if we were
some two or three inches high. No, Mr. Ork, I'd rather stay here, as I
am, than be a hop-o'-my-thumb somewhere else."

"Why couldn't you take some of the dark purple berries along with you,
to eat after we had reached our destination?" inquired the Ork. "Then
you could grow big again whenever you pleased."

Trot clapped her hands with delight.

"That's it!" she exclaimed. "Let's do it, Cap'n Bill."

The old sailor did not like the idea at first, but he thought it over
carefully and the more he thought the better it seemed.

"How could you manage to carry us, if we were so small?" he asked.

"I could put you in a paper bag, and tie the bag around my neck."

"But we haven't a paper bag," objected Trot.

The Ork looked at her.

"There's your sunbonnet," it said presently, "which is hollow in the
middle and has two strings that you could tie around my neck."

Trot took off her sunbonnet and regarded it critically. Yes, it might
easily hold both her and Cap'n Bill, after they had eaten the lavender
berries and been reduced in size. She tied the strings around the Ork's
neck and the sunbonnet made a bag in which two tiny people might ride
without danger of falling out. So she said:

"I b'lieve we'll do it that way, Cap'n."

Cap'n Bill groaned but could make no logical objection except that the
plan seemed to him quite dangerous--and dangerous in more ways than one.

"I think so, myself," said Trot soberly. "But nobody can stay alive
without getting into danger sometimes, and danger doesn't mean getting
hurt, Cap'n; it only means we might get hurt. So I guess we'll have to
take the risk."

"Let's go and find the berries," said the Ork.

They said nothing to Pessim, who was sitting on his stool and scowling
dismally as he stared at the ocean, but started at once to seek the
trees that bore the magic fruits. The Ork remembered very well where
the lavender berries grew and led his companions quickly to the spot.

Cap'n Bill gathered two berries and placed them carefully in his
pocket. Then they went around to the east side of the island and found
the tree that bore the dark purple berries.

"I guess I'll take four of these," said the sailor-man, "so in case one
doesn't make us grow big we can eat another."

"Better take six," advised the Ork. "It's well to be on the safe side,
and I'm sure these trees grow nowhere else in all the world."

So Cap'n Bill gathered six of the purple berries and with their
precious fruit they returned to the shed to big good-bye to Pessim.
Perhaps they would not have granted the surly little man this courtesy
had they not wished to use him to tie the sunbonnet around the Ork's
neck.

When Pessim learned they were about to leave him he at first looked
greatly pleased, but he suddenly recollected that nothing ought to
please him and so began to grumble about being left alone.

"We knew it wouldn't suit you," remarked Cap'n Bill. "It didn't suit
you to have us here, and it won't suit you to have us go away."

"That is quite true," admitted Pessim. "I haven't been suited since I
can remember; so it doesn't matter to me in the least whether you go or
stay."

He was interested in their experiment, however, and willingly agreed to
assist, although he prophesied they would fall out of the sunbonnet on
their way and be either drowned in the ocean or crushed upon some rocky
shore. This uncheerful prospect did not daunt Trot, but it made Cap'n
Bill quite nervous.

"I will eat my berry first," said Trot, as she placed her sunbonnet on
the ground, in such manner that they could get into it.

Then she ate the lavender berry and in a few seconds became so small
that Cap'n Bill picked her up gently with his thumb and one finger and
placed her in the middle of the sunbonnet. Then he placed beside her
the six purple berries--each one being about as big as the tiny Trot's
head--and all preparations being now made the old sailor ate his
lavender berry and became very small--wooden leg and all!

Cap'n Bill stumbled sadly in trying to climb over the edge of the
sunbonnet and pitched in beside Trot headfirst, which caused the
unhappy Pessim to laugh with glee. Then the King of the Island picked
up the sunbonnet--so rudely that he shook its occupants like peas in a
pod--and tied it, by means of its strings, securely around the Ork's
neck.

"I hope, Trot, you sewed those strings on tight," said Cap'n Bill
anxiously.

"Why, we are not very heavy, you know," she replied, "so I think the
stitches will hold. But be careful and not crush the berries, Cap'n."

"One is jammed already," he said, looking at them.

"All ready?" asked the Ork.

"Yes!" they cried together, and Pessim came close to the sunbonnet and
called out to them: "You'll be smashed or drowned, I'm sure you will!
But farewell, and good riddance to you."

The Ork was provoked by this unkind speech, so he turned his tail
toward the little man and made it revolve so fast that the rush of air
tumbled Pessim over backward and he rolled several times upon the
ground before he could stop himself and sit up. By that time the Ork
was high in the air and speeding swiftly over the ocean.




Chapter Six

The Flight of the Midgets


Cap'n Bill and Trot rode very comfortably in the sunbonnet.  The motion
was quite steady, for they weighed so little that the Ork flew without
effort. Yet they were both somewhat nervous about their future fate and
could not help wishing they were safe on land and their natural size
again.

"You're terr'ble small, Trot," remarked Cap'n Bill, looking at his
companion.

"Same to you, Cap'n," she said with a laugh; "but as long as we have
the purple berries we needn't worry about our size."

"In a circus," mused the old man, "we'd be curiosities. But in a
sunbonnet--high up in the air--sailin' over a big, unknown ocean--they
ain't no word in any booktionary to describe us."

"Why, we're midgets, that's all," said the little girl. The Ork flew
silently for a long time. The slight swaying of the sunbonnet made
Cap'n Bill drowsy, and he began to doze. Trot, however, was wide awake,
and after enduring the monotonous journey as long as she was able she
called out:

"Don't you see land anywhere, Mr. Ork?"

"Not yet," he answered. "This is a big ocean and I've no idea in which
direction the nearest land to that island lies; but if I keep flying in
a straight line I'm sure to reach some place some time."

That seemed reasonable, so the little people in the sunbonnet remained
as patient as possible; that is, Cap'n Bill dozed and Trot tried to
remember her geography lessons so she could figure out what land they
were likely to arrive at.

For hours and hours the Ork flew steadily, keeping to the straight line
and searching with his eyes the horizon of the ocean for land. Cap'n
Bill was fast asleep and snoring and Trot had laid her head on his
shoulder to rest it when suddenly the Ork exclaimed:

"There! I've caught a glimpse of land, at last."

At this announcement they roused themselves. Cap'n Bill stood up and
tried to peek over the edge of the sunbonnet.

"What does it look like?" he inquired.

"Looks like another island," said the Ork; "but I can judge it better
in a minute or two."

"I don't care much for islands, since we visited that other one,"
declared Trot.

Soon the Ork made another announcement.

"It is surely an island, and a little one, too," said he. "But I won't
stop, because I see a much bigger land straight ahead of it."

"That's right," approved Cap'n Bill. "The bigger the land, the better
it will suit us."

"It's almost a continent," continued the Ork after a brief silence,
during which he did not decrease the speed of his flight. "I wonder if
it can be Orkland, the place I have been seeking so long?"

"I hope not," whispered Trot to Cap'n Bill--so softly that the Ork
could not hear her--"for I shouldn't like to be in a country where only
Orks live. This one Ork isn't a bad companion, but a lot of him
wouldn't be much fun."

After a few more minutes of flying the Ork called out in a sad voice:

"No! this is not my country. It's a place I have never seen before,
although I have wandered far and wide. It seems to be all mountains and
deserts and green valleys and queer cities and lakes and rivers--mixed
up in a very puzzling way."

"Most countries are like that," commented Cap'n Bill. "Are you going to
land?"

"Pretty soon," was the reply. "There is a mountain peak just ahead of
me. What do you say to our landing on that?"

"All right," agreed the sailor-man, for both he and Trot were getting
tired of riding in the sunbonnet and longed to set foot on solid ground
again.

So in a few minutes the Ork slowed down his speed and then came to a
stop so easily that they were scarcely jarred at all. Then the creature
squatted down until the sunbonnet rested on the ground, and began
trying to unfasten with its claws the knotted strings.

This proved a very clumsy task, because the strings were tied at the
back of the Ork's neck, just where his claws would not easily reach.
After much fumbling he said:

"I'm afraid I can't let you out, and there is no one near to help me."

This was at first discouraging, but after a little thought Cap'n Bill
said:

"If you don't mind, Trot, I can cut a slit in your sunbonnet with my
knife."

"Do," she replied. "The slit won't matter, 'cause I can sew it up again
afterward, when I am big."

So Cap'n Bill got out his knife, which was just as small, in
proportion, as he was, and after considerable trouble managed to cut a
long slit in the sunbonnet. First he squeezed through the opening
himself and then helped Trot to get out.

When they stood on firm ground again their first act was to begin
eating the dark purple berries which they had brought with them. Two of
these Trot had guarded carefully during the long journey, by holding
them in her lap, for their safety meant much to the tiny people.

"I'm not very hungry," said the little girl as she handed a berry to
Cap'n Bill, "but hunger doesn't count, in this case. It's like taking
medicine to make you well, so we must manage to eat 'em, somehow or
other."

But the berries proved quite pleasant to taste and as Cap'n Bill and
Trot nibbled at their edges their forms began to grow in size--slowly
but steadily. The bigger they grew the easier it was for them to eat
the berries, which of course became smaller to them, and by the time
the fruit was eaten our friends had regained their natural size.

The little girl was greatly relieved when she found herself as large as
she had ever been, and Cap'n Bill shared her satisfaction; for,
although they had seen the effect of the berries on the Ork, they had
not been sure the magic fruit would have the same effect on human
beings, or that the magic would work in any other country than that in
which the berries grew.

"What shall we do with the other four berries?" asked Trot, as she
picked up her sunbonnet, marveling that she had ever been small enough
to ride in it. "They're no good to us now, are they, Cap'n?"

"I'm not sure as to that," he replied. "If they were eaten by one who
had never eaten the lavender berries, they might have no effect at all;
but then, contrarywise, they might. One of 'em has got badly jammed, so
I'll throw it away, but the other three I b'lieve I'll carry with me.
They're magic things, you know, and may come handy to us some time."

He now searched in his big pockets and drew out a small wooden box with
a sliding cover.  The sailor had kept an assortment of nails, of
various sizes, in this box, but those he now dumped loosely into his
pocket and in the box placed the three sound purple berries.

When this important matter was attended to they found time to look
about them and see what sort of place the Ork had landed them in.




Chapter Seven

The Bumpy Man


The mountain on which they had alighted was not a barren waste, but had
on its sides patches of green grass, some bushes, a few slender trees
and here and there masses of tumbled rocks. The sides of the slope
seemed rather steep, but with care one could climb up or down them with
ease and safety. The view from where they now stood showed pleasant
valleys and fertile hills lying below the heights. Trot thought she saw
some houses of queer shapes scattered about the lower landscape, and
there were moving dots that might be people or animals, yet were too
far away for her to see them clearly.

Not far from the place where they stood was the top of the mountain,
which seemed to be flat, so the Ork proposed to his companions that he
would fly up and see what was there.

"That's a good idea," said Trot, "'cause it's getting toward evening
and we'll have to find a place to sleep."

The Ork had not been gone more than a few minutes when they saw him
appear on the edge of the top which was nearest them.

"Come on up!" he called.

So Trot and Cap'n Bill began to ascend the steep slope and it did not
take them long to reach the place where the Ork awaited them.

Their first view of the mountain top pleased them very much. It was a
level space of wider extent than they had guessed and upon it grew
grass of a brilliant green color. In the very center stood a house
built of stone and very neatly constructed. No one was in sight, but
smoke was coming from the chimney, so with one accord all three began
walking toward the house.

"I wonder," said Trot, "in what country we are, and if it's very far
from my home in California."

"Can't say as to that, partner," answered Cap'n Bill, "but I'm mighty
certain we've come a long way since we struck that whirlpool."

"Yes," she agreed, with a sigh, "it must be miles and miles!"

"Distance means nothing," said the Ork. "I have flown pretty much all
over the world, trying to find my home, and it is astonishing how many
little countries there are, hidden away in the cracks and corners of
this big globe of Earth. If one travels, he may find some new country
at every turn, and a good many of them have never yet been put upon the
maps."

"P'raps this is one of them," suggested Trot.

They reached the house after a brisk walk and Cap'n Bill knocked upon
the door. It was at once opened by a rugged looking man who had "bumps
all over him," as Trot afterward declared. There were bumps on his
head, bumps on his body and bumps on his arms and legs and hands. Even
his fingers had bumps on the ends of them. For dress he wore an old
gray suit of fantastic design, which fitted him very badly because of
the bumps it covered but could not conceal.

But the Bumpy Man's eyes were kind and twinkling in expression and as
soon as he saw his visitors he bowed low and said in a rather bumpy
voice:

"Happy day!  Come in and shut the door, for it grows cool when the sun
goes down. Winter is now upon us."

"Why, it isn't cold a bit, outside," said Trot, "so it can't be winter
yet."

"You will change your mind about that in a little while," declared the
Bumpy Man. "My bumps always tell me the state of the weather, and they
feel just now as if a snowstorm was coming this way. But make
yourselves at home, strangers. Supper is nearly ready and there is food
enough for all."

Inside the house there was but one large room, simply but comfortably
furnished. It had benches, a table and a fireplace, all made of stone.
On the hearth a pot was bubbling and steaming, and Trot thought it had
a rather nice smell. The visitors seated themselves upon the
benches--except the Ork. which squatted by the fireplace--and the Bumpy
Man began stirring the kettle briskly.

"May I ask what country this is, sir?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"Goodness me--fruit-cake and apple-sauce!--don't you know where you
are?" asked the Bumpy Man, as he stopped stirring and looked at the
speaker in surprise.

"No," admitted Cap'n Bill. "We've just arrived."

"Lost your way?" questioned the Bumpy Man.

"Not exactly," said Cap'n Bill. "We didn't have any way to lose."

"Ah!" said the Bumpy Man, nodding his bumpy head. "This," he announced,
in a solemn, impressive voice, "is the famous Land of Mo."

"Oh!" exclaimed the sailor and the girl, both in one breath. But, never
having heard of the Land of Mo, they were no wiser than before.

"I thought that would startle you," remarked the Bumpy Man, well
pleased, as he resumed his stirring. The Ork watched him a while in
silence and then asked:

"Who may you be?"

"Me?" answered the Bumpy Man. "Haven't you heard of me? Gingerbread and
lemon-juice! I'm known, far and wide, as the Mountain Ear."

They all received this information in silence at first, for they were
trying to think what he could mean. Finally Trot mustered up courage to
ask:

"What is a Mountain Ear, please?"

For answer the man turned around and faced them, waving the spoon with
which he had been stirring the kettle, as he recited the following
verses in a singsong tone of voice:

  "Here's a mountain, hard of hearing,
  That's sad-hearted and needs cheering,
  So my duty is to listen to all sounds that Nature makes,
  So the hill won't get uneasy--
  Get to coughing, or get sneezy--
  For this monster bump, when frightened, is quite liable to quakes.

  "You can hear a bell that's ringing;
  I can feel some people's singing;
  But a mountain isn't sensible of what goes on, and so
  When I hear a blizzard blowing
  Or it's raining hard, or snowing,
  I tell it to the mountain and the mountain seems to know.

  "Thus I benefit all people
  While I'm living on this steeple,
  For I keep the mountain steady so my neighbors all may thrive.
  With my list'ning and my shouting
  I prevent this mount from spouting,
  And that makes me so important that I'm glad that I'm alive."


When he had finished these lines of verse the Bumpy Man turned again to
resume his stirring. The Ork laughed softly and Cap'n Bill whistled to
himself and Trot made up her mind that the Mountain Ear must be a
little crazy. But the Bumpy Man seemed satisfied that he had explained
his position fully and presently he placed four stone plates upon the
table and then lifted the kettle from the fire and poured some of its
contents on each of the plates. Cap'n Bill and Trot at once approached
the table, for they were hungry, but when she examined her plate the
little girl exclaimed:

"Why, it's molasses candy!"

"To be sure," returned the Bumpy Man, with a pleasant smile. "Eat it
quick, while it's hot, for it cools very quickly this winter weather."

With this he seized a stone spoon and began putting the hot molasses
candy into his mouth, while the others watched him in astonishment.

"Doesn't it burn you?" asked the girl.

"No indeed," said he. "Why don't you eat? Aren't you hungry?"

"Yes," she replied, "I am hungry. But we usually eat our candy when it
is cold and hard. We always pull molasses candy before we eat it."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the Mountain Ear. "What a funny idea! Where in
the world did you come from?"

"California," she said.

"California! Pooh! there isn't any such place. I've heard of every
place in the Land of Mo, but I never before heard of California."

"It isn't in the Land of Mo," she explained.

"Then it isn't worth talking about," declared the Bumpy Man, helping
himself again from the steaming kettle, for he had been eating all the
time he talked.

"For my part," sighed Cap'n Bill, "I'd like a decent square meal, once
more, just by way of variety. In the last place there was nothing but
fruit to eat, and here it's worse, for there's nothing but candy."

"Molasses candy isn't so bad," said Trot. "Mine's nearly cool enough to
pull, already. Wait a bit, Cap'n, and you can eat it."

A little later she was able to gather the candy from the stone plate
and begin to work it back and forth with her hands. The Mountain Ear
was greatly amazed at this and watched her closely. It was really good
candy and pulled beautifully, so that Trot was soon ready to cut it
into chunks for eating.

Cap'n Bill condescended to eat one or two pieces and the Ork ate
several, but the Bumpy Man refused to try it. Trot finished the plate
of candy herself and then asked for a drink of water.

"Water?" said the Mountain Ear wonderingly. "What is that?"

"Something to drink. Don't you have water in Mo?"

"None that ever I heard of," said he. "But I can give you some fresh
lemonade. I caught it in a jar the last time it rained, which was only
day before yesterday."

"Oh, does it rain lemonade here?" she inquired.

"Always; and it is very refreshing and healthful."

With this he brought from a cupboard a stone jar and a dipper, and the
girl found it very nice lemonade, indeed. Cap'n Bill liked it, too; but
the Ork would not touch it.

"If there is no water in this country, I cannot stay here for long,"
the creature declared. "Water means life to man and beast and bird."

"There must be water in lemonade," said Trot.

"Yes," answered the Ork, "I suppose so; but there are other things in
it, too, and they spoil the good water."

The day's adventures had made our wanderers tired, so the Bumpy Man
brought them some blankets in which they rolled themselves and then lay
down before the fire, which their host kept alive with fuel all through
the night. Trot wakened several times and found the Mountain Ear always
alert and listening intently for the slightest sound. But the little
girl could hear no sound at all except the snores of Cap'n Bill.




Chapter Eight

Button-Bright is Lost and Found Again


"Wake up--wake up!" called the voice of the Bumpy Man. "Didn't I tell
you winter was coming? I could hear it coming with my left ear, and the
proof is that it is now snowing hard outside."

"Is it?" said Trot, rubbing her eyes and creeping out of her blanket.
"Where I live, in California, I have never seen snow, except far away
on the tops of high mountains."

"Well, this is the top of a high mountain," returned the bumpy one,
"and for that reason we get our heaviest snowfalls right here."

The little girl went to  the window and looked out. The air was filled
with falling white flakes, so large in size and so queer in form that
she was puzzled.

"Are you certain this is snow?" she asked.

"To be sure. I must get my snow-shovel and turn out to shovel a path.
Would you like to come with me?"

"Yes," she said, and followed the Bumpy Man out when he opened the
door. Then she exclaimed: "Why, it isn't cold a bit!"

"Of course not," replied the man. "It was cold last night, before the
snowstorm; but snow, when it falls, is always crisp and warm."

Trot gathered a handful of it.

"Why, it's popcorn?" she cried.

"Certainly; all snow is popcorn. What did you expect it to be?"

"Popcorn is not snow in my country."

"Well, it is the only snow we have in the Land of Mo, so you may as
well make the best of it," said he, a little impatiently. "I'm not
responsible for the absurd things that happen in your country, and when
you're in Mo you must do as the Momen do. Eat some of our snow, and you
will find it is good. The only fault I find with our snow is that we
get too much of it at times."

With this the Bumpy Man set to work shoveling a path and he was so
quick and industrious that he piled up the popcorn in great banks on
either side of the trail that led to the mountain-top from the plains
below. While he worked, Trot ate popcorn and found it crisp and
slightly warm, as well as nicely salted and buttered. Presently Cap'n
Bill came out of the house and joined her.

"What's this?" he asked.

"Mo snow," said she. "But it isn't real snow, although it falls from
the sky. It's popcorn."

Cap'n Bill tasted it; then he sat down in the path and began to eat.
The Ork came out and pecked away with its bill as fast as it could.
They all liked popcorn and they all were hungry this morning.

Meantime the flakes of "Mo snow" came down so fast that the number of
them almost darkened the air. The Bumpy Man was now shoveling quite a
distance down the mountain-side, while the path behind him rapidly
filled up with fresh-fallen popcorn. Suddenly Trot heard him call out:

"Goodness gracious--mince pie and pancakes!--here is some one buried in
the snow."

She ran toward him at once and the others followed, wading through the
corn and crunching it underneath their feet. The Mo snow was pretty
deep where the Bumpy Man was shoveling and from beneath a great bank of
it he had uncovered a pair of feet.

"Dear me!  Someone has been lost in the storm," said Cap'n Bill. "I
hope he is still alive. Let's pull him out and see."

He took hold of one foot and the Bumpy Man took hold of the other. Then
they both pulled and out from the heap of popcorn came a little boy. He
was dressed in a brown velvet jacket and knickerbockers, with brown
stockings, buckled shoes and a blue shirt-waist that had frills down
its front. When drawn from the heap the boy was chewing a mouthful of
popcorn and both his hands were full of it. So at first he couldn't
speak to his rescuers but lay quite still and eyed them calmly until he
had swallowed his mouthful. Then he said:

"Get my cap," and stuffed more popcorn into his mouth.

While the Bumpy Man began shoveling into the corn-bank to find the
boy's cap, Trot was laughing joyfully and Cap'n Bill had a broad grin
on his face. The Ork looked from one to another and asked:

"Who is this stranger?"

"Why, it's Button-Bright, of course," answered Trot. "If anyone ever
finds a lost boy, he can make up his mind it's Button-Bright. But how
he ever came to be lost in this far-away country is more'n I can make
out."

"Where does he belong?" inquired the Ork.

"His home used to be in Philadelphia, I think; but I'm quite sure
Button-Bright doesn't belong anywhere."

"That's right," said the boy, nodding his head as he swallowed the
second mouthful.

"Everyone belongs somewhere," remarked the Ork.

"Not me," insisted Button-Bright. "I'm half way round the world from
Philadelphia, and I've lost my Magic Umbrella, that used to carry me
anywhere. Stands to reason that if I can't get back I haven't any home.
But I don't care much. This is a pretty good country, Trot. I've had
lots of fun here."

By this time the Mountain Ear had secured the boy's cap and was
listening to the conversation with much interest.

"It seems you know this poor, snow-covered cast-away," he said.

"Yes, indeed," answered Trot.  "We made a journey together to Sky
Island, once, and were good friends."

"Well, then I'm glad I saved his life," said the Bumpy Man.

"Much obliged, Mr. Knobs," said Button-Bright, sitting up and staring
at him, "but I don't believe you've saved anything except some popcorn
that I might have eaten had you not disturbed me. It was nice and warm
in that bank of popcorn, and there was plenty to eat. What made you dig
me out? And what makes you so bumpy everywhere?"

"As for the bumps," replied the man, looking at himself with much
pride, "I was born with them and I suspect they were a gift from the
fairies. They make me look rugged and big, like the mountain I serve."

"All right," said Button-Bright and began eating popcorn again.

It had stopped snowing, now, and great flocks of birds were gathering
around the mountain-side, eating the popcorn with much eagerness and
scarcely noticing the people at all. There were birds of every size and
color, most of them having gorgeous feathers and plumes.

"Just look at them!" exclaimed the Ork scornfully. "Aren't they
dreadful creatures, all covered with feathers?"

"I think they're beautiful," said Trot, and this made the Ork so
indignant that he went back into the house and sulked.

Button-Bright reached out his hand and caught a big bird by the leg. At
once it rose into the air and it was so strong that it nearly carried
the little boy with it. He let go the leg in a hurry and the bird flew
down again and began to eat of the popcorn, not being frightened in the
least.

This gave Cap'n Bill an idea. He felt in his pocket and drew out
several pieces of stout string. Moving very quietly, so as to not alarm
the birds, he crept up to several of the biggest ones and tied cords
around their legs, thus making them prisoners.  The birds were so
intent on their eating that they did not notice what had happened to
them, and when about twenty had been captured in this manner Cap'n Bill
tied the ends of all the strings together and fastened them to a huge
stone, so they could not escape.

The Bumpy Man watched the old sailor's actions with much curiosity.

"The birds will be quiet until they've eaten up all the snow," he said,
"but then they will want to fly away to their homes. Tell me, sir, what
will the poor things do when they find they can't fly?"

"It may worry 'em a little," replied Cap'n Bill, "but they're not going
to be hurt if they take it easy and behave themselves."

Our friends had all made a good breakfast of the delicious popcorn and
now they walked toward the house again. Button-Bright walked beside
Trot and held her hand in his, because they were old friends and he
liked the little girl very much. The boy was not so old as Trot, and
small as she was he was half a head shorter in height. The most
remarkable thing about Button-Bright was that he was always quiet and
composed, whatever happened, and nothing was ever able to astonish him.
Trot liked him because he was not rude and never tried to plague her.
Cap'n Bill liked him because he had found the boy cheerful and brave at
all times, and willing to do anything he was asked to do.

When they came to the house Trot sniffed the air and asked "Don't I
smell perfume?"

"I think you do," said the Bumpy Man. "You smell violets, and that
proves there is a breeze springing up from the south. All our winds and
breezes are perfumed and for that reason we are glad to have them blow
in our direction. The south breeze always has a violet odor; the north
breeze has the fragrance of wild roses; the east breeze is perfumed
with lilies-of-the-valley and the west wind with lilac blossoms. So we
need no weathervane to tell us which way the wind is blowing. We have
only to smell the perfume and it informs us at once."

Inside the house they found the Ork, and Button-Bright regarded the
strange, birdlike creature with curious interest. After examining it
closely for a time he asked:

"Which way does your tail whirl?"

"Either way," said the Ork.

Button-Bright put out his hand and tried to spin it.

"Don't do that!" exclaimed the Ork.

"Why not?" inquired the boy.

"Because it happens to be my tail, and I reserve the right to whirl it
myself," explained the Ork.

"Let's go out and fly somewhere," proposed Button-Bright. "I want to
see how the tail works."

"Not now," said the Ork. "I appreciate your interest in me, which I
fully deserve; but I only fly when I am going somewhere, and if I got
started I might not stop."

"That reminds me," remarked Cap'n Bill, "to ask you, friend Ork, how we
are going to get away from here?"

"Get away!" exclaimed the Bumpy Man. "Why don't you stay here? You
won't find any nicer place than Mo."

"Have you been anywhere else, sir?"

"No; I can't say that I have," admitted the Mountain Ear.

"Then permit me to say you're no judge," declared Cap'n Bill. "But you
haven't answered my question, friend Ork. How are we to get away from
this mountain?"

The Ork reflected a while before he answered.

"I might carry one of you--the boy or the girl--upon my back," said he,
"but three big people are more than I can manage, although I have
carried two of you for a short distance. You ought not to have eaten
those purple berries so soon."

"P'r'aps we did make a mistake," Cap'n Bill acknowledged.

"Or we might have brought some of those lavender berries with us,
instead of so many purple ones," suggested Trot regretfully.

Cap'n Bill made no reply to this statement, which showed he did not
fully agree with the little girl; but he fell into deep thought, with
wrinkled brows, and finally he said:

"If those purple berries would make anything grow bigger, whether it'd
eaten the lavender ones or not, I could find a way out of our troubles."

They did not understand this speech and looked at the old sailor as if
expecting him to explain what he meant. But just then a chorus of
shrill cries rose from outside.

"Here! Let me go--let me go!" the voices seemed to say. "Why are we
insulted in this way? Mountain Ear, come and help us!"

Trot ran to the window and looked out.

"It's the birds you caught, Cap'n," she said. "I didn't know they could
talk."

"Oh, yes; all the birds in Mo are educated to talk," said the Bumpy
Man. Then he looked at Cap'n Bill uneasily and added: "Won't you let
the poor things go?"

"I'll see," replied the sailor, and walked out to where the birds were
fluttering and complaining because the strings would not allow them to
fly away.

"Listen to me!" he cried, and at once they became still. "We three
people who are strangers in your land want to go to some other country,
and we want three of you birds to carry us there. We know we are asking
a great favor, but it's the only way we can think of--excep' walkin',
an' I'm not much good at that because I've a wooden leg. Besides, Trot
an' Button-Bright are too small to undertake a long and tiresome
journey. Now, tell me: Which three of you birds will consent to carry
us?"

The birds looked at one another as if greatly astonished. Then one of
them replied: "You must be crazy, old man. Not one of us is big enough
to fly with even the smallest of your party."

"I'll fix the matter of size," promised Cap'n Bill. "If three of you
will agree to carry us, I'll make you big an' strong enough to do it,
so it won't worry you a bit."

The birds considered this gravely.  Living in a magic country, they had
no doubt but that the strange one-legged man could do what he said.
After a little, one of them asked:

"If you make us big, would we stay big always?"

"I think so," replied Cap'n Bill.

They chattered a while among themselves and then the bird that had
first spoken said: "I'll go, for one."

"So will I," said another; and after a pause a third said: "I'll go,
too."

Perhaps more would have volunteered, for it seemed that for some reason
they all longed to be bigger than they were; but three were enough for
Cap'n Bill's purpose and so he promptly released all the others, who
immediately flew away.

The three that remained were cousins, and all were of the same
brilliant plumage and in size about as large as eagles. When Trot
questioned them she found they were quite young, having only abandoned
their nests a few weeks before. They were strong young birds, with
clear, brave eyes, and the little girl decided they were the most
beautiful of all the feathered creatures she had ever seen.

Cap'n Bill now took from his pocket the wooden box with the sliding
cover and removed the three purple berries, which were still in good
condition.

"Eat these," he said, and gave one to each of the birds. They obeyed,
finding the fruit very pleasant to taste. In a few seconds they began
to grow in size and grew so fast that Trot feared they would never
stop. But they finally did stop growing, and then they were much larger
than the Ork, and nearly the size of full-grown ostriches.

Cap'n Bill was much pleased by this result.

"You can carry us now, all right," said he.

The birds strutted around with pride, highly pleased with their immense
size.

"I don't see, though," said Trot doubtfully, "how we're going to ride
on their backs without falling off."

"We're not going to ride on their backs," answered Cap'n Bill. "I'm
going to make swings for us to ride in."

He then asked the Bumpy Man for some rope, but the man had no rope. He
had, however, an old suit of gray clothes which he gladly presented to
Cap'n Bill, who cut the cloth into strips and twisted it so that it was
almost as strong as rope. With this material he attached to each bird a
swing that dangled below its feet, and Button-Bright made a trial
flight in one of them to prove that it was safe and comfortable. When
all this had been arranged one of the birds asked:

"Where do you wish us to take you?"

"Why, just follow the Ork," said Cap'n Bill. "He will be our leader,
and wherever the Ork flies you are to fly, and wherever the Ork lands
you are to land. Is that satisfactory?"

The birds declared it was quite satisfactory, so Cap'n Bill took
counsel with the Ork.

"On our way here," said that peculiar creature, "I noticed a broad,
sandy desert at the left of me, on which was no living thing."

"Then we'd better keep away from it," replied the sailor.

"Not so," insisted the Ork. "I have found, on my travels, that the most
pleasant countries often lie in the midst of deserts; so I think it
would be wise for us to fly over this desert and discover what lies
beyond it. For in the direction we came from lies the ocean, as we well
know, and beyond here is this strange Land of Mo, which we do not care
to explore. On one side, as we can see from this mountain, is a broad
expanse of plain, and on the other the desert.  For my part, I vote for
the desert."

"What do you say, Trot?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"It's all the same to me," she replied.

No one thought of asking Button-Bright's opinion, so it was decided to
fly over the desert. They bade good-bye to the Bumpy Man and thanked
him for his kindness and hospitality. Then they seated themselves in
the swings--one for each bird--and told the Ork to start away and they
would follow.

The whirl of the Ork's tail astonished the birds at first, but after he
had gone a short distance they rose in the air, carrying their
passengers easily, and flew with strong, regular strokes of their great
wings in the wake of their leader.




Chapter Nine

The Kingdom of Jinxland


Trot rode with more comfort than she had expected, although the swing
swayed so much that she had to hold on tight with both hands. Cap'n
Bill's bird followed the Ork, and Trot came next, with Button-Bright
trailing behind her. It was quite an imposing procession, but
unfortunately there was no one to see it, for the Ork had headed
straight for the great sandy desert and in a few minutes after starting
they were flying high over the broad waste, where no living thing could
exist.

The little girl thought this would be a bad place for the birds to lose
strength, or for the cloth ropes to give way; but although she could
not help feeling a trifle nervous and fidgety she had confidence in the
huge and brilliantly plumaged bird that bore her, as well as in Cap'n
Bill's knowledge of how to twist and fasten a rope so it would hold.

That was a remarkably big desert. There was nothing to relieve the
monotony of view and every minute seemed an hour and every hour a day.
Disagreeable fumes and gases rose from the sands, which would have been
deadly to the travelers had they not been so high in the air. As it
was, Trot was beginning to feel sick, when a breath of fresher air
filled her nostrils and on looking ahead she saw a great cloud of
pink-tinted mist. Even while she wondered what it could be, the Ork
plunged boldly into the mist and the other birds followed. She could
see nothing for a time, nor could the bird which carried her see where
the Ork had gone, but it kept flying as sturdily as ever and in a few
moments the mist was passed and the girl saw a most beautiful landscape
spread out below her, extending as far as her eye could reach.

She saw bits of forest, verdure clothed hills, fields of waving grain,
fountains, rivers and lakes; and throughout the scene were scattered
groups of pretty houses and a few grand castles and palaces.

Over all this delightful landscape--which from Trot's high perch seemed
like a magnificent painted picture--was a rosy glow such as we
sometimes see in the west at sunset. In this case, however, it was not
in the west only, but everywhere.

No wonder the Ork paused to circle slowly over this lovely country. The
other birds followed his action, all eyeing the place with equal
delight. Then, as with one accord, the four formed a group and slowly
sailed downward. This brought them to that part of the newly-discovered
land which bordered on the desert's edge; but it was just as pretty
here as anywhere, so the Ork and the birds alighted and the three
passengers at once got out of their swings.

"Oh, Cap'n Bill, isn't this fine an' dandy?" exclaimed Trot
rapturously. "How lucky we were to discover this beautiful country!"

"The country seems rather high class, I'll admit, Trot," replied the
old sailor-man, looking around him, "but we don't know, as yet, what
its people are like."

"No one could live in such a country without being happy and good--I'm
sure of that," she said earnestly. "Don't you think so, Button-Bright?"

"I'm not thinking, just now," answered the little boy. "It tires me to
think, and I never seem to gain anything by it. When we see the people
who live here we will know what they are like, and no 'mount of
thinking will make them any different."

"That's true enough," said the Ork. "But now I want to make a proposal.
While you are getting acquainted with this new country, which looks as
if it contains everything to make one happy, I would like to fly
along--all by myself--and see if I can find my home on the other side
of the great desert. If I do, I will stay there, of course. But if I
fail to find Orkland I will return to you in a week, to see if I can do
anything more to assist you."

They were sorry to lose their queer companion, but could offer no
objection to the plan; so the Ork bade them good-bye and rising swiftly
in the air, he flew over the country and was soon lost to view in the
distance.

The three birds which had carried our friends now begged permission to
return by the way they had come, to their own homes, saying they were
anxious to show their families how big they had become. So Cap'n Bill
and Trot and Button-Bright all thanked them gratefully for their
assistance and soon the birds began their long flight toward the Land
of Mo. Being now left to themselves in this strange land, the three
comrades selected a pretty pathway and began walking along it. They
believed this path would lead them to a splendid castle which they
espied in the distance, the turrets of which towered far above the tops
of the trees which surrounded it. It did not seem very far away, so
they sauntered on slowly, admiring the beautiful ferns and flowers that
lined the pathway and listening to the singing of the birds and the
soft chirping of the grasshoppers.

Presently the path wound over a little hill. In a valley that lay
beyond the hill was a tiny cottage surrounded by flower beds and fruit
trees. On the shady porch of the cottage they saw, as they approached,
a pleasant faced woman sitting amidst a group of children, to whom she
was telling stories. The children quickly discovered the strangers and
ran toward them with exclamations of astonishment, so that Trot and her
friends became the center of a curious group, all chattering excitedly.
Cap'n Bill's wooden leg seemed to arouse the wonder of the children, as
they could not understand why he had not two meat legs. This attention
seemed to please the old sailor, who patted the heads of the children
kindly and then, raising his hat to the woman, he inquired:

"Can you tell us, madam, just what country this is?"

She stared hard at all three of the strangers as she replied briefly:
"Jinxland."

"Oh!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill, with a puzzled look. "And where is
Jinxland, please?"

"In the Quadling Country," said she.

"What!" cried Trot, in sudden excitement. "Do you mean to say this is
the Quadling Country of the Land of Oz?"

"To be sure I do," the woman answered. "Every bit of land that is
surrounded by the great desert is the Land of Oz, as you ought to know
as well as I do; but I'm sorry to say that Jinxland is separated from
the rest of the Quadling Country by that row of high mountains you see
yonder, which have such steep sides that no one can cross them. So we
live here all by ourselves, and are ruled by our own King, instead of
by Ozma of Oz."

"I've been to the Land of Oz before," said Button-Bright, "but I've
never been here."

"Did you ever hear of Jinxland before?" asked Trot.

"No," said Button-Bright.

"It is on the Map of Oz, though," asserted the woman, "and it's a fine
country, I assure you. If only," she added, and then paused to look
around her with a frightened expression. "If only--" here she stopped
again, as if not daring to go on with her speech.

"If only what, ma'am?" asked Cap'n Bill.

The woman sent the children into the house. Then she came closer to the
strangers and whispered: "If only we had a different King, we would be
very happy and contented."

"What's the matter with your King?" asked Trot, curiously. But the
woman seemed frightened to have said so much. She retreated to her
porch, merely saying:

"The King punishes severely any treason on the part of his subjects."

"What's treason?" asked Button-Bright.

"In this case," replied Cap'n Bill, "treason seems to consist of
knockin' the King; but I guess we know his disposition now as well as
if the lady had said more."

"I wonder," said Trot, going up to the woman, "if you could spare us
something to eat. We haven't had anything but popcorn and lemonade for
a long time."

"Bless your heart! Of course I can spare you some food," the woman
answered, and entering her cottage she soon returned with a tray loaded
with sandwiches, cakes and cheese. One of the children drew a bucket of
clear, cold water from a spring and the three wanderers ate heartily
and enjoyed the good things immensely.

When Button-Bright could eat no more he filled the pockets of his
jacket with cakes and cheese, and not even the children objected to
this. Indeed they all seemed pleased to see the strangers eat, so Cap'n
Bill decided that no matter what the King of Jinxland was like, the
people would prove friendly and hospitable.

"Whose castle is that, yonder, ma'am?" he asked, waving his hand toward
the towers that rose above the trees.

"It belongs to his Majesty, King Krewl." she said.

"Oh, indeed; and does he live there?"

"When he is not out hunting with his fierce courtiers and war
captains," she replied.

"Is he hunting now?" Trot inquired.

"I do not know, my dear. The less we know about the King's actions the
safer we are."

It was evident the woman did not like to talk about King Krewl and so,
having finished their meal, they said good-bye and continued along the
pathway.

"Don't you think we'd better keep away from that King's castle, Cap'n?"
asked Trot.

"Well," said he, "King Krewl would find out, sooner or later, that we
are in his country, so we may as well face the music now. Perhaps he
isn't quite so bad as that woman thinks he is. Kings aren't always
popular with their people, you know, even if they do the best they know
how."

"Ozma is pop'lar," said Button-Bright.

"Ozma is diff'rent from any other Ruler, from all I've heard," remarked
Trot musingly, as she walked beside the boy. "And, after all, we are
really in the Land of Oz, where Ozma rules ev'ry King and ev'rybody
else. I never heard of anybody getting hurt in her dominions, did you,
Button-Bright?"

"Not when she knows about it," he replied. "But those birds landed us
in just the wrong place, seems to me. They might have carried us right
on, over that row of mountains, to the Em'rald City."

"True enough," said Cap'n Bill; "but they didn't, an' so we must make
the best of Jinxland. Let's try not to be afraid."

"Oh, I'm not very scared," said Button-Bright, pausing to look at a
pink rabbit that popped its head out of a hole in the field near by.

"Nor am I," added Trot. "Really, Cap'n, I'm so glad to be anywhere at
all in the wonderful fairyland of Oz that I think I'm the luckiest girl
in all the world. Dorothy lives in the Em'rald City, you know, and so
does the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and Tik-Tok and the Shaggy
Man--and all the rest of 'em that we've heard so much about--not to
mention Ozma, who must be the sweetest and loveliest girl in all the
world!"

"Take your time, Trot," advised Button-Bright. "You don't have to say
it all in one breath, you know. And you haven't mentioned half of the
curious people in the Em'rald City."

"That 'ere Em'rald City," said Cap'n Bill impressively, "happens to be
on the other side o' those mountains, that we're told no one is able to
cross. I don't want to discourage of you, Trot, but we're a'most as
much separated from your Ozma an' Dorothy as we were when we lived in
Californy."

There was so much truth in this statement that they all walked on in
silence for some time. Finally they reached the grove of stately trees
that bordered the grounds of the King's castle. They had gone halfway
through it when the sound of sobbing, as of someone in bitter distress,
reached their ears and caused them to halt abruptly.




Chapter Ten

Pon, the Gardener's Boy


It was Button-Bright who first discovered, lying on his face beneath a
broad spreading tree near the pathway, a young man whose body shook
with the force of his sobs. He was dressed in a long brown smock and
had sandals on his feet, betokening one in humble life. His head was
bare and showed a shock of brown, curly hair. Button-Bright looked down
on the young man and said:

"Who cares, anyhow?"

"I do!" cried the young man, interrupting his sobs to roll over, face
upward, that he might see who had spoken. "I care, for my heart is
broken!"

"Can't you get another one?" asked the little boy.

"I don't want another!" wailed the young man.

By this time Trot and Cap'n Bill arrived at the spot and the girl
leaned over and said in a sympathetic voice:

"Tell us your troubles and perhaps we may help you."

The youth sat up, then, and bowed politely. Afterward he got upon his
feet, but still kept wringing his hands as he tried to choke down his
sobs. Trot thought he was very brave to control such awful agony so
well.

"My name is Pon," he began. "I'm the gardener's boy."

"Then the gardener of the King is your father, I suppose," said Trot.

"Not my father, but my master," was the reply

"I do the work and the gardener gives the orders. And it was not my
fault, in the least, that the Princess Gloria fell in love with me."

"Did she, really?" asked the little girl.

"I don't see why," remarked Button-Bright, staring at the youth.

"And who may the Princess Gloria be?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"She is the niece of King Krewl, who is her guardian. The Princess
lives in the castle and is the loveliest and sweetest maiden in all
Jinxland. She is fond of flowers and used to walk in the gardens with
her attendants. At such times, if I was working at my tasks, I used to
cast down my eyes as Gloria passed me; but one day I glanced up and
found her gazing at me with a very tender look in her eyes. The next
day she dismissed her attendants and, coming to my side, began to talk
with me. She said I had touched her heart as no other young man had
ever done. I kissed her hand. Just then the King came around a bend in
the walk. He struck me with his fist and kicked me with his foot. Then
he seized the arm of the Princess and rudely dragged her into the
castle."

"Wasn't he awful!" gasped Trot indignantly.

"He is a very abrupt King," said Pon, "so it was the least I could
expect. Up to that time I had not thought of loving Princess Gloria,
but realizing it would be impolite not to return her love, I did so. We
met at evening, now and then, and she told me the King wanted her to
marry a rich courtier named Googly-Goo, who is old enough to be
Gloria's father. She has refused Googly-Goo thirty-nine times, but he
still persists and has brought many rich presents to bribe the King. On
that account King Krewl has commanded his niece to marry the old man,
but the Princess has assured me, time and again, that she will wed only
me. This morning we happened to meet in the grape arbor and as I was
respectfully saluting the cheek of the Princess, two of the King's
guards seized me and beat me terribly before the very eyes of Gloria,
whom the King himself held back so she could not interfere."

"Why, this King must be a monster!" cried Trot.

"He is far worse than that," said Pon, mournfully.

"But, see here," interrupted Cap'n Bill, who had listened carefully to
Pon. "This King may not be so much to blame, after all. Kings are proud
folks, because they're so high an' mighty, an' it isn't reasonable for
a royal Princess to marry a common gardener's boy."

"It isn't right," declared Button-Bright. "A Princess should marry a
Prince."

"I'm not a common gardener's boy," protested Pon. "If I had my rights I
would be the King instead of Krewl. As it is, I'm a Prince, and as
royal as any man in Jinxland."

"How does that come?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"My father used to be the King and Krewl was his Prime Minister. But
one day while out hunting, King Phearse--that was my father's name--had
a quarrel with Krewl and tapped him gently on the nose with the
knuckles of his closed hand. This so provoked the wicked Krewl that he
tripped my father backward, so that he fell into a deep pond. At once
Krewl threw in a mass of heavy stones, which so weighted down my poor
father that his body could not rise again to the surface. It is
impossible to kill anyone in this land, as perhaps you know, but when
my father was pressed down into the mud at the bottom of the deep pool
and the stones held him so he could never escape, he was of no more use
to himself or the world than if he had died. Knowing this, Krewl
proclaimed himself King, taking possession of the royal castle and
driving all my father's people out. I was a small boy, then, but when I
grew up I became a gardener. I have served King Krewl without his
knowing that I am the son of the same King Phearse whom he so cruelly
made away with."

"My, but that's a terr'bly exciting story!" said Trot, drawing a long
breath. "But tell us, Pon, who was Gloria's father?"

"Oh, he was the King before my father," replied Pon. "Father was Prime
Minister for King Kynd, who was Gloria's father. She was only a baby
when King Kynd fell into the Great Gulf that lies just this side of the
mountains--the same mountains that separate Jinxland from the rest of
the Land of Oz. It is said the Great Gulf has no bottom; but, however
that may be, King Kynd has never been seen again and my father became
King in his place."

"Seems to me," said Trot, "that if Gloria had her rights she would be
Queen of Jinxland."

"Well, her father was a King," admitted Pon, "and so was my father; so
we are of equal rank, although she's a great lady and I'm a humble
gardener's boy. I can't see why we should not marry if we want to
except that King Krewl won't let us."

"It's a sort of mixed-up mess, taken altogether," remarked Cap'n Bill.
"But we are on our way to visit King Krewl, and if we get a chance,
young man, we'll put in a good word for you."

"Do, please!" begged Pon.

"Was it the flogging you got that broke your heart?" inquired
Button-Bright.

"Why, it helped to break it, of course," said Pon.

"I'd get it fixed up, if I were you," advised the boy, tossing a pebble
at a chipmunk in a tree. "You ought to give Gloria just as good a heart
as she gives you."

"That's common sense," agreed Cap'n Bill. So they left the gardener's
boy standing beside the path, and resumed their journey toward the
castle.




Chapter Eleven

The Wicked King and Googly-Goo


When our friends approached the great doorway of the castle they found
it guarded by several soldiers dressed in splendid uniforms. They were
armed with swords and lances. Cap'n Bill walked straight up to them and
asked:

"Does the King happen to be at home?"

"His Magnificent and Glorious Majesty, King Krewl, is at present
inhabiting his Royal Castle," was the stiff reply.

"Then I guess we'll go in an' say how-d'ye-do," continued Cap'n Bill,
attempting to enter the doorway. But a soldier barred his way with a
lance.

"Who are you, what are your names, and where do you come from?"
demanded the soldier.

"You wouldn't know if we told you," returned the sailor, "seein' as
we're strangers in a strange land."

"Oh, if you are strangers you will be permitted to enter," said the
soldier, lowering his lance. "His Majesty is very fond of strangers."

"Do many strangers come here?" asked Trot.

"You are the first that ever came to our country," said the man. "But
his Majesty has often said that if strangers ever arrived in Jinxland
he would see that they had a very exciting time."

Cap'n Bill scratched his chin thoughtfully. He wasn't very favorably
impressed by this last remark. But he decided that as there was no way
of escape from Jinxland it would be wise to confront the King boldly
and try to win his favor. So they entered the castle, escorted by one
of the soldiers.

It was certainly a fine castle, with many large rooms, all beautifully
furnished. The passages were winding and handsomely decorated, and
after following several of these the soldier led them into an open
court that occupied the very center of the huge building. It was
surrounded on every side by high turreted walls, and contained beds of
flowers, fountains and walks of many colored marbles which were matched
together in quaint designs. In an open space near the middle of the
court they saw a group of courtiers and their ladies, who surrounded a
lean man who wore upon his head a jeweled crown. His face was hard and
sullen and through the slits of his half-closed eyelids the eyes glowed
like coals of fire. He was dressed in brilliant satins and velvets and
was seated in a golden throne-chair.

This personage was King Krewl, and as soon as Cap'n Bill saw him the
old sailor knew at once that he was not going to like the King of
Jinxland.

"Hello! who's here?" said his Majesty, with a deep scowl.

"Strangers, Sire," answered the soldier, bowing so low that his
forehead touched the marble tiles.

"Strangers, eh? Well, well; what an unexpected visit! Advance,
strangers, and give an account of yourselves."

The King's voice was as harsh as his features. Trot shuddered a little
but Cap'n Bill calmly replied:

"There ain't much for us to say, 'cept as we've arrived to look over
your country an' see how we like it. Judgin' from the way you speak,
you don't know who we are, or you'd be jumpin' up to shake hands an'
offer us seats. Kings usually treat us pretty well, in the great big
Outside World where we come from, but in this little kingdom--which
don't amount to much, anyhow--folks don't seem to 'a' got much
culchure."

The King listened with amazement to this bold speech, first with a
frown and then gazing at the two children and the old sailor with
evident curiosity. The courtiers were dumb with fear, for no one had
ever dared speak in such a manner to their self-willed, cruel King
before. His Majesty, however, was somewhat frightened, for cruel people
are always cowards, and he feared these mysterious strangers might
possess magic powers that would destroy him unless he treated them
well. So he commanded his people to give the new arrivals seats, and
they obeyed with trembling haste.

After being seated, Cap'n Bill lighted his pipe and began puffing smoke
from it, a sight so strange to them that it filled them all with
wonder. Presently the King asked:

"How did you penetrate to this hidden country? Did you cross the desert
or the mountains?"

"Desert," answered Cap'n Bill, as if the task were too easy to be worth
talking about.

"Indeed! No one has ever been able to do that before," said the King.

"Well, it's easy enough, if you know how," asserted Cap'n Bill, so
carelessly that it greatly impressed his hearers. The King shifted in
his throne uneasily. He was more afraid of these strangers than before.

"Do you intend to stay long in Jinxland?" was his next anxious question.

"Depends on how we like it," said Cap'n Bill. "Just now I might suggest
to your Majesty to order some rooms got ready for us in your dinky
little castle here. And a royal banquet, with some fried onions an'
pickled tripe, would set easy on our stomicks an' make us a bit happier
than we are now."

"Your wishes shall be attended to," said King Krewl, but his eyes
flashed from between their slits in a wicked way that made Trot hope
the food wouldn't be poisoned. At the King's command several of his
attendants hastened away to give the proper orders to the castle
servants and no sooner were they gone than a skinny old man entered the
courtyard and bowed before the King.

This disagreeable person was dressed in rich velvets, with many
furbelows and laces. He was covered with golden chains, finely wrought
rings and jeweled ornaments. He walked with mincing steps and glared at
all the courtiers as if he considered himself far superior to any or
all of them.

"Well, well, your Majesty; what news--what news?" he demanded, in a
shrill, cracked voice.

The King gave him a surly look.

"No news, Lord Googly-Goo, except that strangers have arrived," he said.

Googly-Goo cast a contemptuous glance at Cap'n Bill and a disdainful
one at Trot and Button-Bright. Then he said:

"Strangers do not interest me, your Majesty. But the Princess Gloria is
very interesting--very interesting, indeed!  What does she say, Sire?
Will she marry me?"

"Ask her," retorted the King.

"I have, many times; and every time she has refused."

"Well?" said the King harshly.

"Well," said Googly-Goo in a jaunty tone, "a bird that can sing, and
won't sing, must be made to sing."

"Huh!" sneered the King. "That's easy, with a bird; but a girl is
harder to manage."

"Still," persisted Googly-Goo, "we must overcome difficulties. The
chief trouble is that Gloria fancies she loves that miserable
gardener's boy, Pon. Suppose we throw Pon into the Great Gulf, your
Majesty?"

"It would do you no good," returned the King. "She would still love
him."

"Too bad, too bad!" sighed Googly-Goo. "I have laid aside more than a
bushel of precious gems--each worth a king's ransom--to present to your
Majesty on the day I wed Gloria."

The King's eyes sparkled, for he loved wealth above everything; but the
next moment he frowned deeply again.

"It won't help us to kill Pon," he muttered. "What we must do is kill
Gloria's love for Pon."

"That is better, if you can find a way to do it," agreed Googly-Goo.
"Everything would come right if you could kill Gloria's love for that
gardener's boy. Really, Sire, now that I come to think of it, there
must be fully a bushel and a half of those jewels!"

Just then a messenger entered the court to say that the banquet was
prepared for the strangers. So Cap'n Bill, Trot and Button-Bright
entered the castle and were taken to a room where a fine feast was
spread upon the table.

"I don't like that Lord Googly-Goo," remarked Trot as she was busily
eating.

"Nor I," said Cap'n Bill. "But from the talk we heard I guess the
gardener's boy won't get the Princess."

"Perhaps not," returned the girl; "but I hope old Googly doesn't get
her, either."

"The King means to sell her for all those jewels," observed
Button-Bright, his mouth half full of cake and jam.

"Poor Princess!" sighed Trot. "I'm sorry for her, although I've never
seen her. But if she says no to Googly-Goo, and means it, what can they
do?"

"Don't let us worry about a strange Princess," advised Cap'n Bill.
"I've a notion we're not too safe, ourselves, with this cruel King."

The two children felt the same way and all three were rather solemn
during the remainder of the meal.

When they had eaten, the servants escorted them to their rooms. Cap'n
Bill's room was way to one end of the castle, very high up, and Trot's
room was at the opposite end, rather low down. As for Button-Bright,
they placed him in the middle, so that all were as far apart as they
could possibly be. They didn't like this arrangement very well, but all
the rooms were handsomely furnished and being guests of the King they
dared not complain.

After the strangers had left the courtyard the King and Googly-Goo had
a long talk together, and the King said:

"I cannot force Gloria to marry you just now, because those strangers
may interfere. I suspect that the wooden-legged man possesses great
magical powers, or he would never have been able to carry himself and
those children across the deadly desert."

"I don't like him; he looks dangerous," answered Googly-Goo. "But
perhaps you are mistaken about his being a wizard. Why don't you test
his powers?"

"How?" asked the King.

"Send for the Wicked Witch. She will tell you in a moment whether that
wooden-legged person is a common man or a magician."

"Ha! that's a good idea," cried the King. "Why didn't I think of the
Wicked Witch before? But the woman demands rich rewards for her
services."

"Never mind; I will pay her," promised the wealthy Googly-Goo.

So a servant was dispatched to summon the Wicked Witch, who lived but a
few leagues from King Krewl's castle. While they awaited her, the
withered old courtier proposed that they pay a visit to Princess Gloria
and see if she was not now in a more complaisant mood. So the two
started away together and searched the castle over without finding
Gloria.

At last Googly-Goo suggested she might be in the rear garden, which was
a large park filled with bushes and trees and surrounded by a high
wall. And what was their anger, when they turned a corner of the path,
to find in a quiet nook the beautiful Princess, and kneeling before
her, Pon, the gardener's boy! With a roar of rage the King dashed
forward; but Pon had scaled the wall by means of a ladder, which still
stood in its place, and when he saw the King coming he ran up the
ladder and made good his escape. But this left Gloria confronted by her
angry guardian, the King, and by old Googly-Goo, who was trembling with
a fury he could not express in words.

Seizing the Princess by her arm the King dragged her back to the
castle. Pushing her into a room on the lower floor he locked the door
upon the unhappy girl. And at that moment the arrival of the Wicked
Witch was announced.

Hearing this, the King smiled, as a tiger smiles, showing his teeth.
And Googly-Goo smiled, as a serpent smiles, for he had no teeth except
a couple of fangs. And having frightened each other with these smiles
the two dreadful men went away to the Royal Council Chamber to meet the
Wicked Witch.




Chapter Twelve

The Wooden-Legged Grass-Hopper


Now it so happened that Trot, from the window of her room, had
witnessed the meeting of the lovers in the garden and had seen the King
come and drag Gloria away. The little girl's heart went out in sympathy
for the poor Princess, who seemed to her to be one of the sweetest and
loveliest young ladies she had ever seen, so she crept along the
passages and from a hidden niche saw Gloria locked in her room.

The key was still in the lock, so when the King had gone away, followed
by Googly-Goo, Trot stole up to the door, turned the key and entered.
The Princess lay prone upon a couch, sobbing bitterly. Trot went up to
her and smoothed her hair and tried to comfort her.

"Don't cry," she said. "I've unlocked the door, so you can go away any
time you want to."

"It isn't that," sobbed the Princess. "I am unhappy because they will
not let me love Pon, the gardener's boy!"

"Well, never mind; Pon isn't any great shakes, anyhow, seems to me,"
said Trot soothingly. "There are lots of other people you can love."

Gloria rolled over on the couch and looked at the little girl
reproachfully.

"Pon has won my heart, and I can't help loving him," she explained.
Then with sudden indignation she added: "But I'll never love
Googly-Goo--never, as long as I live!"

"I should say not!" replied Trot. "Pon may not be much good, but old
Googly is very, very bad. Hunt around, and I'm sure you'll find someone
worth your love. You're very pretty, you know, and almost anyone ought
to love you."

"You don't understand, my dear," said Gloria, as she wiped the tears
from her eyes with a dainty lace handkerchief bordered with pearls.
"When you are older you will realize that a young lady cannot decide
whom she will love, or choose the most worthy. Her heart alone decides
for her, and whomsoever her heart selects, she must love, whether he
amounts to much or not."

Trot was a little puzzled by this speech, which seemed to her
unreasonable; but she made no reply and presently Gloria's grief
softened and she began to question the little girl about herself and
her adventures. Trot told her how they had happened to come to
Jinxland, and all about Cap'n Bill and the Ork and Pessim and the Bumpy
Man.

While they were thus conversing together, getting more and more
friendly as they became better acquainted, in the Council Chamber the
King and Googly-Goo were talking with the Wicked Witch.

This evil creature was old and ugly. She had lost one eye and wore a
black patch over it, so the people of Jinxland had named her "Blinkie."
Of course witches are forbidden to exist in the Land of Oz, but
Jinxland was so far removed from the center of Ozma's dominions, and so
absolutely cut off from it by the steep mountains and the bottomless
gulf, that the laws of Oz were not obeyed very well in that country. So
there were several witches in Jinxland who were the terror of the
people, but King Krewl favored them and permitted them to exercise
their evil sorcery.

Blinkie was the leader of all the other witches and therefore the most
hated and feared. The King used her witchcraft at times to assist him
in carrying out his cruelties and revenge, but he was always obliged to
pay Blinkie large sums of money or heaps of precious jewels before she
would undertake an enchantment. This made him hate the old woman almost
as much as his subjects did, but to-day Lord Googly-Goo had agreed to
pay the witch's price, so the King greeted her with gracious favor.

"Can you destroy the love of Princess Gloria for the gardener's boy?"
inquired his Majesty.

The Wicked Witch thought about it before she replied:

"That's a hard question to answer. I can do lots of clever magic, but
love is a stubborn thing to conquer. When you think you've killed it,
it's liable to bob up again as strong as ever. I believe love and cats
have nine lives. In other words, killing love is a hard job, even for a
skillful witch, but I believe I can do something that will answer your
purpose just as well."

"What is that?" asked the King.

"I can freeze the girl's heart. I've got a special incantation for
that, and when Gloria's heart is thoroughly frozen she can no longer
love Pon."

"Just the thing!" exclaimed Googly-Goo, and the King was likewise much
pleased.

They bargained a long time as to the price, but finally the old
courtier agreed to pay the Wicked Witch's demands. It was arranged that
they should take Gloria to Blinkie's house the next day, to have her
heart frozen.

Then King Krewl mentioned to the old hag the strangers who had that day
arrived in Jinxland, and said to her:

"I think the two children--the boy and the girl--are unable to harm me,
but I have a suspicion that the wooden-legged man is a powerful wizard."

The witch's face wore a troubled look when she heard this.

"If you are right," she said, "this wizard might spoil my incantation
and interfere with me in other ways. So it will be best for me to meet
this stranger at once and match my magic against his, to decide which
is the stronger."

"All right," said the King. "Come with me and I will lead you to the
man's room."

Googly-Goo did not accompany them, as he was obliged to go home to get
the money and jewels he had promised to pay old Blinkie, so the other
two climbed several flights of stairs and went through many passages
until they came to the room occupied by Cap'n Bill.

The sailor-man, finding his bed soft and inviting, and being tired with
the adventures he had experienced, had decided to take a nap. When the
Wicked Witch and the King softly opened his door and entered, Cap'n
Bill was snoring with such vigor that he did not hear them at all.

Blinkie approached the bed and with her one eye anxiously stared at the
sleeping stranger.

"Ah," she said in a soft whisper, "I believe you are right, King Krewl.
The man looks to me like a very powerful wizard. But by good luck I
have caught him asleep, so I shall transform him before he wakes up,
giving him such a form that he will be unable to oppose me."

"Careful!" cautioned the King, also speaking low. "If he discovers what
you are doing he may destroy you, and that would annoy me because I
need you to attend to Gloria."

But the Wicked Witch realized as well as he did that she must be
careful. She carried over her arm a black bag, from which she now drew
several packets carefully wrapped in paper. Three of these she
selected, replacing the others in the bag. Two of the packets she mixed
together, and then she cautiously opened the third.

"Better stand back, your Majesty," she advised, "for if this powder
falls on you you might be transformed yourself."

The King hastily retreated to the end of the room. As Blinkie mixed the
third powder with the others she waved her hands over it, mumbled a few
words, and then backed away as quickly as she could.

Cap'n Bill was slumbering peacefully, all unconscious of what was going
on. Puff! A great cloud of smoke rolled over the bed and completely hid
him from view. When the smoke rolled away, both Blinkie and the King
saw that the body of the stranger had quite disappeared, while in his
place, crouching in the middle of the bed, was a little gray
grasshopper.

One curious thing about this grasshopper was that the last joint of its
left leg was made of wood. Another curious thing--considering it was a
grasshopper--was that it began talking, crying out in a tiny but sharp
voice:

"Here--you people! What do you mean by treating me so? Put me back
where I belong, at once, or you'll be sorry!"

The cruel King turned pale at hearing the grasshopper's threats, but
the Wicked Witch merely laughed in derision. Then she raised her stick
and aimed a vicious blow at the grasshopper, but before the stick
struck the bed the tiny hopper made a marvelous jump--marvelous,
indeed, when we consider that it had a wooden leg. It rose in the air
and sailed across the room and passed right through the open window,
where it disappeared from their view.

"Good!" shouted the King. "We are well rid of this desperate wizard."
And then they both laughed heartily at the success of the incantation,
and went away to complete their horrid plans.

After Trot had visited a time with Princess Gloria, the little girl
went to Button-Bright's room but did not find him there. Then she went
to Cap'n Bill's room, but he was not there because the witch and the
King had been there before her. So she made her way downstairs and
questioned the servants. They said they had seen the little boy go out
into the garden, some time ago, but the old man with the wooden leg
they had not seen at all.

Therefore Trot, not knowing what else to do, rambled through the great
gardens, seeking for Button-Bright or Cap'n Bill and not finding either
of them. This part of the garden, which lay before the castle, was not
walled in, but extended to the roadway, and the paths were open to the
edge of the forest; so, after two hours of vain search for her friends,
the little girl returned to the castle.

But at the doorway a soldier stopped her.

"I live here," said Trot, "so it's all right to let me in. The King has
given me a room."

"Well, he has taken it back again," was the soldier's reply. "His
Majesty's orders are to turn you away if you attempt to enter. I am
also ordered to forbid the boy, your companion, to again enter the
King's castle."

"How 'bout Cap'n Bill?" she inquired.

"Why, it seems he has mysteriously disappeared," replied the soldier,
shaking his head ominously. "Where he has gone to, I can't make out,
but I can assure you he is no longer in this castle. I'm sorry, little
girl, to disappoint you. Don't blame me; I must obey my master's
orders."

Now, all her life Trot had been accustomed to depend on Cap'n Bill, so
when this good friend was suddenly taken from her she felt very
miserable and forlorn indeed. She was brave enough not to cry before
the soldier, or even to let him see her grief and anxiety, but after
she was turned away from the castle she sought a quiet bench in the
garden and for a time sobbed as if her heart would break.

It was Button-Bright who found her, at last, just as the sun had set
and the shades of evening were falling. He also had been turned away
from the King's castle, when he tried to enter it, and in the park he
came across Trot.

"Never mind," said the boy. "We can find a place to sleep."

"I want Cap'n Bill," wailed the girl.

"Well, so do I," was the reply. "But we haven't got him. Where do you
s'pose he is, Trot?

"I don't s'pose anything. He's gone, an' that's all I know 'bout it."

Button-Bright sat on the bench beside her and thrust his hands in the
pockets of his knickerbockers. Then he reflected somewhat gravely for
him.

"Cap'n Bill isn't around here," he said, letting his eyes wander over
the dim garden, "so we must go somewhere else if we want to find him.
Besides, it's fast getting dark, and if we want to find a place to
sleep we must get busy while we can see where to go."

He rose from the bench as he said this and Trot also jumped up, drying
her eyes on her apron. Then she walked beside him out of the grounds of
the King's castle. They did not go by the main path, but passed through
an opening in a hedge and found themselves in a small but well-worn
roadway. Following this for some distance, along a winding way, they
came upon no house or building that would afford them refuge for the
night. It became so dark that they could scarcely see their way, and
finally Trot stopped and suggested that they camp under a tree.

"All right," said Button-Bright, "I've often found that leaves make a
good warm blanket. But--look there, Trot!--isn't that a light flashing
over yonder?"

"It certainly is, Button-Bright. Let's go over and see if it's a house.
Whoever lives there couldn't treat us worse than the King did."

To reach the light they had to leave the road, so they stumbled over
hillocks and brushwood, hand in hand, keeping the tiny speck of light
always in sight.

They were rather forlorn little waifs, outcasts in a strange country
and forsaken by their only friend and guardian, Cap'n Bill. So they
were very glad when finally they reached a small cottage and, looking
in through its one window, saw Pon, the gardener's boy, sitting by a
fire of twigs.

As Trot opened the door and walked boldly in, Pon sprang up to greet
them. They told him of Cap'n Bill's disappearance and how they had been
turned out of the King's castle. As they finished the story Pon shook
his head sadly.

"King Krewl is plotting mischief, I fear," said he, "for to-day he sent
for old Blinkie, the Wicked Witch, and with my own eyes I saw her come
from the castle and hobble away toward her hut. She had been with the
King and Googly-Goo, and I was afraid they were going to work some
enchantment on Gloria so she would no longer love me. But perhaps the
witch was only called to the castle to enchant your friend, Cap'n Bill."

"Could she do that?" asked Trot, horrified by the suggestion.

"I suppose so, for old Blinkie can do a lot of wicked magical things."

"What sort of an enchantment could she put on Cap'n Bill?"

"I don't know. But he has disappeared, so I'm pretty certain she has
done something dreadful to him. But don't worry. If it has happened, it
can't be helped, and if it hasn't happened we may be able to find him
in the morning."

With this Pon went to the cupboard and brought food for them. Trot was
far too worried to eat, but Button-Bright made a good supper from the
simple food and then lay down before the fire and went to sleep. The
little girl and the gardener's boy, however, sat for a long time
staring into the fire, busy with their thoughts. But at last Trot, too,
became sleepy and Pon gently covered her with the one blanket he
possessed. Then he threw more wood on the fire and laid himself down
before it, next to Button-Bright. Soon all three were fast asleep. They
were in a good deal of trouble; but they were young, and sleep was good
to them because for a time it made them forget.




Chapter Thirteen

Glinda the Good and the Scarecrow of Oz


That country south of the Emerald City, in the Land of Oz, is known as
the Quadling Country, and in the very southernmost part of it stands a
splendid palace in which lives Glinda the Good.

Glinda is the Royal Sorceress of Oz. She has wonderful magical powers
and uses them only to benefit the subjects of Ozma's kingdom. Even the
famous Wizard of Oz pays tribute to her, for Glinda taught him all the
real magic he knows, and she is his superior in all sorts of sorcery
Everyone loves Glinda, from the dainty and exquisite Ruler, Ozma, down
to the humblest inhabitant of Oz, for she is always kindly and helpful
and willing to listen to their troubles, however busy she may be. No
one knows her age, but all can see how beautiful and stately she is.
Her hair is like red gold and finer than the finest silken strands. Her
eyes are blue as the sky and always frank and smiling. Her cheeks are
the envy of peach-blows and her mouth is enticing as a rosebud. Glinda
is tall and wears splendid gowns that trail behind her as she walks.
She wears no jewels, for her beauty would shame them.

For attendants Glinda has half a hundred of the loveliest girls in Oz.
They are gathered from all over Oz, from among the Winkies, the
Munchkins, the Gillikins and the Quadlings, as well as from Ozma's
magnificent Emerald City, and it is considered a great favor to be
allowed to serve the Royal Sorceress.

Among the many wonderful things in Glinda's palace is the Great Book of
Records. In this book is inscribed everything that takes place in all
the world, just the instant it happens; so that by referring to its
pages Glinda knows what is taking place far and near, in every country
that exists. In this way she learns when and where she can help any in
distress or danger, and although her duties are confined to assisting
those who inhabit the Land of Oz, she is always interested in what
takes place in the unprotected outside world.

So it was that on a certain evening Glinda sat in her library,
surrounded by a bevy of her maids, who were engaged in spinning,
weaving and embroidery, when an attendant announced the arrival at the
palace of the Scarecrow.

This personage was one of the most famous and popular in all the Land
of Oz. His body was merely a suit of Munchkin clothes stuffed with
straw, but his head was a round sack filled with bran, with which the
Wizard of Oz had mixed some magic brains of a very superior sort. The
eyes, nose and mouth of the Scarecrow were painted upon the front of
the sack, as were his ears, and since this quaint being had been
endowed with life, the expression of his face was very interesting, if
somewhat comical.

The Scarecrow was good all through, even to his brains, and while he
was naturally awkward in his movements and lacked the neat symmetry of
other people, his disposition was so kind and considerate and he was so
obliging and honest, that all who knew him loved him, and there were
few people in Oz who had not met our Scarecrow and made his
acquaintance. He lived part of the time in Ozma's palace at the Emerald
City, part of the time in his own corncob castle in the Winkie Country,
and part of the time he traveled over all Oz, visiting with the people
and playing with the children, whom he dearly loved.

It was on one of his wandering journeys that the Scarecrow had arrived
at Glinda's palace, and the Sorceress at once made him welcome. As he
sat beside her, talking of his adventures, he asked:

"What's new in the way of news?"

Glinda opened her Great Book of Records and read some of the last pages.

"Here is an item quite curious and interesting," she announced, an
accent of surprise in her voice. "Three people from the big Outside
World have arrived in Jinxland."

"Where is Jinxland?" inquired the Scarecrow.

"Very near here, a little to the east of us," she said. "In fact,
Jinxland is a little slice taken off the Quadling Country, but
separated from it by a range of high mountains, at the foot of which
lies a wide, deep gulf that is supposed to be impassable."

"Then Jinxland is really a part of the Land of Oz," said he.

"Yes," returned Glinda, "but Oz people know nothing of it, except what
is recorded here in my book."

"What does the Book say about it?" asked the Scarecrow.

"It is ruled by a wicked man called King Krewl, although he has no
right to the title. Most of the people are good, but they are very
timid and live in constant fear of their fierce ruler. There are also
several Wicked Witches who keep the inhabitants of Jinxland in a state
of terror."

"Do those witches have any magical powers?" inquired the Scarecrow.

"Yes, they seem to understand witchcraft in its most evil form, for one
of them has just transformed a respectable and honest old sailor--one
of the strangers who arrived there--into a grasshopper. This same
witch, Blinkie by name, is also planning to freeze the heart of a
beautiful Jinxland girl named Princess Gloria."

"Why, that's a dreadful thing to do!" exclaimed the Scarecrow.

Glinda's face was very grave. She read in her book how Trot and
Button-Bright were turned out of the King's castle, and how they found
refuge in the hut of Pon, the gardener's boy.

"I'm afraid those helpless earth people will endure much suffering in
Jinxland, even if the wicked King and the witches permit them to live,"
said the good Sorceress, thoughtfully. "I wish I might help them."

"Can I do anything?" asked the Scarecrow, anxiously. "If so, tell me
what to do, and I'll do it."

For a few moments Glinda did not reply, but sat musing over the
records. Then she said: "I am going to send you to Jinxland, to protect
Trot and Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill."

"All right," answered the Scarecrow in a cheerful voice. "I know
Button-Bright already, for he has been in the Land of Oz before. You
remember he went away from the Land of Oz in one of our Wizard's big
bubbles."

"Yes," said Glinda, "I remember that." Then she carefully instructed
the Scarecrow what to do and gave him certain magical things which he
placed in the pockets of his ragged Munchkin coat.

"As you have no need to sleep," said she, "you may as well start at
once."

"The night is the same as day to me," he replied, "except that I cannot
see my way so well in the dark."

"I will furnish a light to guide you," promised the Sorceress.

So the Scarecrow bade her good-bye and at once started on his journey.
By morning he had reached the mountains that separated the Quadling
Country from Jinxland. The sides of these mountains were too steep to
climb, but the Scarecrow took a small rope from his pocket and tossed
one end upward, into the air. The rope unwound itself for hundreds of
feet, until it caught upon a peak of rock at the very top of a
mountain, for it was a magic rope furnished him by Glinda. The
Scarecrow climbed the rope and, after pulling it up, let it down on the
other side of the mountain range. When he descended the rope on this
side he found himself in Jinxland, but at his feet yawned the Great
Gulf, which must be crossed before he could proceed any farther.

The Scarecrow knelt down and examined the ground carefully, and in a
moment he discovered a fuzzy brown spider that had rolled itself into a
ball. So he took two tiny pills from his pocket and laid them beside
the spider, which unrolled itself and quickly ate up the pills. Then
the Scarecrow said in a voice of command:

"Spin!" and the spider obeyed instantly.

In a few moments the little creature had spun two slender but strong
strands that reached way across the gulf, one being five or six feet
above the other. When these were completed the Scarecrow started across
the tiny bridge, walking upon one strand as a person walks upon a rope,
and holding to the upper strand with his hands to prevent him from
losing his balance and toppling over into the gulf. The tiny threads
held him safely, thanks to the strength given them by the magic pills.

Presently he was safe across and standing on the plains of Jinxland.
Far away he could see the towers of the King's castle and toward this
he at once began to walk.




Chapter Fourteen

The Frozen Heart


In the hut of Pon, the gardener's boy, Button-Bright was the first to
waken in the morning. Leaving his companions still asleep, he went out
into the fresh morning air and saw some blackberries growing on bushes
in a field not far away. Going to the bushes he found the berries ripe
and sweet, so he began eating them. More bushes were scattered over the
fields, so the boy wandered on, from bush to bush, without paying any
heed to where he was wandering. Then a butterfly fluttered by. He gave
chase to it and followed it a long way. When finally he paused to look
around him, Button-Bright could see no sign of Pon's house, nor had he
the slightest idea in which direction it lay.

"Well, I'm lost again," he remarked to himself. "But never mind; I've
been lost lots of times. Someone is sure to find me."

Trot was a little worried about Button-Bright when she awoke and found
him gone. Knowing how careless he was, she believed that he had strayed
away, but felt that he would come back in time, because he had a habit
of not staying lost. Pon got the little girl some food for her
breakfast and then together they went out of the hut and stood in the
sunshine.

Pon's house was some distance off the road, but they could see it from
where they stood and both gave a start of surprise when they discovered
two soldiers walking along the roadway and escorting Princess Gloria
between them. The poor girl had her hands bound together, to prevent
her from struggling, and the soldiers rudely dragged her forward when
her steps seemed to lag.

Behind this group came King Krewl, wearing his jeweled crown and
swinging in his hand a slender golden staff with a ball of clustered
gems at one end.

"Where are they going?" asked Trot. "To the house of the Wicked Witch,
I fear," Pon replied. "Come, let us follow them, for I am sure they
intend to harm my dear Gloria."

"Won't they see us?" she asked timidly.

"We won't let them. I know a short cut through the trees to Blinkie's
house," said he.

So they hurried away through the trees and reached the house of the
witch ahead of the King and his soldiers. Hiding themselves in the
shrubbery, they watched the approach of poor Gloria and her escort, all
of whom passed so near to them that Pon could have put out a hand and
touched his sweetheart, had he dared to.

Blinkie's house had eight sides, with a door and a window in each side.
Smoke was coming out of the chimney and as the guards brought Gloria to
one of the doors it was opened by the old witch in person. She chuckled
with evil glee and rubbed her skinny hands together to show the delight
with which she greeted her victim, for Blinkie was pleased to be able
to perform her wicked rites on one so fair and sweet as the Princess.

Gloria struggled to resist when they bade her enter the house, so the
soldiers forced her through the doorway and even the King gave her a
shove as he followed close behind. Pon was so incensed at the cruelty
shown Gloria that he forgot all caution and rushed forward to enter the
house also; but one of the soldiers prevented him, pushing the
gardener's boy away with violence and slamming the door in his face.

"Never mind," said Trot soothingly, as Pon rose from where he had
fallen. "You couldn't do much to help the poor Princess if you were
inside. How unfortunate it is that you are in love with her!"

"True," he answered sadly, "it is indeed my misfortune. If I did not
love her, it would be none of my business what the King did to his
niece Gloria; but the unlucky circumstance of my loving her makes it my
duty to defend her."

"I don't see how you can, duty or no duty," observed Trot.

"No; I am powerless, for they are stronger than I. But we might peek in
through the window and see what they are doing."

Trot was somewhat curious, too, so they crept up to one of the windows
and looked in, and it so happened that those inside the witch's house
were so busy they did not notice that Pon and Trot were watching them.

Gloria had been tied to a stout post in the center of the room and the
King was giving the Wicked Witch a quantity of money and jewels, which
Googly-Goo had provided in payment. When this had been done the King
said to her:

"Are you perfectly sure you can freeze this maiden's heart, so that she
will no longer love that low gardener's boy?"

"Sure as witchcraft, your Majesty," the creature replied.

"Then get to work," said the King. "There may be some unpleasant
features about the ceremony that would annoy me, so I'll bid you good
day and leave you to carry out your contract. One word, however: If you
fail, I shall burn you at the stake!" Then he beckoned to his soldiers
to follow him, and throwing wide the door of the house walked out.

This action was so sudden that King Krewl almost caught Trot and Pon
eavesdropping, but they managed to run around the house before he saw
them. Away he marched, up the road, followed by his men, heartlessly
leaving Gloria to the mercies of old Blinkie.

When they again crept up to the window, Trot and Pon saw Blinkie
gloating over her victim. Although nearly fainting from fear, the proud
Princess gazed with haughty defiance into the face of the wicked
creature; but she was bound so tightly to the post that she could do no
more to express her loathing.

Pretty soon Blinkie went to a kettle that was swinging by a chain over
the fire and tossed into it several magical compounds. The kettle gave
three flashes, and at every flash another witch appeared in the room.

These hags were very ugly but when one-eyed Blinkie whispered her
orders to them they grinned with joy as they began dancing around
Gloria. First one and then another cast something into the kettle, when
to the astonishment of the watchers at the window all three of the old
women were instantly transformed into maidens of exquisite beauty,
dressed in the daintiest costumes imaginable. Only their eyes could not
be disguised, and an evil glare still shone in their depths. But if the
eyes were cast down or hidden, one could not help but admire these
beautiful creatures, even with the knowledge that they were mere
illusions of witchcraft.

Trot certainly admired them, for she had never seen anything so dainty
and bewitching, but her attention was quickly drawn to their deeds
instead of their persons, and then horror replaced admiration. Into the
kettle old Blinkie poured another mess from a big brass bottle she took
from a chest, and this made the kettle begin to bubble and smoke
violently. One by one the beautiful witches approached to stir the
contents of the kettle and to mutter a magic charm. Their movements
were graceful and rhythmic and the Wicked Witch who had called them to
her aid watched them with an evil grin upon her wrinkled face.

Finally the incantation was complete. The kettle ceased bubbling and
together the witches lifted it from the fire. Then Blinkie brought a
wooden ladle and filled it from the contents of the kettle. Going with
the spoon to Princess Gloria she cried:

"Love no more! Magic art Now will freeze your mortal heart!"

With this she dashed the contents of the ladle full upon Gloria's
breast.

Trot saw the body of the Princess become transparent, so that her
beating heart showed plainly. But now the heart turned from a vivid red
to gray, and then to white. A layer of frost formed about it and tiny
icicles clung to its surface. Then slowly the body of the girl became
visible again and the heart was hidden from view. Gloria seemed to have
fainted, but now she recovered and, opening her beautiful eyes, stared
coldly and without emotion at the group of witches confronting her.

Blinkie and the others knew by that one cold look that their charm had
been successful. They burst into a chorus of wild laughter and the
three beautiful ones began dancing again, while Blinkie unbound the
Princess and set her free.

Trot rubbed her eyes to prove that she was wide awake and seeing
clearly, for her astonishment was great when the three lovely maidens
turned into ugly, crooked hags again, leaning on broomsticks and canes.
They jeered at Gloria, but the Princess regarded them with cold
disdain. Being now free, she walked to a door, opened it and passed
out. And the witches let her go.

Trot and Pon had been so intent upon this scene that in their eagerness
they had pressed quite hard against the window. Just as Gloria went out
of the house the window-sash broke loose from its fastenings and fell
with a crash into the room. The witches uttered a chorus of screams and
then, seeing that their magical incantation had been observed, they
rushed for the open window with uplifted broomsticks and canes. But Pon
was off like the wind, and Trot followed at his heels. Fear lent them
strength to run, to leap across ditches, to speed up the hills and to
vault the low fences as a deer would.

The band of witches had dashed through the window in pursuit; but
Blinkie was so old, and the others so crooked and awkward, that they
soon realized they would be unable to overtake the fugitives. So the
three who had been summoned by the Wicked Witch put their canes or
broomsticks between their legs and flew away through the air, quickly
disappearing against the blue sky. Blinkie, however, was so enraged at
Pon and Trot that she hobbled on in the direction they had taken, fully
determined to catch them, in time, and to punish them terribly for
spying upon her witchcraft.

When Pon and Trot had run so far that they were confident they had made
good their escape, they sat down near the edge of a forest to get their
breath again, for both were panting hard from their exertions. Trot was
the first to recover speech, and she said to her companion:

"My! wasn't it terr'ble?"

"The most terrible thing I ever saw," Pon agreed.

"And they froze Gloria's heart; so now she can't love you any more."

"Well, they froze her heart, to be sure," admitted Pon, "but I'm in
hopes I can melt it with my love."

"Where do you s'pose Gloria is?" asked the girl, after a pause.

"She left the witch's house just before we did. Perhaps she has gone
back to the King's castle," he said.

"I'm pretty sure she started off in a diff'rent direction," declared
Trot. "I looked over my shoulder, as I ran, to see how close the
witches were, and I'm sure I saw Gloria walking slowly away toward the
north."

"Then let us circle around that way," proposed Pon, "and perhaps we
shall meet her."

Trot agreed to this and they left the grove and began to circle around
toward the north, thus drawing nearer and nearer to old Blinkie's house
again. The Wicked Witch did not suspect this change of direction, so
when she came to the grove she passed through it and continued on.

Pon and Trot had reached a place less than half a mile from the witch's
house when they saw Gloria walking toward them. The Princess moved with
great dignity and with no show of haste whatever, holding her head high
and looking neither to right nor left.

Pon rushed forward, holding out his arms as if to embrace her and
calling her sweet names. But Gloria gazed upon him coldly and repelled
him with a haughty gesture. At this the poor gardener's boy sank upon
his knees and hid his face in his arms, weeping bitter tears; but the
Princess was not at all moved by his distress. Passing him by, she drew
her skirts aside, as if unwilling they should touch him, and then she
walked up the path a way and hesitated, as if uncertain where to go
next.

Trot was grieved by Pon's sobs and indignant because Gloria treated him
so badly. But she remembered why.

"I guess your heart is frozen, all right," she said to the Princess.
Gloria nodded gravely, in reply, and then turned her back upon the
little girl. "Can't you like even me?" asked Trot, half pleadingly.

"No," said Gloria.

"Your voice sounds like a refrig'rator," sighed the little girl. "I'm
awful sorry for you, 'cause you were sweet an' nice to me before this
happened. You can't help it, of course; but it's a dreadful thing, jus'
the same."

"My heart is frozen to all mortal loves," announced Gloria, calmly. "I
do not love even myself."

"That's too bad," said Trot, "for, if you can't love anybody, you can't
expect anybody to love you."

"I do!" cried Pon. "I shall always love her."

"Well, you're just a gardener's boy," replied Trot, "and I didn't think
you 'mounted to much, from the first. I can love the old Princess
Gloria, with a warm heart an' nice manners, but this one gives me the
shivers."

"It's her icy heart, that's all," said Pon.

"That's enough," insisted Trot. "Seeing her heart isn't big enough to
skate on, I can't see that she's of any use to anyone. For my part, I'm
goin' to try to find Button-Bright an' Cap'n Bill."

"I will go with you," decided Pon. "It is evident that Gloria no longer
loves me and that her heart is frozen too stiff for me to melt it with
my own love; therefore I may as well help you to find your friends."

As Trot started off, Pon cast one more imploring look at the Princess,
who returned it with a chilly stare. So he followed after the little
girl.

As for the Princess, she hesitated a moment and then turned in the same
direction the others had taken, but going far more slowly. Soon she
heard footsteps pattering behind her, and up came Googly-Goo, a little
out of breath with running.

"Stop, Gloria!" he cried. "I have come to take you back to my mansion,
where we are to be married."

She looked at him wonderingly a moment, then tossed her head
disdainfully and walked on. But Googly-Goo kept beside her.

"What does this mean?" he demanded. "Haven't you discovered that you no
longer love that gardener's boy, who stood in my way?"

"Yes; I have discovered it," she replied. "My heart is frozen to all
mortal loves. I cannot love you, or Pon, or the cruel King my uncle, or
even myself. Go your way, Googly-Goo, for I will wed no one at all."

He stopped in dismay when he heard this, but in another minute he
exclaimed angrily:

"You must wed me, Princess Gloria, whether you want to or not! I paid
to have your heart frozen; I also paid the King to permit our marriage.
If you now refuse me it will mean that I have been
robbed--robbed--robbed of my precious money and jewels!"

He almost wept with despair, but she laughed a cold, bitter laugh and
passed on. Googly-Goo caught at her arm, as if to restrain her, but she
whirled and dealt him a blow that sent him reeling into a ditch beside
the path. Here he lay for a long time, half covered by muddy water,
dazed with surprise.

Finally the old courtier arose, dripping, and climbed from the ditch.
The Princess had gone; so, muttering threats of vengeance upon her,
upon the King and upon Blinkie, old Googly-Goo hobbled back to his
mansion to have the mud removed from his costly velvet clothes.




Chapter Fifteen

Trot Meets the Scarecrow


Trot and Pon covered many leagues of ground, searching through forests,
in fields and in many of the little villages of Jinxland, but could
find no trace of either Cap'n Bill or Button-Bright. Finally they
paused beside a cornfield and sat upon a stile to rest. Pon took some
apples from his pocket and gave one to Trot. Then he began eating
another himself, for this was their time for luncheon. When his apple
was finished Pon tossed the core into the field.

"Tchuk-tchuk!" said a strange voice. "What do you mean by hitting me in
the eye with an apple-core?"

Then rose up the form of the Scarecrow, who had hidden himself in the
cornfield while he examined Pon and Trot and decided whether they were
worthy to be helped.

"Excuse me," said Pon. "I didn't know you were there."

"How did you happen to be there, anyhow?" asked Trot.

The Scarecrow came forward with awkward steps and stood beside them.

"Ah, you are the gardener's boy," he said to Pon. Then he turned to
Trot. "And you are the little girl who came to Jinxland riding on a big
bird, and who has had the misfortune to lose her friend, Cap'n Bill,
and her chum, Button-Bright."

"Why, how did you know all that?" she inquired.

"I know a lot of things," replied the Scarecrow, winking at her
comically. "My brains are the Carefully-Assorted, Double-Distilled,
High-Efficiency sort that the Wizard of Oz makes. He admits, himself,
that my brains are the best he ever manufactured."

"I think I've heard of you," said Trot slowly, as she looked the
Scarecrow over with much interest; "but you used to live in the Land of
Oz."

"Oh, I do now," he replied cheerfully. "I've just come over the
mountains from the Quadling Country to see if I can be of any help to
you."

"Who, me?" asked Pon.

"No, the strangers from the big world. It seems they need looking
after."

"I'm doing that myself," said Pon, a little ungraciously. "If you will
pardon me for saying so, I don't see how a Scarecrow with painted eyes
can look after anyone."

"If you don't see that, you are more blind than the Scarecrow,"
asserted Trot. "He's a fairy man, Pon, and comes from the fairyland of
Oz, so he can do 'most anything. I hope," she added, turning to the
Scarecrow, "you can find Cap'n Bill for me."

"I will try, anyhow," he promised. "But who is that old woman who is
running toward us and shaking her stick at us?"

Trot and Pon turned around and both uttered an exclamation of fear. The
next instant they took to their heels and ran fast up the path. For it
was old Blinkie, the Wicked Witch, who had at last traced them to this
place. Her anger was so great that she was determined not to abandon
the chase of Pon and Trot until she had caught and punished them. The
Scarecrow understood at once that the old woman meant harm to his new
friends, so as she drew near he stepped before her. His appearance was
so sudden and unexpected that Blinkie ran into him and toppled him
over, but she tripped on his straw body and went rolling in the path
beside him.

The Scarecrow sat up and said: "I beg your pardon!" but she whacked him
with her stick and knocked him flat again. Then, furious with rage, the
old witch sprang upon her victim and began pulling the straw out of his
body. The poor Scarecrow was helpless to resist and in a few moments
all that was left of him was an empty suit of clothes and a heap of
straw beside it. Fortunately, Blinkie did not harm his head, for it
rolled into a little hollow and escaped her notice. Fearing that Pon
and Trot would escape her, she quickly resumed the chase and
disappeared over the brow of a hill, following the direction in which
she had seen them go.

Only a short time elapsed before a gray grasshopper with a wooden leg
came hopping along and lit directly on the upturned face of the
Scarecrow's head.

"Pardon me, but you are resting yourself upon my nose," remarked the
Scarecrow.

"Oh! are you alive?" asked the grasshopper.

"That is a question I have never been able to decide," said the
Scarecrow's head. "When my body is properly stuffed I have animation
and can move around as well as any live person. The brains in the head
you are now occupying as a throne, are of very superior quality and do
a lot of very clever thinking. But whether that is being alive, or not,
I cannot prove to you; for one who lives is liable to death, while I am
only liable to destruction."

"Seems to me," said the grasshopper, rubbing his nose with his front
legs, "that in your case it doesn't matter--unless you're destroyed
already."

"I am not; all I need is re-stuffing," declared the Scarecrow; "and if
Pon and Trot escape the witch, and come back here, I am sure they will
do me that favor."

"Tell me! Are Trot and Pon around here?" inquired the grasshopper, its
small voice trembling with excitement.

The Scarecrow did not answer at once, for both his eyes were staring
straight upward at a beautiful face that was slightly bent over his
head. It was, indeed, Princess Gloria, who had wandered to this spot,
very much surprised when she heard the Scarecrow's head talk and the
tiny gray grasshopper answer it.

"This," said the Scarecrow, still staring at her, "must be the Princess
who loves Pon, the gardener's boy."

"Oh, indeed!" exclaimed the grasshopper--who of course was Cap'n
Bill--as he examined the young lady curiously.

"No," said Gloria frigidly, "I do not love Pon, or anyone else, for the
Wicked Witch has frozen my heart."

"What a shame!" cried the Scarecrow. "One so lovely should be able to
love. But would you mind, my dear, stuffing that straw into my body
again?"

The dainty Princess glanced at the straw and at the well-worn blue
Munchkin clothes and shrank back in disdain. But she was spared from
refusing the Scarecrow's request by the appearance of Trot and Pon, who
had hidden in some bushes just over the brow of the hill and waited
until old Blinkie had passed them by. Their hiding place was on the
same side as the witch's blind eye, and she rushed on in the chase of
the girl and the youth without being aware that they had tricked her.

Trot was shocked at the Scarecrow's sad condition and at once began
putting the straw back into his body. Pon, at sight of Gloria, again
appealed to her to take pity on him, but the frozen-hearted Princess
turned coldly away and with a sigh the gardener's boy began to assist
Trot.

Neither of them at first noticed the small grasshopper, which at their
appearance had skipped off the Scarecrow's nose and was now clinging to
a wisp of grass beside the path, where he was not likely to be stepped
upon. Not until the Scarecrow had been neatly restuffed and set upon
his feet again--when he bowed to his restorers and expressed his
thanks--did the grasshopper move from his perch. Then he leaped lightly
into the path and called out:

"Trot--Trot! Look at me. I'm Cap'n Bill! See what the Wicked Witch has
done to me."

The voice was small, to be sure, but it reached Trot's ears and
startled her greatly. She looked intently at the grasshopper, her eyes
wide with fear at first; then she knelt down and, noticing the wooden
leg, she began to weep sorrowfully.

"Oh, Cap'n Bill--dear Cap'n Bill! What a cruel thing to do!" she sobbed.

"Don't cry, Trot," begged the grasshopper. "It didn't hurt any, and it
doesn't hurt now. But it's mighty inconvenient an' humiliatin', to say
the least."

"I wish," said the girl indignantly, while trying hard to restrain her
tears, "that I was big 'nough an' strong 'nough to give that horrid
witch a good beating. She ought to be turned into a toad for doing this
to you, Cap'n Bill!"

"Never mind," urged the Scarecrow, in a comforting voice, "such a
transformation doesn't last always, and as a general thing there's some
way to break the enchantment. I'm sure Glinda could do it, in a jiffy."

"Who is Glinda?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

Then the Scarecrow told them all about Glinda, not forgetting to
mention her beauty and goodness and her wonderful powers of magic. He
also explained how the Royal Sorceress had sent him to Jinxland
especially to help the strangers, whom she knew to be in danger because
of the wiles of the cruel King and the Wicked Witch.




Chapter Sixteen

Pon Summons the King to Surrender


Gloria had drawn near to the group to listen to their talk, and it
seemed to interest her in spite of her frigid manner. They knew, of
course, that the poor Princess could not help being cold and reserved,
so they tried not to blame her.

"I ought to have come here a little sooner," said the Scarecrow,
regretfully; "but Glinda sent me as soon as she discovered you were
here and were likely to get into trouble. And now that we are all
together--except Button-Bright, over whom it is useless to worry--I
propose we hold a council of war, to decide what is best to be done."

That seemed a wise thing to do, so they all sat down upon the grass,
including Gloria, and the grasshopper perched upon Trot's shoulder and
allowed her to stroke him gently with her hand.

"In the first place," began the Scarecrow, "this King Krewl is a
usurper and has no right to rule this Kingdom of Jinxland."

"That is true," said Pon, eagerly. "My father was King before him, and
I--"

"You are a gardener's boy," interrupted the Scarecrow. "Your father had
no right to rule, either, for the rightful King of this land was the
father of Princess Gloria, and only she is entitled to sit upon the
throne of Jinxland."

"Good!" exclaimed Trot. "But what'll we do with King Krewl? I s'pose he
won't give up the throne unless he has to."

"No, of course not," said the Scarecrow. "Therefore it will be our duty
to make him give up the throne."

"How?" asked Trot.

"Give me time to think," was the reply. "That's what my brains are for.
I don't know whether you people ever think, or not, but my brains are
the best that the Wizard of Oz ever turned out, and if I give them
plenty of time to work, the result usually surprises me."

"Take your time, then," suggested Trot. "There's no hurry."

"Thank you," said the straw man, and sat perfectly still for half an
hour. During this interval the grasshopper whispered in Trot's ear, to
which he was very close, and Trot whispered back to the grasshopper
sitting upon her shoulder. Pon cast loving glances at Gloria, who paid
not the slightest heed to them.

Finally the Scarecrow laughed aloud.

"Brains working?" inquired Trot.

"Yes. They seem in fine order to-day. We will conquer King Krewl and
put Gloria upon his throne as Queen of Jinxland."

"Fine!" cried the little girl, clapping her hands together gleefully.
"But how?"

"Leave the how to me," said the Scarecrow proudly. "As a conqueror I'm
a wonder. We will, first of all, write a message to send to King Krewl,
asking him to surrender. If he refuses, then we will make him
surrender."

"Why ask him, when we know he'll refuse?" inquired Pon.

"Why, we must be polite, whatever we do," explained the Scarecrow. "It
would be very rude to conquer a King without proper notice."

They found it difficult to write a message without paper, pen and ink,
none of which was at hand; so it was decided to send Pon as a
messenger, with instructions to ask the King, politely but firmly, to
surrender.

Pon was not anxious to be the messenger. Indeed, he hinted that it
might prove a dangerous mission. But the Scarecrow was now the
acknowledged head of the Army of Conquest, and he would listen to no
refusal. So off Pon started for the King's castle, and the others
accompanied him as far as his hut, where they had decided to await the
gardener's boy's return.

I think it was because Pon had known the Scarecrow such a short time
that he lacked confidence in the straw man's wisdom. It was easy to
say: "We will conquer King Krewl," but when Pon drew near to the great
castle he began to doubt the ability of a straw-stuffed man, a girl, a
grasshopper and a frozen-hearted Princess to do it. As for himself, he
had never thought of defying the King before.

That was why the gardener's boy was not very bold when he entered the
castle and passed through to the enclosed court where the King was just
then seated, with his favorite courtiers around him. None prevented
Pon's entrance, because he was known to be the gardener's boy, but when
the King saw him he began to frown fiercely. He considered Pon to be to
blame for all his trouble with Princess Gloria, who since her heart had
been frozen had escaped to some unknown place, instead of returning to
the castle to wed Googly-Goo, as she had been expected to do. So the
King bared his teeth angrily as he demanded:

"What have you done with Princess Gloria?"

"Nothing, your Majesty! I have done nothing at all," answered Pon in a
faltering voice. "She does not love me any more and even refuses to
speak to me."

"Then why are you here, you rascal?" roared the King.

Pon looked first one way and then another, but saw no means of escape;
so he plucked up courage.

"I am here to summon your Majesty to surrender."

"What!" shouted the King. "Surrender?  Surrender to whom?"

Pon's heart sank to his boots.

"To the Scarecrow," he replied.

Some of the courtiers began to titter, but King Krewl was greatly
annoyed. He sprang up and began to beat poor Pon with the golden staff
he carried. Pon howled lustily and would have run away had not two of
the soldiers held him until his Majesty was exhausted with punishing
the boy. Then they let him go and he left the castle and returned along
the road, sobbing at every step because his body was so sore and aching.

"Well," said the Scarecrow, "did the King surrender?"

"No; but he gave me a good drubbing!" sobbed poor Pon.

Trot was very sorry for Pon, but Gloria did not seem affected in any
way by her lover's anguish. The grasshopper leaped to the Scarecrow's
shoulder and asked him what he was going to do next.

"Conquer," was the reply. "But I will go alone, this time, for beatings
cannot hurt me at all; nor can lance thrusts--or sword cuts--or arrow
pricks."

"Why is that?" inquired Trot.

"Because I have no nerves, such as you meat people possess. Even
grasshoppers have nerves, but straw doesn't; so whatever they
do--except just one thing--they cannot injure me. Therefore I expect to
conquer King Krewl with ease."

"What is that one thing you excepted?" asked Trot.

"They will never think of it, so never mind. And now, if you will
kindly excuse me for a time, I'll go over to the castle and do my
conquering."

"You have no weapons," Pon reminded him.

"True," said the Scarecrow. "But if I carried weapons I might injure
someone--perhaps seriously--and that would make me unhappy. I will just
borrow that riding-whip, which I see in the corner of your hut, if you
don't mind. It isn't exactly proper to walk with a riding-whip, but I
trust you will excuse the inconsistency."

Pon handed him the whip and the Scarecrow bowed to all the party and
left the hut, proceeding leisurely along the way to the King's castle.




Chapter Seventeen

The Ork Rescues Button-Bright


I must now tell you what had become of Button-Bright since he wandered
away in the morning and got lost. This small boy, as perhaps you have
discovered, was almost as destitute of nerves as the Scarecrow. Nothing
ever astonished him much; nothing ever worried him or made him unhappy.
Good fortune or bad fortune he accepted with a quiet smile, never
complaining, whatever happened. This was one reason why Button-Bright
was a favorite with all who knew him--and perhaps it was the reason why
he so often got into difficulties, or found himself lost.

To-day, as he wandered here and there, over hill and down dale, he
missed Trot and Cap'n Bill, of whom he was fond, but nevertheless he
was not unhappy. The birds sang merrily and the wildflowers were
beautiful and the breeze had a fragrance of new-mown hay.

"The only bad thing about this country is its King," he reflected; "but
the country isn't to blame for that."

A prairie-dog stuck its round head out of a mound of earth and looked
at the boy with bright eyes.

"Walk around my house, please," it said, "and then you won't harm it or
disturb the babies."

"All right," answered Button-Bright, and took care not to step on the
mound. He went on, whistling merrily, until a petulant voice cried:

"Oh, stop it! Please stop that noise. It gets on my nerves."

Button-Bright saw an old gray owl sitting in the crotch of a tree, and
he replied with a laugh: "All right, old Fussy," and stopped whistling
until he had passed out of the owl's hearing. At noon he came to a
farmhouse where an aged couple lived. They gave him a good dinner and
treated him kindly, but the man was deaf and the woman was dumb, so
they could answer no questions to guide him on the way to Pon's house.
When he left them he was just as much lost as he had been before.

Every grove of trees he saw from a distance he visited, for he
remembered that the King's castle was near a grove of trees and Pon's
hut was near the King's castle; but always he met with disappointment.
Finally, passing through one of these groves, he came out into the open
and found himself face to face with the Ork.

"Hello!" said Button-Bright. "Where did you come from?"

"From Orkland," was the reply. "I've found my own country, at last, and
it is not far from here, either. I would have come back to you sooner,
to see how you are getting along, had not my family and friends
welcomed my return so royally that a great celebration was held in my
honor. So I couldn't very well leave Orkland again until the excitement
was over."

"Can you find your way back home again?" asked the boy.

"Yes, easily; for now I know exactly where it is. But where are Trot
and Cap'n Bill?"

Button-Bright related to the Ork their adventures since it had left
them in Jinxland, telling of Trot's fear that the King had done
something wicked to Cap'n Bill, and of Pon's love for Gloria, and how
Trot and Button-Bright had been turned out of the King's castle. That
was all the news that the boy had, but it made the Ork anxious for the
safety of his friends.

"We must go to them at once, for they may need us," he said.

"I don't know where to go," confessed Button-Bright. "I'm lost."

"Well, I can take you back to the hut of the gardener's boy," promised
the Ork, "for when I fly high in the air I can look down and easily spy
the King's castle. That was how I happened to spy you, just entering
the grove; so I flew down and waited until you came out."

"How can you carry me?" asked the boy.

"You'll have to sit straddle my shoulders and put your arms around my
neck. Do you think you can keep from falling off?"

"I'll try," said Button-Bright. So the Ork squatted down and the boy
took his seat and held on tight. Then the skinny creature's tail began
whirling and up they went, far above all the tree-tops.

After the Ork had circled around once or twice, its sharp eyes located
the towers of the castle and away it flew, straight toward the place.
As it hovered in the air, near by the castle, Button-Bright pointed out
Pon's hut, so they landed just before it and Trot came running out to
greet them.

Gloria was introduced to the Ork, who was surprised to find Cap'n Bill
transformed into a grasshopper.

"How do you like it?" asked the creature.

"Why, it worries me good deal," answered Cap'n Bill, perched upon
Trot's shoulder. "I'm always afraid o' bein' stepped on, and I don't
like the flavor of grass an' can't seem to get used to it. It's my
nature to eat grass, you know, but I begin to suspect it's an acquired
taste."

"Can you give molasses?" asked the Ork.

"I guess I'm not that kind of a grasshopper," replied Cap'n Bill. "But
I can't say what I might do if I was squeezed--which I hope I won't be."

"Well," said the Ork, "it's a great pity, and I'd like to meet that
cruel King and his Wicked Witch and punish them both severely. You're
awfully small, Cap'n Bill, but I think I would recognize you anywhere
by your wooden leg."

Then the Ork and Button-Bright were told all about Gloria's frozen
heart and how the Scarecrow had come from the Land of Oz to help them.
The Ork seemed rather disturbed when it learned that the Scarecrow had
gone alone to conquer King Krewl.

"I'm afraid he'll make a fizzle of it," said the skinny creature, "and
there's no telling what that terrible King might do to the poor
Scarecrow, who seems like a very interesting person. So I believe I'll
take a hand in this conquest myself."

"How?" asked Trot.

"Wait and see," was the reply. "But, first of all, I must fly home
again--back to my own country--so if you'll forgive my leaving you so
soon, I'll be off at once. Stand away from my tail, please, so that the
wind from it, when it revolves, won't knock you over."

They gave the creature plenty of room and away it went like a flash and
soon disappeared in the sky.

"I wonder," said Button-Bright, looking solemnly after the Ork,
"whether he'll ever come back again."

"Of course he will!" returned Trot. "The Ork's a pretty good fellow,
and we can depend on him. An' mark my words, Button-Bright, whenever
our Ork does come back, there's one cruel King in Jinxland that'll wish
he hadn't."




Chapter Eighteen

The Scarecrow Meets an Enemy


The Scarecrow was not a bit afraid of King Krewl. Indeed, he rather
enjoyed the prospect of conquering the evil King and putting Gloria on
the throne of Jinxland in his place. So he advanced boldly to the royal
castle and demanded admittance.

Seeing that he was a stranger, the soldiers allowed him to enter. He
made his way straight to the throne room, where at that time his
Majesty was settling the disputes among his subjects.

"Who are you?" demanded the King.

"I'm the Scarecrow of Oz, and I command you to surrender yourself my
prisoner."

"Why should I do that?" inquired the King, much astonished at the straw
man's audacity.

"Because I've decided you are too cruel a King to rule so beautiful a
country. You must remember that Jinxland is a part of Oz, and therefore
you owe allegiance to Ozma of Oz, whose friend and servant I am."

Now, when he heard this, King Krewl was much disturbed in mind, for he
knew the Scarecrow spoke the truth. But no one had ever before come to
Jinxland from the Land of Oz and the King did not intend to be put out
of his throne if he could help it. Therefore he gave a harsh, wicked
laugh of derision and said:

"I'm busy, now. Stand out of my way, Scarecrow, and I'll talk with you
by and by."

But the Scarecrow turned to the assembled courtiers and people and
called in a loud voice:

"I hereby declare, in the name of Ozma of Oz, that this man is no
longer ruler of Jinxland. From this moment Princess Gloria is your
rightful Queen, and I ask all of you to be loyal to her and to obey her
commands."

The people looked fearfully at the King, whom they all hated in their
hearts, but likewise feared. Krewl was now in a terrible rage and he
raised his golden sceptre and struck the Scarecrow so heavy a blow that
he fell to the floor.

But he was up again, in an instant, and with Pon's riding-whip he
switched the King so hard that the wicked monarch roared with pain as
much as with rage, calling on his soldiers to capture the Scarecrow.

They tried to do that, and thrust their lances and swords into the
straw body, but without doing any damage except to make holes in the
Scarecrow's clothes. However, they were many against one and finally
old Googly-Goo brought a rope which he wound around the Scarecrow,
binding his legs together and his arms to his sides, and after that the
fight was over.

The King stormed and danced around in a dreadful fury, for he had never
been so switched since he was a boy--and perhaps not then. He ordered
the Scarecrow thrust into the castle prison, which was no task at all
because one man could carry him easily, bound as he was.

Even after the prisoner was removed the King could not control his
anger. He tried to figure out some way to be revenged upon the straw
man, but could think of nothing that could hurt him. At last, when the
terrified people and the frightened courtiers had all slunk away, old
Googly-Goo approached the king with a malicious grin upon his face.

"I'll tell you what to do," said he. "Build a big bonfire and burn the
Scarecrow up, and that will be the end of him."

The King was so delighted with this suggestion that he hugged old
Googly-Goo in his joy.

"Of course!" he cried. "The very thing. Why did I not think of it
myself?"

So he summoned his soldiers and retainers and bade them prepare a great
bonfire in an open space in the castle park. Also he sent word to all
his people to assemble and witness the destruction of the Scarecrow who
had dared to defy his power. Before long a vast throng gathered in the
park and the servants had heaped up enough fuel to make a fire that
might be seen for miles away--even in the daytime.

When all was prepared, the King had his throne brought out for him to
sit upon and enjoy the spectacle, and then he sent his soldiers to
fetch the Scarecrow.

Now the one thing in all the world that the straw man really feared was
fire. He knew he would burn very easily and that his ashes wouldn't
amount to much afterward. It wouldn't hurt him to be destroyed in such
a manner, but he realized that many people in the Land of Oz, and
especially Dorothy and the Royal Ozma, would feel sad if they learned
that their old friend the Scarecrow was no longer in existence.

In spite of this, the straw man was brave and faced his fiery fate like
a hero. When they marched him out before the concourse of people he
turned to the King with great calmness and said:

"This wicked deed will cost you your throne, as well as much suffering,
for my friends will avenge my destruction."

"Your friends are not here, nor will they know what I have done to you,
when you are gone and can-not tell them," answered the King in a
scornful voice.

Then he ordered the Scarecrow bound to a stout stake that he had had
driven into the ground, and the materials for the fire were heaped all
around him. When this had been done, the King's brass band struck up a
lively tune and old Googly-Goo came forward with a lighted match and
set fire to the pile.

At once the flames shot up and crept closer and closer toward the
Scarecrow. The King and all his people were so intent upon this
terrible spectacle that none of them noticed how the sky grew suddenly
dark. Perhaps they thought that the loud buzzing sound--like the noise
of a dozen moving railway trains--came from the blazing fagots; that
the rush of wind was merely a breeze. But suddenly down swept a flock
of Orks, half a hundred of them at the least, and the powerful currents
of air caused by their revolving tails sent the bonfire scattering in
every direction, so that not one burning brand ever touched the
Scarecrow.

But that was not the only effect of this sudden tornado. King Krewl was
blown out of his throne and went tumbling heels over head until he
landed with a bump against the stone wall of his own castle, and before
he could rise a big Ork sat upon him and held him pressed flat to the
ground. Old Googly-Goo shot up into the air like a rocket and landed on
a tree, where he hung by the middle on a high limb, kicking the air
with his feet and clawing the air with his hands, and howling for mercy
like the coward he was.

The people pressed back until they were jammed close together, while
all the soldiers were knocked over and sent sprawling to the earth. The
excitement was great for a few minutes, and every frightened inhabitant
of Jinxland looked with awe and amazement at the great Orks whose
descent had served to rescue the Scarecrow and conquer King Krewl at
one and the same time.

The Ork, who was the leader of the band, soon had the Scarecrow free of
his bonds. Then he said: "Well, we were just in time to save you, which
is better than being a minute too late. You are now the master here,
and we are determined to see your orders obeyed."

With this the Ork picked up Krewl's golden crown, which had fallen off
his head, and placed it upon the head of the Scarecrow, who in his
awkward way then shuffled over to the throne and sat down in it.

Seeing this, a rousing cheer broke from the crowd of people, who tossed
their hats and waved their handkerchiefs and hailed the Scarecrow as
their King. The soldiers joined the people in the cheering, for now
they fully realized that their hated master was conquered and it would
be wise to show their good will to the conqueror. Some of them bound
Krewl with ropes and dragged him forward, dumping his body on the
ground before the Scarecrow's throne. Googly-Goo struggled until he
finally slid off the limb of the tree and came tumbling to the ground.
He then tried to sneak away and escape, but the soldiers seized and
bound him beside Krewl.

"The tables are turned," said the Scarecrow, swelling out his chest
until the straw within it crackled pleasantly, for he was highly
pleased; "but it was you and your people who did it, friend Ork, and
from this time you may count me your humble servant."




Chapter Nineteen

The Conquest of the Witch


Now as soon as the conquest of King Krewl had taken place, one of the
Orks had been dispatched to Pon's house with the joyful news. At once
Gloria and Pon and Trot and Button-Bright hastened toward the castle.
They were somewhat surprised by the sight that met their eyes, for
there was the Scarecrow, crowned King, and all the people kneeling
humbly before him. So they likewise bowed low to the new ruler and then
stood beside the throne. Cap'n Bill, as the gray grasshopper, was still
perched upon Trot's shoulder, but now he hopped to the shoulder of the
Scarecrow and whispered into the painted ear:

"I thought Gloria was to be Queen of Jinxland."

The Scarecrow shook his head.

"Not yet," he answered. "No Queen with a frozen heart is fit to rule
any country." Then he turned to his new friend, the Ork, who was
strutting about, very proud of what he had done, and said: "Do you
suppose you, or your followers, could find old Blinkie the Witch?"

"Where is she?" asked the Ork.

"Somewhere in Jinxland, I'm sure."

"Then," said the Ork, "we shall certainly be able to find her."

"It will give me great pleasure," declared the Scarecrow. "When you
have found her, bring her here to me, and I will then decide what to do
with her."

The Ork called his followers together and spoke a few words to them in
a low tone. A moment after they rose into the air--so suddenly that the
Scarecrow, who was very light in weight, was blown quite out of his
throne and into the arms of Pon, who replaced him carefully upon his
seat. There was an eddy of dust and ashes, too, and the grasshopper
only saved himself from being whirled into the crowd of people by
jumping into a tree, from where a series of hops soon brought him back
to Trot's shoulder again. The Orks were quite out of sight by this
time, so the Scarecrow made a speech to the people and presented Gloria
to them, whom they knew well already and were fond of. But not all of
them knew of her frozen heart, and when the Scarecrow related the story
of the Wicked Witch's misdeeds, which had been encouraged and paid for
by Krewl and Googly-Goo, the people were very indignant.

Meantime the fifty Orks had scattered all over Jinx land, which is not
a very big country, and their sharp eyes were peering into every valley
and grove and gully. Finally one of them spied a pair of heels sticking
out from underneath some bushes, and with a shrill whistle to warn his
comrades that the witch was found the Ork flew down and dragged old
Blinkie from her hiding-place. Then two or three of the Orks seized the
clothing of the wicked woman in their strong claws and, lifting her
high in the air, where she struggled and screamed to no avail, they
flew with her straight to the royal castle and set her down before the
throne of the Scarecrow.

"Good!" exclaimed the straw man, nodding his stuffed head with
satisfaction. "Now we can proceed to business. Mistress Witch, I am
obliged to request, gently but firmly, that you undo all the wrongs you
have done by means of your witchcraft."

"Pah!" cried old Blinkie in a scornful voice. "I defy you all! By my
magic powers I can turn you all into pigs, rooting in the mud, and I'll
do it if you are not careful."

"I think you are mistaken about that," said the Scarecrow, and rising
from his throne he walked with wobbling steps to the side of the Wicked
Witch. "Before I left the Land of Oz, Glinda the Royal Sorceress gave
me a box, which I was not to open except in an emergency. But I feel
pretty sure that this occasion is an emergency; don't you, Trot?" he
asked, turning toward the little girl.

"Why, we've got to do something," replied Trot seriously. "Things seem
in an awful muddle here, jus' now, and they'll be worse if we don't
stop this witch from doing more harm to people."

"That is my idea, exactly," said the Scarecrow, and taking a small box
from his pocket he opened the cover and tossed the contents toward
Blinkie.

The old woman shrank back, pale and trembling, as a fine white dust
settled all about her. Under its influence she seemed to the eyes of
all observers to shrivel and grow smaller.

"Oh, dear--oh, dear!" she wailed, wringing her hands in fear. "Haven't
you the antidote, Scarecrow? Didn't the great Sorceress give you
another box?"

"She did," answered the Scarecrow.

"Then give it me--quick!" pleaded the witch. "Give it me--and I'll do
anything you ask me to!"

"You will do what I ask first," declared the Scarecrow, firmly.

The witch was shriveling and growing smaller every moment.

"Be quick, then!" she cried. "Tell me what I must do and let me do it,
or it will be too late."

"You made Trot's friend, Cap'n Bill, a grasshopper. I command you to
give him back his proper form again," said the Scarecrow.

"Where is he? Where's the grasshopper? Quick--quick!" she screamed.

Cap'n Bill, who had been deeply interested in this conversation, gave a
great leap from Trot's shoulder and landed on that of the Scarecrow.
Blinkie saw him alight and at once began to make magic passes and to
mumble magic incantations. She was in a desperate hurry, knowing that
she had no time to waste, and the grasshopper was so suddenly
transformed into the old sailor-man, Cap'n Bill, that he had no
opportunity to jump off the Scarecrow's shoulder; so his great weight
bore the stuffed Scarecrow to the ground. No harm was done, however,
and the straw man got up and brushed the dust from his clothes while
Trot delightedly embraced Cap'n Bill.

"The other box! Quick! Give me the other box," begged Blinkie, who had
now shrunk to half her former size.

"Not yet," said the Scarecrow. "You must first melt Princess Gloria's
frozen heart."

"I can't; it's an awful job to do that! I can't," asserted the witch,
in an agony of fear--for still she was growing smaller.

"You must!" declared the Scarecrow, firmly.

The witch cast a shrewd look at him and saw that he meant it; so she
began dancing around Gloria in a frantic manner. The Princess looked
coldly on, as if not at all interested in the proceedings, while
Blinkie tore a handful of hair from her own head and ripped a strip of
cloth from the bottom of her gown. Then the witch sank upon her knees,
took a purple powder from her black bag and sprinkled it over the hair
and cloth.

"I hate to do it--I  hate to do it!" she wailed, "for there is no more
of this magic compound in all the world. But I must sacrifice it to
save my own life. A match! Give me a match, quick!" and panting from
lack of breath she gazed imploringly from one to another.

Cap'n Bill was the only one who had a match, but he lost no time in
handing it to Blinkie, who quickly set fire to the hair and the cloth
and the purple powder. At once a purple cloud enveloped Gloria, and
this gradually turned to a rosy pink color--brilliant and quite
transparent. Through the rosy cloud they could all see the beautiful
Princess, standing proud and erect. Then her heart became visible, at
first frosted with ice but slowly growing brighter and warmer until all
the frost had disappeared and it was beating as softly and regularly as
any other heart. And now the cloud dispersed and disclosed Gloria, her
face suffused with joy, smiling tenderly upon the friends who were
grouped about her.

Poor Pon stepped forward--timidly, fearing a repulse, but with pleading
eyes and arms fondly outstretched toward his former sweetheart--and the
Princess saw him and her sweet face lighted with a radiant smile.
Without an instant's hesitation she threw herself into Pon's arms and
this reunion of two loving hearts was so affecting that the people
turned away and lowered their eyes so as not to mar the sacred joy of
the faithful lovers.

But Blinkie's small voice was shouting to the Scarecrow for help.

"The antidote!" she screamed. "Give me the other box--quick!"

The Scarecrow looked at the witch with his quaint, painted eyes and saw
that she was now no taller than his knee. So he took from his pocket
the second box and scattered its contents on Blinkie. She ceased to
grow any smaller, but she could never regain her former size, and this
the wicked old woman well knew.

She did not know, however, that the second powder had destroyed all her
power to work magic, and seeking to be revenged upon the Scarecrow and
his friends she at once began to mumble a charm so terrible in its
effect that it would have destroyed half the population of
Jinxland--had it worked. But it did not work at all, to the amazement
of old Blinkie. And by this time the Scarecrow noticed what the little
witch was trying to do, and said to her:

"Go home, Blinkie, and behave yourself. You are no longer a witch, but
an ordinary old woman, and since you are powerless to do more evil I
advise you to try to do some good in the world. Believe me, it is more
fun to accomplish a good act than an evil one, as you will discover
when once you have tried it."

But Blinkie was at that moment filled with grief and chagrin at losing
her magic powers. She started away toward her home, sobbing and
bewailing her fate, and not one who saw her go was at all sorry for her.




Chapter Twenty

Queen Gloria


Next morning the Scarecrow called upon all the courtiers and the people
to assemble in the throne room of the castle, where there was room
enough for all that were able to attend. They found the straw man
seated upon the velvet cushions of the throne, with the King's
glittering crown still upon his stuffed head. On one side of the
throne, in a lower chair, sat Gloria, looking radiantly beautiful and
fresh as a new-blown rose. On the other side sat Pon, the gardener's
boy, still dressed in his old smock frock and looking sad and solemn;
for Pon could not make himself believe that so splendid a Princess
would condescend to love him when she had come to her own and was
seated upon a throne. Trot and Cap'n Bill sat at the feet of the
Scarecrow and were much interested in the proceedings. Button-Bright
had lost himself before breakfast, but came into the throne room before
the ceremonies were over. Back of the throne stood a row of the great
Orks, with their leader in the center, and the entrance to the palace
was guarded by more Orks, who were regarded with wonder and awe.

When all were assembled, the Scarecrow stood up and made a speech. He
told how Gloria's father, the good King Kynd, who had once ruled them
and been loved by everyone, had been destroyed by King Phearce, the
father of Pon, and how King Phearce had been destroyed by King Krewl.
This last King had been a bad ruler, as they knew very well, and the
Scarecrow declared that the only one in all Jinxland who had the right
to sit upon the throne was Princess Gloria, the daughter of King Kynd.

"But," he added, "it is not for me, a stranger, to say who shall rule
you. You must decide for yourselves, or you will not be content. So
choose now who shall be your future ruler."

And they all shouted:  "The Scarecrow!  The Scarecrow shall rule us!"

Which proved that the stuffed man had made himself very popular by his
conquest of King Krewl, and the people thought they would like him for
their King. But the Scarecrow shook his head so vigorously that it
became loose, and Trot had to pin it firmly to his body again.

"No," said he, "I belong in the Land of Oz, where I am the humble
servant of the lovely girl who rules us all--the royal Ozma. You must
choose one of your own inhabitants to rule over Jinxland. Who shall it
be?"

They hesitated for a moment, and some few cried: "Pon!" but many more
shouted: "Gloria!"

So the Scarecrow took Gloria's hand and led her to the throne, where he
first seated her and then took the glittering crown off his own head
and placed it upon that of the young lady, where it nestled prettily
amongst her soft curls. The people cheered and shouted then, kneeling
before their new Queen; but Gloria leaned down and took Pon's hand in
both her own and raised him to the seat beside her.

"You shall have both a King and a Queen to care for you and to protect
you, my dear subjects," she said in a sweet voice, while her face
glowed with happiness; "for Pon was a King's son before he became a
gardener's boy, and because I love him he is to be my Royal Consort."

That pleased them all, especially Pon, who realized that this was the
most important moment of his life. Trot and Button-Bright and Cap'n
Will all congratulated him on winning the beautiful Gloria; but the Ork
sneezed twice and said that in his opinion the young lady might have
done better.

Then the Scarecrow ordered the guards to bring in the wicked Krewl,
King no longer, and when he appeared, loaded with chains and dressed in
fustian, the people hissed him and drew back as he passed so their
garments would not touch him.

Krewl was not haughty or overbearing any more; on the contrary he
seemed very meek and in great fear of the fate his conquerors had in
store for him. But Gloria and Pon were too happy to be revengeful and
so they offered to appoint Krewl to the position of gardener's boy at
the castle, Pon having resigned to become King. But they said he must
promise to reform his wicked ways and to do his duty faithfully, and he
must change his name from Krewl to Grewl. All this the man eagerly
promised to do, and so when Pon retired to a room in the castle to put
on princely raiment, the old brown smock he had formerly worn was given
to Grewl, who then went out into the garden to water the roses.

The remainder of that famous day, which was long remembered in
Jinxland, was given over to feasting and merrymaking. In the evening
there was a grand dance in the courtyard, where the brass band played a
new piece of music called the "Ork Trot" which was dedicated to "Our
Glorious Gloria, the Queen."

While the Queen and Pon were leading this dance, and all the Jinxland
people were having a good time, the strangers were gathered in a group
in the park outside the castle. Cap'n Bill, Trot, Button-Bright and the
Scarecrow were there, and so was their old friend the Ork; but of all
the great flock of Orks which had assisted in the conquest but three
remained in Jinxland, besides their leader, the others having returned
to their own country as soon as Gloria was crowned Queen. To the young
Ork who had accompanied them in their adventures Cap'n Bill said:

"You've surely been a friend in need, and we're mighty grateful to you
for helping us. I might have been a grasshopper yet if it hadn't been
for you, an' I might remark that bein' a grasshopper isn't much fun."

"If it hadn't been for you, friend Ork," said the Scarecrow, "I fear I
could not have conquered King Krewl."

"No," agreed Trot, "you'd have been just a heap of ashes by this time."

"And I might have been lost yet," added Button-Bright. "Much obliged,
Mr. Ork."

"Oh, that's all right," replied the Ork. "Friends must stand together,
you know, or they wouldn't be friends. But now I must leave you and be
off to my own country, where there's going to be a surprise party on my
uncle, and I've promised to attend it."

"Dear me," said the Scarecrow, regretfully. "That is very unfortunate."

"Why so?" asked the Ork.

"I hoped you would consent to carry us over those mountains, into the
Land of Oz. My mission here is now finished and I want to get back to
the Emerald City."

"How did you cross the mountains before?" inquired the Ork.

"I scaled the cliffs by means of a rope, and crossed the Great Gulf on
a strand of spider web. Of course I can return in the same manner, but
it would be a hard journey--and perhaps an impossible one--for Trot and
Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill. So I thought that if you had the time you
and your people would carry us over the mountains and land us all
safely on the other side, in the Land of Oz."

The Ork thoughtfully considered the matter for a while. Then he said:

"I mustn't break my promise to be present at the surprise party; but,
tell me, could you go to Oz to-night?"

"What, now?" exclaimed Trot.

"It is a fine moonlight night," said the Ork, "and I've found in my
experience that there's no time so good as right away. The fact is," he
explained, "it's a long journey to Orkland and I and my cousins here
are all rather tired by our day's work. But if you will start now, and
be content to allow us to carry you over the mountains and dump you on
the other side, just say the word and--off we go!"

Cap'n Bill and Trot looked at one another questioningly. The little
girl was eager to visit the famous fairyland of Oz and the old sailor
had endured such hardships in Jinxland that he would be glad to be out
of it.

"It's rather impolite of us not to say good-bye to the new King and
Queen," remarked the Scarecrow, "but I'm sure they're too happy to miss
us, and I assure you it will be much easier to fly on the backs of the
Orks over those steep mountains than to climb them as I did."

"All right; let's go!" Trot decided. "But where's Button-Bright?"

Just at this important moment Button-Bright was lost again, and they
all scattered in search of him. He had been standing beside them just a
few minutes before, but his friends had an exciting hunt for him before
they finally discovered the boy seated among the members of the band,
beating the end of the bass drum with the bone of a turkey-leg that he
had taken from the table in the banquet room.

"Hello, Trot," he said, looking up at the little girl when she found
him. "This is the first chance I ever had to pound a drum with a
reg'lar drum stick. And I ate all the meat off the bone myself."

"Come quick. We're going to the Land of Oz."

"Oh, what's the hurry?" said Button-Bright; but she seized his arm and
dragged him away to the park, where the others were waiting.

Trot climbed upon the back of her old friend, the Ork leader, and the
others took their seats on the backs of his three cousins. As soon as
all were placed and clinging to the skinny necks of the creatures, the
revolving tails began to whirl and up rose the four monster Orks and
sailed away toward the mountains. They were so high in the air that
when they passed the crest of the highest peak it seemed far below
them. No sooner were they well across the barrier than the Orks swooped
downward and landed their passengers upon the ground.

"Here we are, safe in the Land of Oz!" cried the Scarecrow joyfully.

"Oh, are we?" asked Trot, looking around her curiously.

She could see the shadows of stately trees and the outlines of rolling
hills; beneath her feet was soft turf, but otherwise the subdued light
of the moon disclosed nothing clearly.

"Seems jus' like any other country," was Cap'n Bill's comment.

"But it isn't," the Scarecrow assured him. "You are now within the
borders of the most glorious fairyland in all the world. This part of
it is just a corner of the Quadling Country, and the least interesting
portion of it. It's not very thickly settled, around here, I'll admit,
but--"

He was interrupted by a sudden whir and a rush of air as the four Orks
mounted into the sky.

"Good night!" called the shrill voices of the strange creatures, and
although Trot shouted "Good night!" as loudly as she could, the little
girl was almost ready to cry because the Orks had not waited to be
properly thanked for all their kindness to her and to Cap'n Bill.

But the Orks were gone, and thanks for good deeds do not amount to much
except to prove one's politeness.

"Well, friends," said the Scarecrow, "we mustn't stay here in the
meadows all night, so let us find a pleasant place to sleep. Not that
it matters to me, in the least, for I never sleep; but I know that meat
people like to shut their eyes and lie still during the dark hours."

"I'm pretty tired," admitted Trot, yawning as she followed the straw
man along a tiny path, "so, if you don't find a house handy, Cap'n Bill
and I will sleep under the trees, or even on this soft grass."

But a house was not very far off, although when the Scarecrow stumbled
upon it there was no light in it whatever. Cap'n Bill knocked on the
door several times, and there being no response the Scarecrow boldly
lifted the latch and walked in, followed by the others. And no sooner
had they entered than a soft light filled the room. Trot couldn't tell
where it came from, for no lamp of any sort was visible, but she did
not waste much time on this problem, because directly in the center of
the room stood a table set for three, with lots of good food on it and
several of the dishes smoking hot.

The little girl and Button-Bright both uttered exclamations of
pleasure, but they looked in vain for any cook stove or fireplace, or
for any person who might have prepared for them this delicious feast.

"It's fairyland," muttered the boy, tossing his cap in a corner and
seating himself at the table. "This supper smells 'most as good as that
turkey-leg I had in Jinxland. Please pass the muffins, Cap'n Bill."

Trot thought it was strange that no people but themselves were in the
house, but on the wall opposite the door was a gold frame bearing in
big letters the word:

"WELCOME."

So she had no further hesitation in eating of the food so mysteriously
prepared for them.

"But there are only places for three!" she exclaimed.

"Three are quite enough," said the Scarecrow. "I never eat, because I
am stuffed full already, and I like my nice clean straw better than I
do food."

Trot and the sailor-man were hungry and made a hearty meal, for not
since they had left home had they tasted such good food. It was
surprising that Button-Bright could eat so soon after his feast in
Jinxland, but the boy always ate whenever there was an opportunity. "If
I don't eat now," he said, "the next time I'm hungry I'll wish I had."

"Really, Cap'n," remarked Trot, when she found a dish of ice-cream
appear beside her plate, "I b'lieve this is fairyland, sure enough."

"There's no doubt of it, Trot," he answered gravely

"I've been here before," said Button-Bright, "so I know."

After supper they discovered three tiny bedrooms adjoining the big
living room of the house, and in each room was a comfortable white bed
with downy pillows. You may be sure that the tired mortals were not
long in bidding the Scarecrow good night and creeping into their beds,
where they slept soundly until morning.

For the first time since they set eyes on the terrible whirlpool, Trot
and Cap'n Bill were free from anxiety and care. Button-Bright never
worried about anything. The Scarecrow, not being able to sleep, looked
out of the window and tried to count the stars.




Chapter Twenty-One

Dorothy, Betsy and Ozma


I suppose many of my readers have read descriptions of the beautiful
and magnificent Emerald City of Oz, so I need not describe it here,
except to state that never has any city in any fairyland ever equalled
this one in stately splendor. It lies almost exactly in the center of
the Land of Oz, and in the center of the Emerald City rises the wall of
glistening emeralds that surrounds the palace of Ozma. The palace is
almost a city in itself and is inhabited by many of the Ruler's
especial friends and those who have won her confidence and favor. As
for Ozma herself, there are no words in any dictionary I can find that
are fitted to describe this young girl's beauty of mind and person.
Merely to see her is to love her for her charming face and manners; to
know her is to love her for her tender sympathy, her generous nature,
her truth and honor. Born of a long line of Fairy Queens, Ozma is as
nearly perfect as any fairy may be, and she is noted for her wisdom as
well as for her other qualities. Her happy subjects adore their girl
Ruler and each one considers her a comrade and protector.

At the time of which I write, Ozma's best friend and most constant
companion was a little Kansas girl named Dorothy, a mortal who had come
to the Land of Oz in a very curious manner and had been offered a home
in Ozma's palace. Furthermore, Dorothy had been made a Princess of Oz,
and was as much at home in the royal palace as was the gentle Ruler.
She knew almost every part of the great country and almost all of its
numerous inhabitants. Next to Ozma she was loved better than anyone in
all Oz, for Dorothy was simple and sweet, seldom became angry and had
such a friendly, chummy way that she made friends where-ever she
wandered. It was she who first brought the Scarecrow and the Tin
Woodman and the Cowardly Lion to the Emerald City. Dorothy had also
introduced to Ozma the Shaggy Man and the Hungry Tiger, as well as
Billina the Yellow Hen, Eureka the Pink Kitten, and many other
delightful characters and creatures. Coming as she did from our world,
Dorothy was much like many other girls we know; so there were times
when she was not so wise as she might have been, and other times when
she was obstinate and got herself into trouble. But life in a
fairy-land had taught the little girl to accept all sorts of surprising
things as matters-of-course, for while Dorothy was no fairy--but just
as mortal as we are--she had seen more wonders than most mortals ever
do.

Another little girl from our outside world also lived in Ozma's palace.
This was Betsy Bobbin, whose strange adventures had brought her to the
Emerald City, where Ozma had cordially welcomed her. Betsy was a shy
little thing and could never get used to the marvels that surrounded
her, but she and Dorothy were firm friends and thought themselves very
fortunate in being together in this delightful country.

One day Dorothy and Betsy were visiting Ozma in the girl Ruler's
private apartment, and among the things that especially interested them
was Ozma's Magic Picture, set in a handsome frame and hung upon the
wall of the room. This picture was a magic one because it constantly
changed its scenes and showed events and adventures happening in all
parts of the world. Thus it was really a "moving picture" of life, and
if the one who stood before it wished to know what any absent person
was doing, the picture instantly showed that person, with his or her
surroundings.

The two girls were not wishing to see anyone in particular, on this
occasion, but merely enjoyed watching the shifting scenes, some of
which were exceedingly curious and remarkable. Suddenly Dorothy
exclaimed: "Why, there's Button-Bright!" and this drew Ozma also to
look at the picture, for she and Dorothy knew the boy well.

"Who is Button-Bright?" asked Betsy, who had never met him.

"Why, he's the little boy who is just getting off the back of that
strange flying creature," exclaimed Dorothy. Then she turned to Ozma
and asked: "What is that thing, Ozma? A bird? I've never seen anything
like it before."

"It is an Ork," answered Ozma, for they were watching the scene where
the Ork and the three big birds were first landing their passengers in
Jinxland after the long flight across the desert. "I wonder," added the
girl Ruler, musingly, "why those strangers dare venture into that
unfortunate country, which is ruled by a wicked King."

"That girl, and the one-legged man, seem to be mortals from the outside
world," said Dorothy.

"The man isn't one-legged," corrected Betsy; "he has one wooden leg."

"It's almost as bad," declared Dorothy, watching Cap'n Bill stump
around.

"They are three mortal adventurers," said Ozma, "and they seem worthy
and honest. But I fear they will be treated badly in Jinxland, and if
they meet with any misfortune there it will reflect upon me, for
Jinxland is a part of my dominions."

"Can't we help them in any way?" inquired Dorothy. "That seems like a
nice little girl. I'd be sorry if anything happened to her."

"Let us watch the picture for awhile," suggested Ozma, and so they all
drew chairs before the Magic Picture and followed the adventures of
Trot and Cap'n Bill and Button-Bright. Presently the scene shifted and
showed their friend the Scarecrow crossing the mountains into Jinxland,
and that somewhat relieved Ozma's anxiety, for she knew at once that
Glinda the Good had sent the Scarecrow to protect the strangers.

The adventures in Jinxland proved very interesting to the three girls
in Ozma's palace, who during the succeeding days spent much of their
time in watching the picture. It was like a story to them.

"That girl's a reg'lar trump!" exclaimed Dorothy, referring to Trot,
and Ozma answered:

"She's a dear little thing, and I'm sure nothing very bad will happen
to her. The old sailor is a fine character, too, for he has never once
grumbled over being a grasshopper, as so many would have done."

When the Scarecrow was so nearly burned up the girls all shivered a
little, and they clapped their hands in joy when the flock of Orks came
and saved him.

So it was that when all the exciting adventures in Jinxland were over
and the four Orks had begun their flight across the mountains to carry
the mortals into the Land of Oz, Ozma called the Wizard to her and
asked him to prepare a place for the strangers to sleep.

The famous Wizard of Oz was a quaint little man who inhabited the royal
palace and attended to all the magical things that Ozma wanted done. He
was not as powerful as Glinda, to be sure, but he could do a great many
wonderful things. He proved this by placing a house in the uninhabited
part of the Quadling Country where the Orks landed Cap'n Bill and Trot
and Button-Bright, and fitting it with all the comforts I have
described in the last chapter.

Next morning Dorothy said to Ozma:

"Oughtn't we to go meet the strangers, so we can show them the way to
the Emerald City? I'm sure that little girl will feel shy in this
beautiful land, and I know if 'twas me I'd like somebody to give me a
welcome."

Ozma smiled at her little friend and answered:

"You and Betsy may go to meet them, if you wish, but I can not leave my
palace just now, as I am to have a conference with Jack Pumpkinhead and
Professor Wogglebug on important matters. You may take the Sawhorse and
the Red Wagon, and if you start soon you will be able to meet the
Scarecrow and the strangers at Glinda's palace."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Dorothy, and went away to tell Betsy and to make
preparations for the journey.




Chapter Twenty-Two

The Waterfall


Glinda's castle was a long way from the mountains, but the Scarecrow
began the journey cheerfully, since time was of no great importance in
the Land of Oz and he had recently made the trip and knew the way. It
never mattered much to Button-Bright where he was or what he was doing;
the boy was content in being alive and having good companions to share
his wanderings. As for Trot and Cap'n Bill, they now found themselves
so comfortable and free from danger, in this fine fairyland, and they
were so awed and amazed by the adventures they were encountering, that
the journey to Glinda's castle was more like a pleasure trip than a
hardship, so many wonderful things were there to see.

Button-Bright had been in Oz before, but never in this part of it, so
the Scarecrow was the only one who knew the paths and could lead them.
They had eaten a hearty breakfast, which they found already prepared
for them and awaiting them on the table when they arose from their
refreshing sleep, so they left the magic house in a contented mood and
with hearts lighter and more happy than they had known for many a day.
As they marched along through the fields, the sun shone brightly and
the breeze was laden with delicious fragrance, for it carried with it
the breath of millions of wildflowers.

At noon, when they stopped to rest by the bank of a pretty river, Trot
said with a long-drawn breath that was much like a sigh:

"I wish we'd brought with us some of the food that was left from our
breakfast, for I'm getting hungry again."

Scarcely had she spoken when a table rose up before them, as if from
the ground itself, and it was loaded with fruits and nuts and cakes and
many other good things to eat. The little girl's eyes opened wide at
this display of magic, and Cap'n Bill was not sure that the things were
actually there and fit to eat until he had taken them in his hand and
tasted them. But the Scarecrow said with a laugh:

"Someone is looking after your welfare, that is certain, and from the
looks of this table I suspect my friend the Wizard has taken us in his
charge. I've known him to do things like this before, and if we are in
the Wizard's care you need not worry about your future."

"Who's worrying?" inquired Button-Bright, already at the table and
busily eating.

The Scarecrow looked around the place while the others were feasting,
and finding many things unfamiliar to him he shook his head and
remarked:

"I must have taken the wrong path, back in that last valley, for on my
way to Jinxland I remember that I passed around the foot of this river,
where there was a great waterfall."

"Did the river make a bend, after the waterfall?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"No, the river disappeared. Only a pool of whirling water showed what
had become of the river; but I suppose it is under ground, somewhere,
and will come to the surface again in another part of the country."

"Well," suggested Trot, as she finished her luncheon, "as there is no
way to cross this river, I s'pose we'll have to find that waterfall,
and go around it."

"Exactly," replied the Scarecrow; so they soon renewed their journey,
following the river for a long time until the roar of the waterfall
sounded in their ears. By and by they came to the waterfall itself, a
sheet of silver dropping far, far down into a tiny lake which seemed to
have no outlet. From the top of the fall, where they stood, the banks
gradually sloped away, so that the descent by land was quite easy,
while the river could do nothing but glide over an edge of rock and
tumble straight down to the depths below.

"You see," said the Scarecrow, leaning over the brink, "this is called
by our Oz people the Great Waterfall, because it is certainly the
highest one in all the land; but I think--Help!"

He had lost his balance and pitched headforemost into the river. They
saw a flash of straw and blue clothes, and the painted face looking
upward in surprise. The next moment the Scarecrow was swept over the
waterfall and plunged into the basin below.

The accident had happened so suddenly that for a moment they were all
too horrified to speak or move.

"Quick! We must go to help him or he will be drowned," Trot exclaimed.

Even while speaking she began to descend the bank to the pool below,
and Cap'n Bill followed as swiftly as his wooden leg would let him.
Button-Bright came more slowly, calling to the girl:

"He can't drown, Trot; he's a Scarecrow."

But she wasn't sure a Scarecrow couldn't drown and never relaxed her
speed until she stood on the edge of the pool, with the spray dashing
in her face. Cap'n Bill, puffing and panting, had just voice enough to
ask, as he reached her side:

"See him, Trot?"

"Not a speck of him.  Oh, Cap'n, what do you s'pose has become of him?"

"I s'pose," replied the sailor, "that he's in that water, more or less
far down, and I'm 'fraid it'll make his straw pretty soggy. But as fer
his bein' drowned, I agree with Button-Bright that it can't be done."

There was small comfort in this assurance and Trot stood for some time
searching with her eyes the bubbling water, in the hope that the
Scarecrow would finally come to the surface. Presently she heard
Button-Bright calling: "Come here, Trot!" and looking around she saw
that the boy had crept over the wet rocks to the edge of the waterfall
and seemed to be peering behind it. Making her way toward him, she
asked:

"What do you see?"

"A cave," he answered. "Let's go in. P'r'aps we'll find the Scarecrow
there."

She was a little doubtful of that, but the cave interested her, and so
did it Cap'n Bill. There was just space enough at the edge of the sheet
of water for them to crowd in behind it, but after that dangerous
entrance they found room enough to walk upright and after a time they
came to an opening in the wall of rock. Approaching this opening, they
gazed within it and found a series of steps, cut so that they might
easily descend into the cavern.

Trot turned to look inquiringly at her companions. The falling water
made such din and roaring that her voice could not be heard. Cap'n Bill
nodded his head, but before he could enter the cave, Button-Bright was
before him, clambering down the steps without a particle of fear. So
the others followed the boy.

The first steps were wet with spray, and slippery, but the remainder
were quite dry. A rosy light seemed to come from the interior of the
cave, and this lighted their way. After the steps there was a short
tunnel, high enough for them to walk erect in, and then they reached
the cave itself and paused in wonder and admiration.

They stood on the edge of a vast cavern, the walls and domed roof of
which were lined with countless rubies, exquisitely cut and flashing
sparkling rays from one to another. This caused a radiant light that
permitted the entire cavern to be distinctly seen, and the effect was
so marvelous that Trot drew in her breath with a sort of a gasp, and
stood quite still in wonder.

But the walls and roof of the cavern were merely a setting for a more
wonderful scene. In the center was a bubbling caldron of water, for
here the river rose again, splashing and dashing till its spray rose
high in the air, where it took the ruby color of the jewels and seemed
like a seething mass of flame. And while they gazed into the tumbling,
tossing water, the body of the Scarecrow suddenly rose in the center,
struggling and kicking, and the next instant wholly disappeared from
view.

"My, but he's wet!" exclaimed Button-Bright; but none of the others
heard him.

Trot and Cap'n Bill discovered that a broad ledge--covered, like the
walls, with glittering rubies--ran all around the cavern; so they
followed this gorgeous path to the rear and found where the water made
its final dive underground, before it disappeared entirely. Where it
plunged into this dim abyss the river was black and dreary looking, and
they stood gazing in awe until just beside them the body of the
Scarecrow again popped up from the water.




Chapter Twenty Three

The Land of Oz


The straw man's appearance on the water was so sudden that it startled
Trot, but Cap'n Bill had the presence of mind to stick his wooden leg
out over the water and the Scarecrow made a desperate clutch and
grabbed the leg with both hands. He managed to hold on until Trot and
Button-Bright knelt down and seized his clothing, but the children
would have been powerless to drag the soaked Scarecrow ashore had not
Cap'n Bill now assisted them. When they laid him on the ledge of rubies
he was the most useless looking Scarecrow you can imagine--his straw
sodden and dripping with water, his clothing wet and crumpled, while
even the sack upon which his face was painted had become so wrinkled
that the old jolly expression of their stuffed friend's features was
entirely gone. But he could still speak, and when Trot bent down her
ear she heard him say:

"Get me out of here as soon as you can."

That seemed a wise thing to do, so Cap'n Bill lifted his head and
shoulders, and Trot and Button-Bright each took a leg; among them they
partly carried and partly dragged the damp Scarecrow out of the Ruby
Cavern, along the tunnel, and up the flight of rock steps. It was
somewhat difficult to get him past the edge of the waterfall, but they
succeeded, after much effort, and a few minutes later laid their poor
comrade on a grassy bank where the sun shone upon him freely and he was
beyond the reach of the spray.

Cap'n Bill now knelt down and examined the straw that the Scarecrow was
stuffed with.

"I don't believe it'll be of much use to him, any more," said he, "for
it's full of polliwogs an' fish eggs, an' the water has took all the
crinkle out o' the straw an ruined it. I guess, Trot, that the best
thing for us to do is to empty out all his body an' carry his head an'
clothes along the road till we come to a field or a house where we can
get some fresh straw."

"Yes, Cap'n," she agreed, "there's nothing else to be done. But how
shall we ever find the road to Glinda's palace, without the Scarecrow
to guide us?"

"That's easy," said the Scarecrow, speaking in a rather feeble but
distinct voice. "If Cap'n Bill will carry my head on his shoulders,
eyes front, I can tell him which way to go."

So they followed that plan and emptied all the old, wet straw out of
the Scarecrow's body. Then the sailor-man wrung out the clothes and
laid them in the sun till they were quite dry. Trot took charge of the
head and pressed the wrinkles out of the face as it dried, so that
after a while the Scarecrow's expression became natural again, and as
jolly as before.

This work consumed some time, but when it was completed they again
started upon their journey, Button-Bright carrying the boots and hat,
Trot the bundle of clothes, and Cap'n Bill the head. The Scarecrow,
having regained his composure and being now in a good humor, despite
his recent mishaps, beguiled their way with stories of the Land of Oz.

It was not until the next morning, however, that they found straw with
which to restuff the Scarecrow. That evening they came to the same
little house they had slept in before, only now it was magically
transferred to a new place. The same bountiful supper as before was
found smoking hot upon the table and the same cosy beds were ready for
them to sleep in.

They rose early and after breakfast went out of doors, and there, lying
just beside the house, was a heap of clean, crisp straw. Ozma had
noticed the Scarecrow's accident in her Magic Picture and had notified
the Wizard to provide the straw, for she knew the adventurers were not
likely to find straw in the country through which they were now
traveling.

They lost no time in stuffing the Scarecrow anew, and he was greatly
delighted at being able to walk around again and to assume the
leadership of the little party.

"Really," said Trot, "I think you're better than you were before, for
you are fresh and sweet all through and rustle beautifully when you
move."

"Thank you, my dear," he replied gratefully. "I always feel like a new
man when I'm freshly stuffed. No one likes to get musty, you know, and
even good straw may be spoiled by age."

"It was water that spoiled you, the last time," remarked Button-Bright,
"which proves that too much bathing is as bad as too little. But, after
all, Scarecrow, water is not as dangerous for you as fire."

"All things are good in moderation," declared the Scarecrow. "But now,
let us hurry on, or we shall not reach Glinda's palace by nightfall."




Chapter Twenty-Four

The Royal Reception


At about four o'clock of that same day the Red Wagon drew up at the
entrance to Glinda's palace and Dorothy and Betsy jumped out. Ozma's
Red Wagon was almost a chariot, being inlaid with rubies and pearls,
and it was drawn by Ozma's favorite steed, the wooden Sawhorse.

"Shall I unharness you," asked Dorothy, "so you can come in and visit?"

"No," replied the Sawhorse. "I'll just stand here and think. Take your
time. Thinking doesn't seem to bore me at all."

"What will you think of?" inquired Betsy.

"Of the acorn that grew the tree from which I was made."

So they left the wooden animal and went in to see Glinda, who welcomed
the little girls in her most cordial manner.

"I knew you were on your way," said the good Sorceress when they were
seated in her library, "for I learned from my Record Book that you
intended to meet Trot and Button-Bright on their arrival here."

"Is the strange little girl named Trot?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes; and her companion, the old sailor, is named Cap'n Bill. I think
we shall like them very much, for they are just the kind of people to
enjoy and appreciate our fairyland and I do not see any way, at
present, for them to return again to the outside world."

"Well, there's room enough here for them, I'm sure," said Dorothy.
"Betsy and I are already eager to welcome Trot. It will keep us busy
for a year, at least, showing her all the wonderful things in Oz."

Glinda smiled.

"I have lived here many years," said she, "and I have not seen all the
wonders of Oz yet."

Meantime the travelers were drawing near to the palace, and when they
first caught sight of its towers Trot realized that it was far more
grand and imposing than was the King's castle in Jinxland. The nearer
they came, the more beautiful the palace appeared, and when finally the
Scarecrow led them up the great marble steps, even Button-Bright was
filled with awe.

"I don't see any soldiers to guard the place," said the little girl.

"There is no need to guard Glinda's palace," replied the Scarecrow. "We
have no wicked people in Oz, that we know of, and even if there were
any, Glinda's magic would be powerful enough to protect her."

Button-Bright was now standing on the top steps of the entrance, and he
suddenly exclaimed:

"Why, there's the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon! Hip, hooray!" and next
moment he was rushing down to throw his arms around the neck of the
wooden horse, which good-naturedly permitted this familiarity when it
recognized in the boy an old friend.

Button-Bright's shout had been heard inside the palace, so now Dorothy
and Betsy came running out to embrace their beloved friend, the
Scarecrow, and to welcome Trot and Cap'n Bill to the Land of Oz.

"We've been watching you for a long time, in Ozma's Magic Picture,"
said Dorothy, "and Ozma has sent us to invite you to her own palace in
the Em'rald City. I don't know if you realize how lucky you are to get
that invitation, but you'll understand it better after you've seen the
royal palace and the Em'rald City."

Glinda now appeared in person to lead all the party into her Azure
Reception Room. Trot was a little afraid of the stately Sorceress, but
gained courage by holding fast to the hands of Betsy and Dorothy. Cap'n
Bill had no one to help him feel at ease, so the old sailor sat stiffly
on the edge of his chair and said:

"Yes, ma'am," or "No, ma'am," when he was spoken to, and was greatly
embarrassed by so much splendor.

The Scarecrow had lived so much in palaces that he felt quite at home,
and he chatted to Glinda and the Oz girls in a merry, light-hearted
way. He told all about his adventures in Jinxland, and at the Great
Waterfall, and on the journey hither--most of which his hearers knew
already--and then he asked Dorothy and Betsy what had happened in the
Emerald City since he had left there.

They all passed the evening and the night at Glinda's palace, and the
Sorceress was so gracious to Cap'n Bill that the old man by degrees
regained his self-possession and began to enjoy himself. Trot had
already come to the conclusion that in Dorothy and Betsy she had found
two delightful comrades, and Button-Bright was just as much at home
here as he had been in the fields of Jinxland or when he was buried in
the popcorn snow of the Land of Mo.

The next morning they arose bright and early and after breakfast bade
good-bye to the kind Sorceress, whom Trot and Cap'n Bill thanked
earnestly for sending the Scarecrow to Jinxland to rescue them. Then
they all climbed into the Red Wagon.

There was room for all on the broad seats, and when all had taken their
places--Dorothy, Trot and Betsy on the rear seat and Cap'n Bill,
Button-Bright and the Scarecrow in front--they called "Gid-dap!" to the
Sawhorse and the wooden steed moved briskly away, pulling the Red Wagon
with ease.

It was now that the strangers began to perceive the real beauties of
the Land of Oz, for they were passing through a more thickly settled
part of the country and the population grew more dense as they drew
nearer to the Emerald City. Everyone they met had a cheery word or a
smile for the Scarecrow, Dorothy and Betsy Bobbin, and some of them
remembered Button-Bright and welcomed him back to their country.

It was a happy party, indeed, that journeyed in the Red Wagon to the
Emerald City, and Trot already began to hope that Ozma would permit her
and Cap'n Bill to live always in the Land of Oz.

When they reached the great city they were more amazed than ever, both
by the concourse of people in their quaint and picturesque costumes,
and by the splendor of the city itself. But the magnificence of the
Royal Palace quite took their breath away, until Ozma received them in
her own pretty apartment and by her charming manners and assuring
smiles made them feel they were no longer strangers.

Trot was given a lovely little room next to that of Dorothy, while
Cap'n Bill had the cosiest sort of a room next to Trot's and
overlooking the gardens. And that evening Ozma gave a grand banquet and
reception in honor of the new arrivals. While Trot had read of many of
the people she then met, Cap'n Bill was less familiar with them and
many of the unusual characters introduced to him that evening caused
the old sailor to open his eyes wide in astonishment.

He had thought the live Scarecrow about as curious as anyone could be,
but now he met the Tin Woodman, who was all made of tin, even to his
heart, and carried a gleaming axe over his shoulder wherever he went.
Then there was Jack Pumpkinhead, whose head was a real pumpkin with the
face carved upon it; and Professor Wogglebug, who had the shape of an
enormous bug but was dressed in neat fitting garments. The Professor
was an interesting talker and had very polite manners, but his face was
so comical that it made Cap'n Bill smile to look at it. A great friend
of Dorothy and Ozma seemed to be a machine man called Tik-Tok, who ran
down several times during the evening and had to be wound up again by
someone before he could move or speak.

At the reception appeared the Shaggy Man and his brother, both very
popular in Oz, as well as Dorothy's Uncle Henry and Aunt Em, two happy
old people who lived in a pretty cottage near the palace.

But what perhaps seemed most surprising to both Trot and Cap'n Bill was
the number of peculiar animals admitted into Ozma's parlors, where they
not only conducted themselves quite properly but were able to talk as
well as anyone.

There was the Cowardly Lion, an immense beast with a beautiful mane;
and the Hungry Tiger, who smiled continually; and Eureka the Pink
Kitten, who lay curled upon a cushion and had rather supercilious
manners; and the wooden Sawhorse; and nine tiny piglets that belonged
to the Wizard; and a mule named Hank, who belonged to Betsy Bobbin. A
fuzzy little terrier dog, named Toto, lay at Dorothy's feet but seldom
took part in the conversation, although he listened to every word that
was said. But the most wonderful of all to Trot was a square beast with
a winning smile, that squatted in a corner of the room and wagged his
square head at everyone in quite a jolly way. Betsy told Trot that this
unique beast was called the Woozy, and there was no other like him in
all the world.

Cap'n Bill and Trot had both looked around expectantly for the Wizard
of Oz, but the evening was far advanced before the famous little man
entered the room. But he went up to the strangers at once and said:

"I know you, but you don't know me; so let's get acquainted."

And they did get acquainted, in a very short time, and before the
evening was over Trot felt that she knew every person and animal
present at the reception, and that they were all her good friends.

Suddenly they looked around for Button-Bright, but he was nowhere to be
found.

"Dear me!" cried Trot. "He's lost again."

"Never mind, my dear," said Ozma, with her charming smile, "no one can
go far astray in the Land of Oz, and if Button-Bright isn't lost
occasionally, he isn't happy."





The Wonderful Oz Books by L. Frank Baum

  THE WIZARD OF OZ
  THE LAND OF OZ
  OZMA OF OZ
  DOROTHY AND THE WIZARD IN OZ
  THE ROAD TO OZ
  THE EMERALD CITY OF OZ
  THE PATCHWORK GIRL OF OZ
  TIK-TOK OF OZ
  THE SCARECROW OF OZ
  RINKITINK IN OZ
  THE LOST PRINCESS OF OZ
  THE TIN WOODMAN OF OZ
  THE MAGIC OF OZ
  GLINDA OF OZ

========================================
========================================

TIK-TOK OF OZ


by

L. FRANK BAUM



  To Louis F. Gottschalk,
  whose sweet and dainty melodies
  breathe the true spirit of fairyland,
  this book is affectionately dedicated



To My Readers

The very marked success of my last year's fairy book, "The Patchwork
Girl of Oz," convinces me that my readers like the Oz stories "best of
all," as one little girl wrote me. So here, my dears, is a new Oz story
in which is introduced Ann Soforth, the Queen of Oogaboo, whom Tik-Tok
assisted in conquering our old acquaintance, the Nome King. It also
tells of Betsy Bobbin and how, after many adventures, she finally
reached the marvelous Land of Oz.

There is a play called "The Tik-Tok Man of Oz," but it is not like this
story of "Tik-Tok of Oz," although some of the adventures recorded in
this book, as well as those in several other Oz books, are included in
the play. Those who have seen the play and those who have read the
other Oz books will find in this story a lot of strange characters and
adventures that they have never heard of before.

In the letters I receive from children there has been an urgent appeal
for me to write a story that will take Trot and Cap'n Bill to the Land
of Oz, where they will meet Dorothy and Ozma. Also they think
Button-Bright ought to get acquainted with Ojo the Lucky. As you know,
I am obliged to talk these matters over with Dorothy by means of the
"wireless," for that is the only way I can communicate with the Land of
Oz. When I asked her about this idea, she replied: "Why, haven't you
heard?" I said "No." "Well," came the message over the wireless, "I'll
tell you all about it, by and by, and then you can make a book of that
story for the children to read."

So, if Dorothy keeps her word and I am permitted to write another Oz
book, you will probably discover how all these characters came together
in the famous Emerald City. Meantime, I want to tell all my little
friends--whose numbers are increasing by many thousands every
year--that I am very grateful for the favor they have shown my books
and for the delightful little letters I am constantly receiving. I am
almost sure that I have as many friends among the children of America
as any story writer alive; and this, of course, makes me very proud and
happy.

L. Frank Baum.

"OZCOT"
  at HOLLYWOOD
    in CALIFORNIA,
      1914.




LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1 - Ann's Army
   2 - Out of Oogaboo
   3 - Magic Mystifies the Marchers
   4 - Betsy Braves the Bellows
   5 - The Roses Repulse the Refugees
   6 - Shaggy Seeks His Stray Brother
   7 - Polychrome's Pitiful Plight
   8 - Tik-Tok Tackles a Tough Task
   9 - Ruggedo's Rage is Rash and Reckless
  10 - A Terrible Tumble Through a Tube
  11 - The Famous Fellowship of Fairies
  12 - The Lovely Lady of Light
  13 - The Jinjin's Just Judgment
  14 - The Long-Eared Hearer Learns by Listening
  15 - The Dragon Defies Danger
  16 - The Naughty Nome
  17 - A Tragic Transformation
  18 - A Clever Conquest
  19 - King Kaliko
  20 - Quox Quietly Quits
  21 - A Bashful Brother
  22 - Kindly Kisses
  23 - Ruggedo Reforms
  24 - Dorothy is Delighted
  25 - The Land of Love




TIK-TOK of OZ




Chapter One

Ann's Army


"I won't!" cried Ann; "I won't sweep the floor. It is beneath my
dignity."

"Some one must sweep it," replied Ann's younger sister, Salye; "else we
shall soon be wading in dust. And you are the eldest, and the head of
the family."

"I'm Queen of Oogaboo," said Ann, proudly. "But," she added with a
sigh, "my kingdom is the smallest and the poorest in all the Land of
Oz."

This was quite true. Away up in the mountains, in a far corner of the
beautiful fairyland of Oz, lies a small valley which is named Oogaboo,
and in this valley lived a few people who were usually happy and
contented and never cared to wander over the mountain pass into the
more settled parts of the land. They knew that all of Oz, including
their own territory, was ruled by a beautiful Princess named Ozma, who
lived in the splendid Emerald City; yet the simple folk of Oogaboo
never visited Ozma. They had a royal family of their own--not
especially to rule over them, but just as a matter of pride. Ozma
permitted the various parts of her country to have their Kings and
Queens and Emperors and the like, but all were ruled over by the lovely
girl Queen of the Emerald City.

The King of Oogaboo used to be a man named Jol Jemkiph Soforth, who for
many years did all the drudgery of deciding disputes and telling his
people when to plant cabbages and pickle onions. But the King's wife
had a sharp tongue and small respect for the King, her husband;
therefore one night King Jol crept over the pass into the Land of Oz
and disappeared from Oogaboo for good and all. The Queen waited a few
years for him to return and then started in search of him, leaving her
eldest daughter, Ann Soforth, to act as Queen.

Now, Ann had not forgotten when her birthday came, for that meant a
party and feasting and dancing, but she had quite forgotten how many
years the birthdays marked. In a land where people live always, this is
not considered a cause for regret, so we may justly say that Queen Ann
of Oogaboo was old enough to make jelly--and let it go at that.

But she didn't make jelly, or do any more of the housework than she
could help. She was an ambitious woman and constantly resented the fact
that her kingdom was so tiny and her people so stupid and
unenterprising. Often she wondered what had become of her father and
mother, out beyond the pass, in the wonderful Land of Oz, and the fact
that they did not return to Oogaboo led Ann to suspect that they had
found a better place to live. So, when Salye refused to sweep the floor
of the living room in the palace, and Ann would not sweep it, either,
she said to her sister:

"I'm going away. This absurd Kingdom of Oogaboo tires me."

"Go, if you want to," answered Salye; "but you are very foolish to
leave this place."

"Why?" asked Ann.

"Because in the Land of Oz, which is Ozma's country, you will be a
nobody, while here you are a Queen."

"Oh, yes! Queen over eighteen men, twenty-seven women and forty-four
children!" returned Ann bitterly.

"Well, there are certainly more people than that in the great Land of
Oz," laughed Salye. "Why don't you raise an army and conquer them, and
be Queen of all Oz?" she asked, trying to taunt Ann and so to anger
her. Then she made a face at her sister and went into the back yard to
swing in the hammock.

Her jeering words, however, had given Queen Ann an idea. She reflected
that Oz was reported to be a peaceful country and Ozma a mere girl who
ruled with gentleness to all and was obeyed because her people loved
her. Even in Oogaboo the story was told that Ozma's sole army consisted
of twenty-seven fine officers, who wore beautiful uniforms but carried
no weapons, because there was no one to fight. Once there had been a
private soldier, besides the officers, but Ozma had made him a
Captain-General and taken away his gun for fear it might accidentally
hurt some one.

The more Ann thought about the matter the more she was convinced it
would be easy to conquer the Land of Oz and set herself up as Ruler in
Ozma's place, if she but had an Army to do it with. Afterward she could
go out into the world and conquer other lands, and then perhaps she
could find a way to the moon, and conquer that. She had a warlike
spirit that preferred trouble to idleness.

It all depended on an Army, Ann decided. She carefully counted in her
mind all the men of her kingdom. Yes; there were exactly eighteen of
them, all told. That would not make a very big Army, but by surprising
Ozma's unarmed officers her men might easily subdue them. "Gentle
people are always afraid of those that bluster," Ann told herself. "I
don't wish to shed any blood, for that would shock my nerves and I
might faint; but if we threaten and flash our weapons I am sure the
people of Oz will fall upon their knees before me and surrender."

This argument, which she repeated to herself more than once, finally
determined the Queen of Oogaboo to undertake the audacious venture.

"Whatever happens," she reflected, "can make me no more unhappy than my
staying shut up in this miserable valley and sweeping floors and
quarreling with Sister Salye; so I will venture all, and win what I
may."

That very day she started out to organize her Army.

The first man she came to was Jo Apple, so called because he had an
apple orchard.

"Jo," said Ann, "I am going to conquer the world, and I want you to
join my Army."

"Don't ask me to do such a fool thing, for I must politely refuse Your
Majesty," said Jo Apple.

"I have no intention of asking you. I shall command you, as Queen of
Oogaboo, to join," said Ann.

"In that case, I suppose I must obey," the man remarked, in a sad
voice. "But I pray you to consider that I am a very important citizen,
and for that reason am entitled to an office of high rank."

"You shall be a General," promised Ann.

"With gold epaulets and a sword?" he asked.

"Of course," said the Queen.

Then she went to the next man, whose name was Jo Bunn, as he owned an
orchard where graham-buns and wheat-buns, in great variety, both hot
and cold, grew on the trees.

"Jo," said Ann, "I am going to conquer the world, and I command you to
join my Army."

"Impossible!" he exclaimed. "The bun crop has to be picked."

"Let your wife and children do the picking," said Ann.

"But I'm a man of great importance, Your Majesty," he protested.

"For that reason you shall be one of my Generals, and wear a cocked hat
with gold braid, and curl your mustaches and clank a long sword," she
promised.

So he consented, although sorely against his will, and the Queen walked
on to the next cottage. Here lived Jo Cone, so called because the trees
in his orchard bore crops of excellent ice-cream cones.

"Jo," said Ann, "I am going to conquer the world, and you must join my
Army."

"Excuse me, please," said Jo Cone. "I am a bad fighter. My good wife
conquered me years ago, for she can fight better than I. Take her, Your
Majesty, instead of me, and I'll bless you for the favor."

"This must be an army of men--fierce, ferocious warriors," declared
Ann, looking sternly upon the mild little man.

"And you will leave my wife here in Oogaboo?" he asked.

"Yes; and make you a General."

"I'll go," said Jo Cone, and Ann went on to the cottage of Jo Clock,
who had an orchard of clock-trees. This man at first insisted that he
would not join the army, but Queen Ann's promise to make him a General
finally won his consent.

"How many Generals are there in your army?" he asked.

"Four, so far," replied Ann.

"And how big will the army be?" was his next question.

"I intend to make every one of the eighteen men in Oogaboo join it,"
she said.

"Then four Generals are enough," announced Jo Clock. "I advise you to
make the rest of them Colonels."

Ann tried to follow his advice. The next four men she visited--who were
Jo Plum, Jo Egg, Jo Banjo and Jo Cheese, named after the trees in their
orchards--she made Colonels of her Army; but the fifth one, Jo Nails,
said Colonels and Generals were getting to be altogether too common in
the Army of Oogaboo and he preferred to be a Major. So Jo Nails, Jo
Cake, Jo Ham and Jo Stockings were all four made Majors, while the next
four--Jo Sandwich, Jo Padlocks, Jo Sundae and Jo Buttons--were
appointed Captains of the Army.

But now Queen Ann was in a quandary. There remained but two other men
in all Oogaboo, and if she made these two Lieutenants, while there were
four Captains, four Majors, four Colonels and four Generals, there was
likely to be jealousy in her army, and perhaps mutiny and desertions.

One of these men, however, was Jo Candy, and he would not go at all. No
promises could tempt him, nor could threats move him. He said he must
remain at home to harvest his crop of jackson-balls, lemon-drops,
bonbons and chocolate-creams. Also he had large fields of crackerjack
and buttered pop corn to be mowed and threshed, and he was determined
not to disappoint the children of Oogaboo by going away to conquer the
world and so let the candy crop spoil.

Finding Jo Candy so obstinate, Queen Ann let him have his own way and
continued her journey to the house of the eighteenth and last man in
Oogaboo, who was a young fellow named Jo Files. This Files had twelve
trees which bore steel files of various sorts; but also he had nine
book-trees, on which grew a choice selection of story-books. In case
you have never seen books growing upon trees, I will explain that those
in Jo Files' orchard were enclosed in broad green husks which, when
fully ripe, turned to a deep red color. Then the books were picked and
husked and were ready to read. If they were picked too soon, the
stories were found to be confused and uninteresting and the spelling
bad. However, if allowed to ripen perfectly, the stories were fine
reading and the spelling and grammar excellent.

Files freely gave his books to all who wanted them, but the people of
Oogaboo cared little for books and so he had to read most of them
himself, before they spoiled. For, as you probably know, as soon as the
books were read the words disappeared and the leaves withered and
faded--which is the worst fault of all books which grow upon trees.

When Queen Ann spoke to this young man Files, who was both intelligent
and ambitious, he said he thought it would be great fun to conquer the
world. But he called her attention to the fact that he was far superior
to the other men of her army. Therefore, he would not be one of her
Generals or Colonels or Majors or Captains, but claimed the honor of
being sole Private.

Ann did not like this idea at all.

"I hate to have a Private Soldier in my army," she said; "they're so
common. I am told that Princess Ozma once had a private soldier, but
she made him her Captain-General, which is good evidence that the
private was unnecessary."

"Ozma's army doesn't fight," returned Files; "but your army must fight
like fury in order to conquer the world. I have read in my books that
it is always the private soldiers who do the fighting, for no officer
is ever brave enough to face the foe. Also, it stands to reason that
your officers must have some one to command and to issue their orders
to; therefore I'll be the one. I long to slash and slay the enemy and
become a hero. Then, when we return to Oogaboo, I'll take all the
marbles away from the children and melt them up and make a marble
statue of myself for all to look upon and admire."

Ann was much pleased with Private Files. He seemed indeed to be such a
warrior as she needed in her enterprise, and her hopes of success took
a sudden bound when Files told her he knew where a gun-tree grew and
would go there at once and pick the ripest and biggest musket the tree
bore.




Chapter Two

Out of Oogaboo


Three days later the Grand Army of Oogaboo assembled in the square in
front of the royal palace. The sixteen officers were attired in
gorgeous uniforms and carried sharp, glittering swords. The Private had
picked his gun and, although it was not a very big weapon, Files tried
to look fierce and succeeded so well that all his commanding officers
were secretly afraid of him.

The women were there, protesting that Queen Ann Soforth had no right to
take their husbands and fathers from them; but Ann commanded them to
keep silent, and that was the hardest order to obey they had ever
received.

The Queen appeared before her Army dressed in an imposing uniform of
green, covered with gold braid. She wore a green soldier-cap with a
purple plume in it and looked so royal and dignified that everyone in
Oogaboo except the Army was glad she was going. The Army was sorry she
was not going alone.

"Form ranks!" she cried in her shrill voice.

Salye leaned out of the palace window and laughed.

"I believe your Army can run better than it can fight," she observed.

"Of course," replied General Bunn, proudly. "We're not looking for
trouble, you know, but for plunder. The more plunder and the less
fighting we get, the better we shall like our work."

"For my part," said Files, "I prefer war and carnage to anything. The
only way to become a hero is to conquer, and the story-books all say
that the easiest way to conquer is to fight."

"That's the idea, my brave man!" agreed Ann. "To fight is to conquer
and to conquer is to secure plunder and to secure plunder is to become
a hero. With such noble determination to back me, the world is mine!
Good-bye, Salye. When we return we shall be rich and famous. Come,
Generals; let us march."

At this the Generals straightened up and threw out their chests. Then
they swung their glittering swords in rapid circles and cried to the
Colonels:

"For-ward March!"

Then the Colonels shouted to the Majors: "For-ward March!" and the
Majors yelled to the Captains: "For-ward March!" and the Captains
screamed to the Private:

"For-ward March!"

So Files shouldered his gun and began to march, and all the officers
followed after him. Queen Ann came last of all, rejoicing in her noble
army and wondering why she had not decided long ago to conquer the
world.

In this order the procession marched out of Oogaboo and took the narrow
mountain pass which led into the lovely Fairyland of Oz.




Chapter Three

Magic Mystifies the Marchers


Princess Ozma was all unaware that the Army of Oogaboo, led by their
ambitious Queen, was determined to conquer her Kingdom. The beautiful
girl Ruler of Oz was busy with the welfare of her subjects and had no
time to think of Ann Soforth and her disloyal plans. But there was one
who constantly guarded the peace and happiness of the Land of Oz and
this was the Official Sorceress of the Kingdom, Glinda the Good.

In her magnificent castle, which stands far north of the Emerald City
where Ozma holds her court, Glinda owns a wonderful magic Record Book,
in which is printed every event that takes place anywhere, just as soon
as it happens.

The smallest things and the biggest things are all recorded in this
book. If a child stamps its foot in anger, Glinda reads about it; if a
city burns down, Glinda finds the fact noted in her book.

The Sorceress always reads her Record Book every day, and so it was she
knew that Ann Soforth, Queen of Oogaboo, had foolishly assembled an
army of sixteen officers and one private soldier, with which she
intended to invade and conquer the Land of Oz.

There was no danger but that Ozma, supported by the magic arts of
Glinda the Good and the powerful Wizard of Oz--both her firm
friends--could easily defeat a far more imposing army than Ann's; but
it would be a shame to have the peace of Oz interrupted by any sort of
quarreling or fighting. So Glinda did not even mention the matter to
Ozma, or to anyone else. She merely went into a great chamber of her
castle, known as the Magic Room, where she performed a magical ceremony
which caused the mountain pass that led from Oogaboo to make several
turns and twists. The result was that when Ann and her army came to the
end of the pass they were not in the Land of Oz at all, but in an
adjoining territory that was quite distinct from Ozma's domain and
separated from Oz by an invisible barrier.

As the Oogaboo people emerged into this country, the pass they had
traversed disappeared behind them and it was not likely they would ever
find their way back into the valley of Oogaboo. They were greatly
puzzled, indeed, by their surroundings and did not know which way to
go. None of them had ever visited Oz, so it took them some time to
discover they were not in Oz at all, but in an unknown country.

"Never mind," said Ann, trying to conceal her disappointment; "we have
started out to conquer the world, and here is part of it. In time, as
we pursue our victorious journey, we will doubtless come to Oz; but,
until we get there, we may as well conquer whatever land we find
ourselves in."

"Have we conquered this place, Your Majesty?" anxiously inquired Major
Cake.

"Most certainly," said Ann. "We have met no people, as yet, but when we
do, we will inform them that they are our slaves."

"And afterward we will plunder them of all their possessions," added
General Apple.

"They may not possess anything," objected Private Files; "but I hope
they will fight us, just the same. A peaceful conquest wouldn't be any
fun at all."

"Don't worry," said the Queen. "_We_ can fight, whether our foes do or
not; and perhaps we would find it more comfortable to have the enemy
surrender promptly."

It was a barren country and not very pleasant to travel in. Moreover,
there was little for them to eat, and as the officers became hungry
they became fretful. Many would have deserted had they been able to
find their way home, but as the Oogaboo people were now hopelessly lost
in a strange country they considered it more safe to keep together than
to separate.

Queen Ann's temper, never very agreeable, became sharp and irritable as
she and her army tramped over the rocky roads without encountering
either people or plunder. She scolded her officers until they became
surly, and a few of them were disloyal enough to ask her to hold her
tongue. Others began to reproach her for leading them into difficulties
and in the space of three unhappy days every man was mourning for his
orchard in the pretty valley of Oogaboo.

Files, however, proved a different sort. The more difficulties he
encountered the more cheerful he became, and the sighs of the officers
were answered by the merry whistle of the Private. His pleasant
disposition did much to encourage Queen Ann and before long she
consulted the Private Soldier more often than she did his superiors.

It was on the third day of their pilgrimage that they encountered their
first adventure. Toward evening the sky was suddenly darkened and Major
Nails exclaimed:

"A fog is coming toward us."

"I do not think it is a fog," replied Files, looking with interest at
the approaching cloud. "It seems to me more like the breath of a Rak."

"What is a Rak?" asked Ann, looking about fearfully.

"A terrible beast with a horrible appetite," answered the soldier,
growing a little paler than usual. "I have never seen a Rak, to be
sure, but I have read of them in the story-books that grew in my
orchard, and if this is indeed one of those fearful monsters, we are
not likely to conquer the world."

Hearing this, the officers became quite worried and gathered closer
about their soldier.

"What is the thing like?" asked one.

"The only picture of a Rak that I ever saw in a book was rather
blurred," said Files, "because the book was not quite ripe when it was
picked. But the creature can fly in the air and run like a deer and
swim like a fish. Inside its body is a glowing furnace of fire, and the
Rak breathes in air and breathes out smoke, which darkens the sky for
miles around, wherever it goes. It is bigger than a hundred men and
feeds on any living thing."

The officers now began to groan and to tremble, but Files tried to
cheer them, saying:

"It may not be a Rak, after all, that we see approaching us, and you
must not forget that we people of Oogaboo, which is part of the
fairyland of Oz, cannot be killed."

"Nevertheless," said Captain Buttons, "if the Rak catches us, and chews
us up into small pieces, and swallows us--what will happen then?"

"Then each small piece will still be alive," declared Files.

"I cannot see how that would help us," wailed Colonel Banjo. "A
hamburger steak is a hamburger steak, whether it is alive or not!"

"I tell you, this may not be a Rak," persisted Files. "We will know,
when the cloud gets nearer, whether it is the breath of a Rak or not.
If it has no smell at all, it is probably a fog; but if it has an odor
of salt and pepper, it is a Rak and we must prepare for a desperate
fight."

They all eyed the dark cloud fearfully. Before long it reached the
frightened group and began to envelop them. Every nose sniffed the
cloud--and every one detected in it the odor of salt and pepper.

"The Rak!" shouted Private Files, and with a howl of despair the
sixteen officers fell to the ground, writhing and moaning in anguish.
Queen Ann sat down upon a rock and faced the cloud more bravely,
although her heart was beating fast. As for Files, he calmly loaded his
gun and stood ready to fight the foe, as a soldier should.

They were now in absolute darkness, for the cloud which covered the sky
and the setting sun was black as ink. Then through the gloom appeared
two round, glowing balls of red, and Files at once decided these must
be the monster's eyes.

He raised his gun, took aim and fired.

There were several bullets in the gun, all gathered from an excellent
bullet-tree in Oogaboo, and they were big and hard. They flew toward
the monster and struck it, and with a wild, weird cry the Rak came
fluttering down and its huge body fell plump upon the forms of the
sixteen officers, who thereupon screamed louder than before.

"Badness me!" moaned the Rak. "See what you've done with that dangerous
gun of yours!"

"I can't see," replied Files, "for the cloud formed by your breath
darkens my sight!"

"Don't tell me it was an accident," continued the Rak, reproachfully,
as it still flapped its wings in a helpless manner. "Don't claim you
didn't know the gun was loaded, I beg of you!"

"I don't intend to," replied Files. "Did the bullets hurt you very
badly?"

"One has broken my jaw, so that I can't open my mouth. You will notice
that my voice sounds rather harsh and husky, because I have to talk
with my teeth set close together. Another bullet broke my left wing, so
that I can't fly; and still another broke my right leg, so that I can't
walk. It was the most careless shot I ever heard of!"

"Can't you manage to lift your body off from my commanding officers?"
inquired Files. "From their cries I'm afraid your great weight is
crushing them."

"I hope it is," growled the Rak. "I want to crush them, if possible,
for I have a bad disposition. If only I could open my mouth, I'd eat
all of you, although my appetite is poorly this warm weather."

With this the Rak began to roll its immense body sidewise, so as to
crush the officers more easily; but in doing this it rolled completely
off from them and the entire sixteen scrambled to their feet and made
off as fast as they could run.

Private Files could not see them go but he knew from the sound of their
voices that they had escaped, so he ceased to worry about them.

"Pardon me if I now bid you good-bye," he said to the Rak. "The parting
is caused by our desire to continue our journey. If you die, do not
blame me, for I was obliged to shoot you as a matter of
self-protection."

"I shall not die," answered the monster, "for I bear a charmed life.
But I beg you not to leave me!"

"Why not?" asked Files.

"Because my broken jaw will heal in about an hour, and then I shall be
able to eat you. My wing will heal in a day and my leg will heal in a
week, when I shall be as well as ever. Having shot me, and so caused me
all this annoyance, it is only fair and just that you remain here and
allow me to eat you as soon as I can open my jaws."

"I beg to differ with you," returned the soldier firmly. "I have made
an engagement with Queen Ann of Oogaboo to help her conquer the world,
and I cannot break my word for the sake of being eaten by a Rak."

"Oh; that's different," said the monster. "If you've an engagement,
don't let me detain you."

So Files felt around in the dark and grasped the hand of the trembling
Queen, whom he led away from the flapping, sighing Rak. They stumbled
over the stones for a way but presently began to see dimly the path
ahead of them, as they got farther and farther away from the dreadful
spot where the wounded monster lay. By and by they reached a little
hill and could see the last rays of the sun flooding a pretty valley
beyond, for now they had passed beyond the cloudy breath of the Rak.
Here were huddled the sixteen officers, still frightened and panting
from their run. They had halted only because it was impossible for them
to run any farther.

Queen Ann gave them a severe scolding for their cowardice, at the same
time praising Files for his courage.

"We are wiser than he, however," muttered General Clock, "for by
running away we are now able to assist Your Majesty in conquering the
world; whereas, had Files been eaten by the Rak, he would have deserted
your Army."

After a brief rest they descended into the valley, and as soon as they
were out of sight of the Rak the spirits of the entire party rose
quickly. Just at dusk they came to a brook, on the banks of which Queen
Ann commanded them to make camp for the night.

Each officer carried in his pocket a tiny white tent. This, when placed
upon the ground, quickly grew in size until it was large enough to
permit the owner to enter it and sleep within its canvas walls. Files
was obliged to carry a knapsack, in which was not only his own tent but
an elaborate pavilion for Queen Ann, besides a bed and chair and a
magic table. This table, when set upon the ground in Ann's pavilion,
became of large size, and in a drawer of the table was contained the
Queen's supply of extra clothing, her manicure and toilet articles and
other necessary things. The royal bed was the only one in the camp, the
officers and private sleeping in hammocks attached to their tent poles.

There was also in the knapsack a flag bearing the royal emblem of
Oogaboo, and this flag Files flew upon its staff every night, to show
that the country they were in had been conquered by the Queen of
Oogaboo. So far, no one but themselves had seen the flag, but Ann was
pleased to see it flutter in the breeze and considered herself already
a famous conqueror.




Chapter Four

Betsy Braves the Billows


The waves dashed and the lightning flashed and the thunder rolled and
the ship struck a rock. Betsy Bobbin was running across the deck and
the shock sent her flying through the air until she fell with a splash
into the dark blue water. The same shock caught Hank, a thin little,
sad-faced mule, and tumbled him also into the sea, far from the ship's
side.

When Betsy came up, gasping for breath because the wet plunge had
surprised her, she reached out in the dark and grabbed a bunch of hair.
At first she thought it was the end of a rope, but presently she heard
a dismal "Hee-haw!" and knew she was holding fast to the end of Hank's
tail.

Suddenly the sea was lighted up by a vivid glare. The ship, now in the
far distance, caught fire, blew up and sank beneath the waves.

Betsy shuddered at the sight, but just then her eye caught a mass of
wreckage floating near her and she let go the mule's tail and seized
the rude raft, pulling herself up so that she rode upon it in safety.
Hank also saw the raft and swam to it, but he was so clumsy he never
would have been able to climb upon it had not Betsy helped him to get
aboard.

They had to crowd close together, for their support was only a
hatch-cover torn from the ship's deck; but it floated them fairly well
and both the girl and the mule knew it would keep them from drowning.

The storm was not over, by any means, when the ship went down. Blinding
bolts of lightning shot from cloud to cloud and the clamor of deep
thunderclaps echoed far over the sea. The waves tossed the little raft
here and there as a child tosses a rubber ball and Betsy had a solemn
feeling that for hundreds of watery miles in every direction there was
no living thing besides herself and the small donkey.

Perhaps Hank had the same thought, for he gently rubbed his nose
against the frightened girl and said "Hee-haw!" in his softest voice,
as if to comfort her.

"You'll protect me, Hank dear, won't you?" she cried helplessly, and
the mule said "Hee-haw!" again, in tones that meant a promise.

On board the ship, during the days that preceded the wreck, when the
sea was calm, Betsy and Hank had become good friends; so, while the
girl might have preferred a more powerful protector in this dreadful
emergency, she felt that the mule would do all in a mule's power to
guard her safety.

All night they floated, and when the storm had worn itself out and
passed away with a few distant growls, and the waves had grown smaller
and easier to ride, Betsy stretched herself out on the wet raft and
fell asleep.

Hank did not sleep a wink. Perhaps he felt it his duty to guard Betsy.
Anyhow, he crouched on the raft beside the tired sleeping girl and
watched patiently until the first light of dawn swept over the sea.

The light wakened Betsy Bobbin. She sat up, rubbed her eyes and stared
across the water.

"Oh, Hank; there's land ahead!" she exclaimed.

"Hee-haw!" answered Hank in his plaintive voice.

The raft was floating swiftly toward a very beautiful country and as
they drew near Betsy could see banks of lovely flowers showing brightly
between leafy trees. But no people were to be seen at all.




Chapter Five

The Roses Repulse the Refugees


Gently the raft grated on the sandy beach. Then Betsy easily waded
ashore, the mule following closely behind her. The sun was now shining
and the air was warm and laden with the fragrance of roses.

"I'd like some breakfast, Hank," remarked the girl, feeling more
cheerful now that she was on dry land; "but we can't eat the flowers,
although they do smell mighty good."

"Hee-haw!" replied Hank and trotted up a little pathway to the top of
the bank.

Betsy followed and from the eminence looked around her. A little way
off stood a splendid big greenhouse, its thousands of crystal panes
glittering in the sunlight.

"There ought to be people somewhere 'round," observed Betsy
thoughtfully; "gardeners, or somebody. Let's go and see, Hank. I'm
getting hungrier ev'ry minute."

So they walked toward the great greenhouse and came to its entrance
without meeting with anyone at all. A door stood ajar, so Hank went in
first, thinking if there was any danger he could back out and warn his
companion. But Betsy was close at his heels and the moment she entered
was lost in amazement at the wonderful sight she saw.

The greenhouse was filled with magnificent rosebushes, all growing in
big pots. On the central stem of each bush bloomed a splendid Rose,
gorgeously colored and deliciously fragrant, and in the center of each
Rose was the face of a lovely girl.

As Betsy and Hank entered, the heads of the Roses were drooping and
their eyelids were closed in slumber; but the mule was so amazed that
he uttered a loud "Hee-haw!" and at the sound of his harsh voice the
rose leaves fluttered, the Roses raised their heads and a hundred
startled eyes were instantly fixed upon the intruders.

"I--I beg your pardon!" stammered Betsy, blushing and confused.

"O-o-o-h!" cried the Roses, in a sort of sighing chorus; and one of
them added: "What a horrid noise!"

"Why, that was only Hank," said Betsy, and as if to prove the truth of
her words the mule uttered another loud "Hee-haw!"

At this all the Roses turned on their stems as far as they were able
and trembled as if some one were shaking their bushes. A dainty Moss
Rose gasped: "Dear me! How dreadfully dreadful!"

"It isn't dreadful at all," said Betsy, somewhat indignant. "When you
get used to Hank's voice it will put you to sleep."

The Roses now looked at the mule less fearfully and one of them asked:

"Is that savage beast named Hank?"

"Yes; Hank's my comrade, faithful and true," answered the girl, twining
her arms around the little mule's neck and hugging him tight. "Aren't
you, Hank?"

Hank could only say in reply: "Hee-haw!" and at his bray the Roses
shivered again.

"Please go away!" begged one. "Can't you see you're frightening us out
of a week's growth?"

"Go away!" echoed Betsy. "Why, we've no place to go. We've just been
wrecked."

"Wrecked?" asked the Roses in a surprised chorus.

"Yes; we were on a big ship and the storm came and wrecked it,"
explained the girl. "But Hank and I caught hold of a raft and floated
ashore to this place, and--we're tired and hungry. What country _is_
this, please?"

"This is the Rose Kingdom," replied the Moss Rose, haughtily, "and it
is devoted to the culture of the rarest and fairest Roses grown."

"I believe it," said Betsy, admiring the pretty blossoms.

"But only Roses are allowed here," continued a delicate Tea Rose,
bending her brows in a frown; "therefore you must go away before the
Royal Gardener finds you and casts you back into the sea."

"Oh! Is there a Royal Gardener, then?" inquired Betsy.

"To be sure."

"And is he a Rose, also?"

"Of course not; he's a man--a wonderful man," was the reply.

"Well, I'm not afraid of a man," declared the girl, much relieved, and
even as she spoke the Royal Gardener popped into the greenhouse--a
spading fork in one hand and a watering pot in the other.

He was a funny little man, dressed in a rose-colored costume, with
ribbons at his knees and elbows, and a bunch of ribbons in his hair.
His eyes were small and twinkling, his nose sharp and his face puckered
and deeply lined.

"O-ho!" he exclaimed, astonished to find strangers in his greenhouse,
and when Hank gave a loud bray the Gardener threw the watering pot over
the mule's head and danced around with his fork, in such agitation that
presently he fell over the handle of the implement and sprawled at full
length upon the ground.

Betsy laughed and pulled the watering pot off from Hank's head. The
little mule was angry at the treatment he had received and backed
toward the Gardener threateningly.

"Look out for his heels!" called Betsy warningly and the Gardener
scrambled to his feet and hastily hid behind the Roses.

"You are breaking the Law!" he shouted, sticking out his head to glare
at the girl and the mule.

"What Law?" asked Betsy.

"The Law of the Rose Kingdom. No strangers are allowed in these
domains."

"Not when they're shipwrecked?" she inquired.

"The Law doesn't except shipwrecks," replied the Royal Gardener, and he
was about to say more when suddenly there was a crash of glass and a
man came tumbling through the roof of the greenhouse and fell plump to
the ground.




Chapter Six

Shaggy Seeks his Stray Brother


This sudden arrival was a queer looking man, dressed all in garments so
shaggy that Betsy at first thought he must be some animal. But the
stranger ended his fall in a sitting position and then the girl saw it
was really a man. He held an apple in his hand, which he had evidently
been eating when he fell, and so little was he jarred or flustered by
the accident that he continued to munch this apple as he calmly looked
around him.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Betsy, approaching him. "Who _are_ you, and
where did you come from?"

"Me? Oh, I'm Shaggy Man," said he, taking another bite of the apple.
"Just dropped in for a short call. Excuse my seeming haste."

"Why, I s'pose you couldn't help the haste," said Betsy.

"No. I climbed an apple tree, outside; branch gave way and--here I am."

As he spoke the Shaggy Man finished his apple, gave the core to
Hank--who ate it greedily--and then stood up to bow politely to Betsy
and the Roses.

The Royal Gardener had been frightened nearly into fits by the crash of
glass and the fall of the shaggy stranger into the bower of Roses, but
now he peeped out from behind a bush and cried in his squeaky voice:

"You're breaking the Law! You're breaking the Law!"

Shaggy stared at him solemnly.

"Is the glass the Law in this country?" he asked.

"Breaking the glass is breaking the Law," squeaked the Gardener,
angrily. "Also, to intrude in any part of the Rose Kingdom is breaking
the Law."

"How do you know?" asked Shaggy.

"Why, it's printed in a book," said the Gardener, coming forward and
taking a small book from his pocket. "Page thirteen. Here it is: 'If
any stranger enters the Rose Kingdom he shall at once be condemned by
the Ruler and put to death.' So you see, strangers," he continued
triumphantly, "it's death for you all and your time has come!"

But just here Hank interposed. He had been stealthily backing toward
the Royal Gardener, whom he disliked, and now the mule's heels shot out
and struck the little man in the middle. He doubled up like the letter
"U" and flew out of the door so swiftly--never touching the
ground--that he was gone before Betsy had time to wink.

But the mule's attack frightened the girl.

"Come," she whispered, approaching the Shaggy Man and taking his hand;
"let's go somewhere else. They'll surely kill us if we stay here!"

"Don't worry, my dear," replied Shaggy, patting the child's head. "I'm
not afraid of anything, so long as I have the Love Magnet."

"The Love Magnet! Why, what is that?" asked Betsy.

"It's a charming little enchantment that wins the heart of everyone who
looks upon it," was the reply. "The Love Magnet used to hang over the
gateway to the Emerald City, in the Land of Oz; but when I started on
this journey our beloved Ruler, Ozma of Oz, allowed me to take it with
me."

"Oh!" cried Betsy, staring hard at him; "are you really from the
wonderful Land of Oz?"

"Yes. Ever been there, my dear?"

"No; but I've heard about it. And do you know Princess Ozma?"

"Very well indeed."

"And--and Princess Dorothy?"

"Dorothy's an old chum of mine," declared Shaggy.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Betsy. "And why did you ever leave such a
beautiful land as Oz?"

"On an errand," said Shaggy, looking sad and solemn. "I'm trying to
find my dear little brother."

"Oh! Is he lost?" questioned Betsy, feeling very sorry for the poor man.

"Been lost these ten years," replied Shaggy, taking out a handkerchief
and wiping a tear from his eye. "I didn't know it until lately, when I
saw it recorded in the magic Record Book of the Sorceress Glinda, in
the Land of Oz. So now I'm trying to find him."

"Where was he lost?" asked the girl sympathetically.

"Back in Colorado, where I used to live before I went to Oz. Brother
was a miner, and dug gold out of a mine. One day he went into his mine
and never came out. They searched for him, but he was not there.
Disappeared entirely," Shaggy ended miserably.

"For goodness sake! What do you s'pose became of him?" she asked.

"There is only one explanation," replied Shaggy, taking another apple
from his pocket and eating it to relieve his misery. "The Nome King
probably got him."

"The Nome King! Who is he?"

"Why, he's sometimes called the Metal Monarch, and his name is Ruggedo.
Lives in some underground cavern. Claims to own all the metals hidden
in the earth. Don't ask me why."

"Why?"

"'Cause I don't know. But this Ruggedo gets wild with anger if anyone
digs gold out of the earth, and my private opinion is that he captured
brother and carried him off to his underground kingdom. No--don't ask
me why. I see you're dying to ask me why. But I don't know."

"But--dear me!--in that case you will never find your lost brother!"
exclaimed the girl.

"Maybe not; but it's my duty to try," answered Shaggy. "I've wandered
so far without finding him, but that only proves he is not where I've
been looking. What I seek now is the hidden passage to the underground
cavern of the terrible Metal Monarch."

"Well," said Betsy doubtfully, "it strikes me that if you ever manage
to get there the Metal Monarch will make you, too, his prisoner."

"Nonsense!" answered Shaggy, carelessly. "You mustn't forget the Love
Magnet."

"What about it?" she asked.

"When the fierce Metal Monarch sees the Love Magnet, he will love me
dearly and do anything I ask."

"It must be wonderful," said Betsy, with awe.

"It is," the man assured her. "Shall I show it to you?"

"Oh, do!" she cried; so Shaggy searched in his shaggy pocket and drew
out a small silver magnet, shaped like a horseshoe.

The moment Betsy saw it she began to like the Shaggy Man better than
before. Hank also saw the Magnet and crept up to Shaggy to rub his head
lovingly against the man's knee.

But they were interrupted by the Royal Gardener, who stuck his head
into the greenhouse and shouted angrily:

"You are all condemned to death! Your only chance to escape is to leave
here instantly."

This startled little Betsy, but the Shaggy Man merely waved the Magnet
toward the Gardener, who, seeing it, rushed forward and threw himself
at Shaggy's feet, murmuring in honeyed words:

"Oh, you lovely, lovely man! How fond I am of you! Every shag and
bobtail that decorates you is dear to me--all I have is yours! But for
goodness' sake get out of here before you die the death."

"I'm not going to die," declared Shaggy Man.

"You must. It's the Law," exclaimed the Gardener, beginning to weep
real tears. "It breaks my heart to tell you this bad news, but the Law
says that all strangers must be condemned by the Ruler to die the
death."

"No Ruler has condemned us yet," said Betsy.

"Of course not," added Shaggy. "We haven't even seen the Ruler of the
Rose Kingdom."

"Well, to tell the truth," said the Gardener, in a perplexed tone of
voice, "we haven't any real Ruler, just now. You see, all our Rulers
grow on bushes in the Royal Gardens, and the last one we had got
mildewed and withered before his time. So we had to plant him, and at
this time there is no one growing on the Royal Bushes who is ripe
enough to pick."

"How do you know?" asked Betsy.

"Why, I'm the Royal Gardener. Plenty of royalties are growing, I admit;
but just now they are all green. Until one ripens, I am supposed to
rule the Rose Kingdom myself, and see that its Laws are obeyed.
Therefore, much as I love you, Shaggy, I must put you to death."

"Wait a minute," pleaded Betsy. "I'd like to see those Royal Gardens
before I die."

"So would I," added Shaggy Man. "Take us there, Gardener."

"Oh, I can't do that," objected the Gardener. But Shaggy again showed
him the Love Magnet and after one glance at it the Gardener could no
longer resist.

He led Shaggy, Betsy and Hank to the end of the great greenhouse and
carefully unlocked a small door. Passing through this they came into
the splendid Royal Garden of the Rose Kingdom.

It was all surrounded by a tall hedge and within the enclosure grew
several enormous rosebushes having thick green leaves of the texture of
velvet. Upon these bushes grew the members of the Royal Family of the
Rose Kingdom--men, women and children in all stages of maturity. They
all seemed to have a light green hue, as if unripe or not fully
developed, their flesh and clothing being alike green. They stood
perfectly lifeless upon their branches, which swayed softly in the
breeze, and their wide open eyes stared straight ahead, unseeing and
unintelligent.

While examining these curious growing people, Betsy passed behind a big
central bush and at once uttered an exclamation of surprise and
pleasure. For there, blooming in perfect color and shape, stood a Royal
Princess, whose beauty was amazing.

"Why, she's ripe!" cried Betsy, pushing aside some of the broad leaves
to observe her more clearly.

"Well, perhaps so," admitted the Gardener, who had come to the girl's
side; "but she's a girl, and so we can't use her for a Ruler."

"No, indeed!" came a chorus of soft voices, and looking around Betsy
discovered that all the Roses had followed them from the greenhouse and
were now grouped before the entrance.

"You see," explained the Gardener, "the subjects of Rose Kingdom don't
want a girl Ruler. They want a King."

"A King! We want a King!" repeated the chorus of Roses.

"Isn't she Royal?" inquired Shaggy, admiring the lovely Princess.

"Of course, for she grows on a Royal Bush. This Princess is named Ozga,
as she is a distant cousin of Ozma of Oz; and, were she but a man, we
would joyfully hail her as our Ruler."

The Gardener then turned away to talk with his Roses and Betsy
whispered to her companion: "Let's pick her, Shaggy."

"All right," said he. "If she's royal, she has the right to rule this
Kingdom, and if we pick her she will surely protect us and prevent our
being hurt, or driven away."

So Betsy and Shaggy each took an arm of the beautiful Rose Princess and
a little twist of her feet set her free of the branch upon which she
grew. Very gracefully she stepped down from the bush to the ground,
where she bowed low to Betsy and Shaggy and said in a delightfully
sweet voice: "I thank you."

But at the sound of these words the Gardener and the Roses turned and
discovered that the Princess had been picked, and was now alive. Over
every face flashed an expression of resentment and anger, and one of
the Roses cried aloud.

"Audacious mortals! What have you done?"

"Picked a Princess for you, that's all," replied Betsy, cheerfully.

"But we won't have her! We want a King!" exclaimed a Jacque Rose, and
another added with a voice of scorn: "No girl shall rule over us!"

The newly-picked Princess looked from one to another of her rebellious
subjects in astonishment. A grieved look came over her exquisite
features.

"Have I no welcome here, pretty subjects?" she asked gently. "Have I
not come from my Royal Bush to be your Ruler?"

"You were picked by mortals, without our consent," replied the Moss
Rose, coldly; "so we refuse to allow you to rule us."

"Turn her out, Gardener, with the others!" cried the Tea Rose.

"Just a second, please!" called Shaggy, taking the Love Magnet from his
pocket. "I guess this will win their love, Princess. Here--take it in
your hand and let the roses see it."

Princess Ozga took the Magnet and held it poised before the eyes of her
subjects; but the Roses regarded it with calm disdain.

"Why, what's the matter?" demanded Shaggy in surprise. "The Magnet
never failed to work before!"

"I know," said Betsy, nodding her head wisely. "These Roses have no
hearts."

"That's it," agreed the Gardener. "They're pretty, and sweet, and
alive; but still they are Roses. Their stems have thorns, but no
hearts."

The Princess sighed and handed the Magnet to the Shaggy Man.

"What shall I do?" she asked sorrowfully.

"Turn her out, Gardener, with the others!" commanded the Roses. "We
will have no Ruler until a man-rose--a King--is ripe enough to pick."

"Very well," said the Gardener meekly. "You must excuse me, my dear
Shaggy, for opposing your wishes, but you and the others, including
Ozga, must get out of Rose Kingdom immediately, if not before."

"Don't you love me, Gardy?" asked Shaggy, carelessly displaying the
Magnet.

"I do. I dote on thee!" answered the Gardener earnestly; "but no true
man will neglect his duty for the sake of love. My duty is to drive you
out, so--out you go!"

With this he seized a garden fork and began jabbing it at the
strangers, in order to force them to leave. Hank the mule was not
afraid of the fork and when he got his heels near to the Gardener the
man fell back to avoid a kick.

But now the Roses crowded around the outcasts and it was soon
discovered that beneath their draperies of green leaves were many sharp
thorns which were more dangerous than Hank's heels. Neither Betsy nor
Ozga nor Shaggy nor the mule cared to brave those thorns and when they
pressed away from them they found themselves slowly driven through the
garden door into the greenhouse. From there they were forced out at the
entrance and so through the territory of the flower-strewn Rose
Kingdom, which was not of very great extent.

The Rose Princess was sobbing bitterly; Betsy was indignant and angry;
Hank uttered defiant "Hee-haws" and the Shaggy Man whistled softly to
himself.

The boundary of the Rose Kingdom was a deep gulf, but there was a
drawbridge in one place and this the Royal Gardener let down until the
outcasts had passed over it. Then he drew it up again and returned with
his Roses to the greenhouse, leaving the four queerly assorted comrades
to wander into the bleak and unknown country that lay beyond.

"I don't mind, much," remarked Shaggy, as he led the way over the
stony, barren ground. "I've got to search for my long-lost little
brother, anyhow, so it won't matter where I go."

"Hank and I will help you find your brother," said Betsy in her most
cheerful voice. "I'm so far away from home now that I don't s'pose I'll
ever find my way back; and, to tell the truth, it's more fun traveling
around and having adventures than sticking at home. Don't you think so,
Hank?"

"Hee-haw!" said Hank, and the Shaggy Man thanked them both.

"For my part," said Princess Ozga of Roseland, with a gentle sigh, "I
must remain forever exiled from my Kingdom. So I, too, will be glad to
help the Shaggy Man find his lost brother."

"That's very kind of you, ma'am," said Shaggy. "But unless I can find
the underground cavern of Ruggedo, the Metal Monarch, I shall never
find poor brother."


(This King was formerly named "Roquat," but after he drank of the
"Waters of Oblivion" he forgot his own name and had to take another.)


"Doesn't anyone know where it is?" inquired Betsy.

"_Some_ one must know, of course," was Shaggy's reply. "But we are not
the ones. The only way to succeed is for us to keep going until we find
a person who can direct us to Ruggedo's cavern."

"We may find it ourselves, without any help," suggested Betsy. "Who
knows?"

"No one knows that, except the person who's writing this story," said
Shaggy. "But we won't find anything--not even supper--unless we travel
on. Here's a path. Let's take it and see where it leads to."




Chapter Seven

Polychrome's Pitiful Plight


The Rain King got too much water in his basin and spilled some over the
brim. That made it rain in a certain part of the country--a real hard
shower, for a time--and sent the Rainbow scampering to the place to
show the gorgeous colors of his glorious bow as soon as the mist of
rain had passed and the sky was clear.

The coming of the Rainbow is always a joyous event to earth folk, yet
few have ever seen it close by. Usually the Rainbow is so far distant
that you can observe its splendid hues but dimly, and that is why we
seldom catch sight of the dancing Daughters of the Rainbow.

In the barren country where the rain had just fallen there appeared to
be no human beings at all; but the Rainbow appeared, just the same, and
dancing gayly upon its arch were the Rainbow's Daughters, led by the
fairylike Polychrome, who is so dainty and beautiful that no girl has
ever quite equalled her in loveliness.

Polychrome was in a merry mood and danced down the arch of the bow to
the ground, daring her sisters to follow her. Laughing and gleeful,
they also touched the ground with their twinkling feet; but all the
Daughters of the Rainbow knew that this was a dangerous pastime, so
they quickly climbed upon their bow again.

All but Polychrome. Though the sweetest and merriest of them all, she
was likewise the most reckless. Moreover, it was an unusual sensation
to pat the cold, damp earth with her rosy toes. Before she realized it
the bow had lifted and disappeared in the billowy blue sky, and here
was Polychrome standing helpless upon a rock, her gauzy draperies
floating about her like brilliant cobwebs and not a soul--fairy or
mortal--to help her regain her lost bow!

"Dear me!" she exclaimed, a frown passing across her pretty face, "I'm
caught again. This is the second time my carelessness has left me on
earth while my sisters returned to our Sky Palaces. The first time I
enjoyed some pleasant adventures, but this is a lonely, forsaken
country and I shall be very unhappy until my Rainbow comes again and I
can climb aboard. Let me think what is best to be done."

She crouched low upon the flat rock, drew her draperies about her and
bowed her head.

It was in this position that Betsy Bobbin spied Polychrome as she came
along the stony path, followed by Hank, the Princess and Shaggy. At
once the girl ran up to the radiant Daughter of the Rainbow and
exclaimed:

"Oh, what a lovely, lovely creature!"

Polychrome raised her golden head. There were tears in her blue eyes.

"I'm the most miserable girl in the whole world!" she sobbed.

The others gathered around her.

"Tell us your troubles, pretty one," urged the Princess.

"I--I've lost my bow!" wailed Polychrome.

"Take me, my dear," said Shaggy Man in a sympathetic tone, thinking she
meant "beau" instead of "bow."

"I don't want you!" cried Polychrome, stamping her foot imperiously; "I
want my _Rain_bow."

"Oh; that's different," said Shaggy. "But try to forget it. When I was
young I used to cry for the Rainbow myself, but I couldn't have it.
Looks as if _you_ couldn't have it, either; so please don't cry."

Polychrome looked at him reproachfully.

"I don't like you," she said.

"No?" replied Shaggy, drawing the Love Magnet from his pocket; "not a
little bit?--just a wee speck of a like?"

"Yes, yes!" said Polychrome, clasping her hands in ecstasy as she gazed
at the enchanted talisman; "I love you, Shaggy Man!"

"Of course you do," said he calmly; "but I don't take any credit for
it. It's the Love Magnet's powerful charm. But you seem quite alone and
friendless, little Rainbow. Don't you want to join our party until you
find your father and sisters again?"

"Where are you going?" she asked.

"We don't just know that," said Betsy, taking her hand; "but we're
trying to find Shaggy's long-lost brother, who has been captured by the
terrible Metal Monarch. Won't you come with us, and help us?"

Polychrome looked from one to another of the queer party of travelers
and a bewitching smile suddenly lighted her face.

"A donkey, a mortal maid, a Rose Princess and a Shaggy Man!" she
exclaimed. "Surely you need help, if you intend to face Ruggedo."

"Do you know him, then?" inquired Betsy.

"No, indeed. Ruggedo's caverns are beneath the earth's surface, where
no Rainbow can ever penetrate. But I've heard of the Metal Monarch. He
is also called the Nome King, you know, and he has made trouble for a
good many people--mortals and fairies--in his time," said Polychrome.

"Do you fear him, then?" asked the Princess, anxiously.

"No one can harm a Daughter of the Rainbow," said Polychrome proudly.
"I'm a sky fairy."

"Then," said Betsy, quickly, "you will be able to tell us the way to
Ruggedo's cavern."

"No," returned Polychrome, shaking her head, "that is one thing I
cannot do. But I will gladly go with you and help you search for the
place."

This promise delighted all the wanderers and after the Shaggy Man had
found the path again they began moving along it in a more happy mood.
The Rainbow's Daughter danced lightly over the rocky trail, no longer
sad, but with her beautiful features wreathed in smiles. Shaggy came
next, walking steadily and now and then supporting the Rose Princess,
who followed him. Betsy and Hank brought up the rear, and if she tired
with walking the girl got upon Hank's back and let the stout little
donkey carry her for awhile.

At nightfall they came to some trees that grew beside a tiny brook and
here they made camp and rested until morning. Then away they tramped,
finding berries and fruits here and there which satisfied the hunger of
Betsy, Shaggy and Hank, so that they were well content with their lot.

It surprised Betsy to see the Rose Princess partake of their food, for
she considered her a fairy; but when she mentioned this to Polychrome,
the Rainbow's Daughter explained that when Ozga was driven out of her
Rose Kingdom she ceased to be a fairy and would never again be more
than a mere mortal. Polychrome, however, was a fairy wherever she
happened to be, and if she sipped a few dewdrops by moonlight for
refreshment no one ever saw her do it.

As they continued their wandering journey, direction meant very little
to them, for they were hopelessly lost in this strange country. Shaggy
said it would be best to go toward the mountains, as the natural
entrance to Ruggedo's underground cavern was likely to be hidden in
some rocky, deserted place; but mountains seemed all around them except
in the one direction that they had come from, which led to the Rose
Kingdom and the sea. Therefore it mattered little which way they
traveled.

By and by they espied a faint trail that looked like a path and after
following this for some time they reached a crossroads. Here were many
paths, leading in various directions, and there was a signpost so old
that there were now no words upon the sign. At one side was an old
well, with a chain windlass for drawing water, yet there was no house
or other building anywhere in sight.

While the party halted, puzzled which way to proceed, the mule
approached the well and tried to look into it.

"He's thirsty," said Betsy.

"It's a dry well," remarked Shaggy. "Probably there has been no water
in it for many years. But, come; let us decide which way to travel."

No one seemed able to decide that. They sat down in a group and tried
to consider which road might be the best to take. Hank, however, could
not keep away from the well and finally he reared up on his hind legs,
got his head over the edge and uttered a loud "Hee-haw!" Betsy watched
her animal friend curiously.

"I wonder if he sees anything down there?" she said.

At this, Shaggy rose and went over to the well to investigate, and
Betsy went with him. The Princess and Polychrome, who had become fast
friends, linked arms and sauntered down one of the roads, to find an
easy path.

"Really," said Shaggy, "there does seem to be something at the bottom
of this old well."

"Can't we pull it up, and see what it is?" asked the girl.

There was no bucket at the end of the windlass chain, but there was a
big hook that at one time was used to hold a bucket. Shaggy let down
this hook, dragged it around on the bottom and then pulled it up. An
old hoopskirt came with it, and Betsy laughed and threw it away. The
thing frightened Hank, who had never seen a hoopskirt before, and he
kept a good distance away from it.

Several other objects the Shaggy Man captured with the hook and drew
up, but none of these was important.

"This well seems to have been the dump for all the old rubbish in the
country," he said, letting down the hook once more. "I guess I've
captured everything now. No--the hook has caught again. Help me, Betsy!
Whatever this thing is, it's heavy."

She ran up and helped him turn the windlass and after much effort a
confused mass of copper came in sight.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Shaggy. "Here is a surprise, indeed!"

"What is it?" inquired Betsy, clinging to the windlass and panting for
breath.

For answer the Shaggy Man grasped the bundle of copper and dumped it
upon the ground, free of the well. Then he turned it over with his
foot, spread it out, and to Betsy's astonishment the thing proved to be
a copper man.

"Just as I thought," said Shaggy, looking hard at the object. "But
unless there are two copper men in the world this is the most
astonishing thing I ever came across."

At this moment the Rainbow's Daughter and the Rose Princess approached
them, and Polychrome said:

"What have you found, Shaggy One?"

"Either an old friend, or a stranger," he replied.

"Oh, here's a sign on his back!" cried Betsy, who had knelt down to
examine the man. "Dear me; how funny! Listen to this."

Then she read the following words, engraved upon the copper plates of
the man's body:

            SMITH & TINKER'S
  Patent Double-Action, Extra-Responsive,
  Thought-Creating, Perfect-Talking
            MECHANICAL MAN
  Fitted with our Special Clockwork Attachment.
  Thinks, Speaks, Acts, and Does Everything but Live.


"Isn't he wonderful!" exclaimed the Princess.

"Yes; but here's more," said Betsy, reading from another engraved plate:


            DIRECTIONS FOR USING:

  For THINKING:--Wind the Clockwork
    Man under his left arm, (marked No. 1).
  For SPEAKING:--Wind  the  Clockwork
    Man under his right arm, (marked No. 2).
  For WALKING and ACTION:--Wind Clockwork Man
    in the middle of his back, (marked No. 3).

  N. B.--This Mechanism is guaranteed to
  work perfectly for a thousand years.


"If he's guaranteed for a thousand years," said Polychrome, "he ought
to work yet."

"Of course," replied Shaggy. "Let's wind him up."

In order to do this they were obliged to set the copper man upon his
feet, in an upright position, and this was no easy task. He was
inclined to topple over, and had to be propped again and again. The
girls assisted Shaggy, and at last Tik-Tok seemed to be balanced and
stood alone upon his broad feet.

"Yes," said Shaggy, looking at the copper man carefully, "this must be,
indeed, my old friend Tik-Tok, whom I left ticking merrily in the Land
of Oz. But how he came to this lonely place, and got into that old
well, is surely a mystery."

"If we wind him, perhaps he will tell us," suggested Betsy. "Here's the
key, hanging to a hook on his back. What part of him shall I wind up
first?"

"His thoughts, of course," said Polychrome, "for it requires thought to
speak or move intelligently."

So Betsy wound him under his left arm, and at once little flashes of
light began to show in the top of his head, which was proof that he had
begun to think.

"Now, then," said Shaggy, "wind up his phonograph."

"What's that?" she asked.

"Why, his talking-machine. His thoughts may be interesting, but they
don't tell us anything."

So Betsy wound the copper man under his right arm, and then from the
interior of his copper body came in jerky tones the words: "Ma-ny
thanks!"

"Hurrah!" cried Shaggy, joyfully, and he slapped Tik-Tok upon the back
in such a hearty manner that the copper man lost his balance and
tumbled to the ground in a heap. But the clockwork that enabled him to
speak had been wound up and he kept saying: "Pick-me-up! Pick-me-up!
Pick-me-up!" until they had again raised him and balanced him upon his
feet, when he added politely: "Ma-ny thanks!"

"He won't be self-supporting until we wind up his action," remarked
Shaggy; so Betsy wound it, as tight as she could--for the key turned
rather hard--and then Tik-Tok lifted his feet, marched around in a
circle and ended by stopping before the group and making them all a low
bow.

"How in the world did you happen to be in that well, when I left you
safe in Oz?" inquired Shaggy.

"It is a long sto-ry," replied Tik-Tok, "but I'll tell it in a few
words. Af-ter you had gone in search of your broth-er, Oz-ma saw you
wan-der-ing in strange lands when-ev-er she looked in her mag-ic
pic-ture, and she also saw your broth-er in the Nome King's cavern; so
she sent me to tell you where to find your broth-er and told me to help
you if I could. The Sor-cer-ess, Glin-da the Good, trans-port-ed me to
this place in the wink of an eye; but here I met the Nome King
him-self--old Rug-ge-do, who is called in these parts the Met-al
Mon-arch. Rug-ge-do knew what I had come for, and he was so an-gry that
he threw me down the well. Af-ter my works ran down I was help-less
un-til you came a-long and pulled me out a-gain. Ma-ny thanks."

"This is, indeed, good news," said Shaggy. "I suspected that my brother
was the prisoner of Ruggedo; but now I know it. Tell us, Tik-Tok, how
shall we get to the Nome King's underground cavern?"

"The best way is to walk," said Tik-Tok. "We might crawl, or jump, or
roll o-ver and o-ver until we get there; but the best way is to walk."

"I know; but which road shall we take?"

"My ma-chin-er-y is-n't made to tell that," replied Tik-Tok.

"There is more than one entrance to the underground cavern," said
Polychrome; "but old Ruggedo has cleverly concealed every opening, so
that earth dwellers can not intrude in his domain. If we find our way
underground at all, it will be by chance."

"Then," said Betsy, "let us select any road, haphazard, and see where
it leads us."

"That seems sensible," declared the Princess. "It may require a lot of
time for us to find Ruggedo, but we have more time than anything else."

"If you keep me wound up," said Tik-Tok, "I will last a thou-sand
years."

"Then the only question to decide is which way to go," added Shaggy,
looking first at one road and then at another.

But while they stood hesitating, a peculiar sound reached their ears--a
sound like the tramping of many feet.

"What's coming?" cried Betsy; and then she ran to the left-hand road
and glanced along the path. "Why, it's an army!" she exclaimed. "What
shall we do, hide or run?"

"Stand still," commanded Shaggy. "I'm not afraid of an army. If they
prove to be friendly, they can help us; if they are enemies, I'll show
them the Love Magnet."




Chapter Eight

Tik-Tok Tackles a Tough Task


While Shaggy and his companions stood huddled in a group at one side,
the Army of Oogaboo was approaching along the pathway, the tramp of
their feet being now and then accompanied by a dismal groan as one of
the officers stepped on a sharp stone or knocked his funnybone against
his neighbor's sword-handle.

Then out from among the trees marched Private Files, bearing the banner
of Oogaboo, which fluttered from a long pole. This pole he stuck in the
ground just in front of the well and then he cried in a loud voice:

"I hereby conquer this territory in the name of Queen Ann Soforth of
Oogaboo, and all the inhabitants of the land I proclaim her slaves!"

Some of the officers now stuck their heads out of the bushes and asked:

"Is the coast clear, Private Files?"

"There is no coast here," was the reply, "but all's well."

"I hope there's water in it," said General Cone, mustering courage to
advance to the well; but just then he caught a glimpse of Tik-Tok and
Shaggy and at once fell upon his knees, trembling and frightened and
cried out:

"Mercy, kind enemies! Mercy! Spare us, and we will be your slaves
forever!"

The other officers, who had now advanced into the clearing, likewise
fell upon their knees and begged for mercy.

Files turned around and, seeing the strangers for the first time,
examined them with much curiosity. Then, discovering that three of the
party were girls, he lifted his cap and made a polite bow.

"What's all this?" demanded a harsh voice, as Queen Ann reached the
place and beheld her kneeling army.

"Permit us to introduce ourselves," replied Shaggy, stepping forward.
"This is Tik-Tok, the Clockwork Man--who works better than some meat
people. And here is Princess Ozga of Roseland, just now unfortunately
exiled from her Kingdom of Roses. I next present Polychrome, a sky
fairy, who lost her Bow by an accident and can't find her way home. The
small girl here is Betsy Bobbin, from some unknown earthly paradise
called Oklahoma, and with her you see Mr. Hank, a mule with a long tail
and a short temper."

"Puh!" said Ann, scornfully; "a pretty lot of vagabonds you are,
indeed; all lost or strayed, I suppose, and not worth a Queen's
plundering. I'm sorry I've conquered you."

"But you haven't conquered us yet," called Betsy indignantly.

"No," agreed Files, "that is a fact. But if my officers will kindly
command me to conquer you, I will do so at once, after which we can
stop arguing and converse more at our ease."

The officers had by this time risen from their knees and brushed the
dust from their trousers. To them the enemy did not look very fierce,
so the Generals and Colonels and Majors and Captains gained courage to
face them and began strutting in their most haughty manner.

"You must understand," said Ann, "that I am the Queen of Oogaboo, and
this is my invincible Army. We are busy conquering the world, and since
you seem to be a part of the world, and are obstructing our journey, it
is necessary for us to conquer you--unworthy though you may be of such
high honor."

"That's all right," replied Shaggy. "Conquer us as often as you like.
We don't mind."

"But we won't be anybody's slaves," added Betsy, positively.

"We'll see about that," retorted the Queen, angrily. "Advance, Private
Files, and bind the enemy hand and foot!"

But Private Files looked at pretty Betsy and fascinating Polychrome and
the beautiful Rose Princess and shook his head.

"It would be impolite, and I won't do it," he asserted.

"You must!" cried Ann. "It is your duty to obey orders."

"I haven't received any orders from my officers," objected the Private.

But the Generals now shouted: "Forward, and bind the prisoners!" and
the Colonels and Majors and Captains repeated the command, yelling it
as loud as they could.

All this noise annoyed Hank, who had been eyeing the Army of Oogaboo
with strong disfavor. The mule now dashed forward and began backing
upon the officers and kicking fierce and dangerous heels at them. The
attack was so sudden that the officers scattered like dust in a
whirlwind, dropping their swords as they ran and trying to seek refuge
behind the trees and bushes.

Betsy laughed joyously at the comical rout of the "noble army," and
Polychrome danced with glee. But Ann was furious at this ignoble defeat
of her gallant forces by one small mule.

"Private Files, I command you to do your duty!" she cried again, and
then she herself ducked to escape the mule's heels--for Hank made no
distinction in favor of a lady who was an open enemy. Betsy grabbed her
champion by the forelock, however, and so held him fast, and when the
officers saw that the mule was restrained from further attacks they
crept fearfully back and picked up their discarded swords.

"Private Files, seize and bind these prisoners!" screamed the Queen.

"No," said Files, throwing down his gun and removing the knapsack which
was strapped to his back, "I resign my position as the Army of Oogaboo.
I enlisted to fight the enemy and become a hero, but if you want some
one to bind harmless girls you will have to hire another Private."

Then he walked over to the others and shook hands with Shaggy and
Tik-Tok.

"Treason!" shrieked Ann, and all the officers echoed her cry.

"Nonsense," said Files. "I've the right to resign if I want to."

"Indeed you haven't!" retorted the Queen. "If you resign it will break
up my Army, and then I cannot conquer the world." She now turned to the
officers and said: "I must ask you to do me a favor. I know it is
undignified in officers to fight, but unless you immediately capture
Private Files and force him to obey my orders there will be no plunder
for any of us. Also it is likely you will all suffer the pangs of
hunger, and when we meet a powerful foe you are liable to be captured
and made slaves."

The prospect of this awful fate so frightened the officers that they
drew their swords and rushed upon Files, who stood beside Shaggy, in a
truly ferocious manner. The next instant, however, they halted and
again fell upon their knees; for there, before them, was the glistening
Love Magnet, held in the hand of the smiling Shaggy Man, and the sight
of this magic talisman at once won the heart of every Oogabooite. Even
Ann saw the Love Magnet, and forgetting all enmity and anger threw
herself upon Shaggy and embraced him lovingly.

Quite disconcerted by this unexpected effect of the Magnet, Shaggy
disengaged himself from the Queen's encircling arms and quickly hid the
talisman in his pocket. The adventurers from Oogaboo were now his firm
friends, and there was no more talk about conquering and binding any of
his party.

"If you insist on conquering anyone," said Shaggy, "you may march with
me to the underground Kingdom of Ruggedo. To conquer the world, as you
have set out to do, you must conquer everyone under its surface as well
as those upon its surface, and no one in all the world needs conquering
so much as Ruggedo."

"Who is he?" asked Ann.

"The Metal Monarch, King of the Nomes."

"Is he rich?" inquired Major Stockings in an anxious voice.

"Of course," answered Shaggy. "He owns all the metal that lies
underground--gold, silver, copper, brass and tin. He has an idea he
also owns all the metals above ground, for he says all metal was once a
part of his kingdom. So, by conquering the Metal Monarch, you will win
all the riches in the world."

"Ah!" exclaimed General Apple, heaving a deep sigh, "that would be
plunder worth our while. Let's conquer him, Your Majesty."

The Queen looked reproachfully at Files, who was sitting next to the
lovely Princess and whispering in her ear.

"Alas," said Ann, "I have no longer an Army. I have plenty of brave
officers, indeed, but no private soldier for them to command. Therefore
I cannot conquer Ruggedo and win all his wealth."

"Why don't you make one of your officers the Private?" asked Shaggy;
but at once every officer began to protest and the Queen of Oogaboo
shook her head as she replied:

"That is impossible. A private soldier must be a terrible fighter, and
my officers are unable to fight. They are exceptionally brave in
commanding others to fight, but could not themselves meet the enemy and
conquer."

"Very true, Your Majesty," said Colonel Plum, eagerly. "There are many
kinds of bravery and one cannot be expected to possess them all. I
myself am brave as a lion in all ways until it comes to fighting, but
then my nature revolts. Fighting is unkind and liable to be injurious
to others; so, being a gentleman, I never fight."

"Nor I!" shouted each of the other officers.

"You see," said Ann, "how helpless I am. Had not Private Files proved
himself a traitor and a deserter, I would gladly have conquered this
Ruggedo; but an Army without a private soldier is like a bee without a
stinger."

"I am not a traitor, Your Majesty," protested Files. "I resigned in a
proper manner, not liking the job. But there are plenty of people to
take my place. Why not make Shaggy Man the private soldier?"

"He might be killed," said Ann, looking tenderly at Shaggy, "for he is
mortal, and able to die. If anything happened to him, it would break my
heart."

"It would hurt me worse than that," declared Shaggy. "You must admit,
Your Majesty, that I am commander of this expedition, for it is my
brother we are seeking, rather than plunder. But I and my companions
would like the assistance of your Army, and if you help us to conquer
Ruggedo and to rescue my brother from captivity we will allow you to
keep all the gold and jewels and other plunder you may find."

This prospect was so tempting that the officers began whispering
together and presently Colonel Cheese said: "Your Majesty, by combining
our brains we have just evolved a most brilliant idea. We will make the
Clockwork Man the private soldier!"

"Who? Me?" asked Tik-Tok. "Not for a sin-gle sec-ond! I can-not fight,
and you must not for-get that it was Rug-ge-do who threw me in the
well."

"At that time you had no gun," said Polychrome. "But if you join the
Army of Oogaboo you will carry the gun that Mr. Files used."

"A sol-dier must be a-ble to run as well as to fight," protested
Tik-Tok, "and if my works run down, as they of-ten do, I could nei-ther
run nor fight."

"I'll keep you wound up, Tik-Tok," promised Betsy.

"Why, it isn't a bad idea," said Shaggy. "Tik-Tok will make an ideal
soldier, for nothing can injure him except a sledge hammer. And, since
a private soldier seems to be necessary to this Army, Tik-Tok is the
only one of our party fitted to undertake the job."

"What must I do?" asked Tik-Tok.

"Obey orders," replied Ann. "When the officers command you to do
anything, you must do it; that is all."

"And that's enough, too," said Files.

"Do I get a salary?" inquired Tik-Tok.

"You get your share of the plunder," answered the Queen.

"Yes," remarked Files, "one-half of the plunder goes to Queen Ann, the
other half is divided among the officers, and the Private gets the
rest."

"That will be sat-is-fac-tor-y," said Tik-Tok, picking up the gun and
examining it wonderingly, for he had never before seen such a weapon.

Then Ann strapped the knapsack to Tik-Tok's copper back and said: "Now
we are ready to march to Ruggedo's Kingdom and conquer it. Officers,
give the command to march."

"Fall--in!" yelled the Generals, drawing their swords.

"Fall--in!" cried the Colonels, drawing their swords.

"Fall--in!" shouted the Majors, drawing their swords.

"Fall--in!" bawled the Captains, drawing their swords.

Tik-Tok looked at them and then around him in surprise.

"Fall in what? The well?" he asked.

"No," said Queen Ann, "you must fall in marching order."

"Can-not I march without fall-ing in-to it?" asked the Clockwork Man.

"Shoulder your gun and stand ready to march," advised Files; so Tik-Tok
held the gun straight and stood still.

"What next?" he asked.

The Queen turned to Shaggy.

"Which road leads to the Metal Monarch's cavern?"

"We don't know, Your Majesty," was the reply.

"But this is absurd!" said Ann with a frown. "If we can't get to
Ruggedo, it is certain that we can't conquer him."

"You are right," admitted Shaggy; "but I did not say we could not get
to him. We have only to discover the way, and that was the matter we
were considering when you and your magnificent Army arrived here."

"Well, then, get busy and discover it," snapped the Queen.

That was no easy task. They all stood looking from one road to another
in perplexity. The paths radiated from the little clearing like the
rays of the midday sun, and each path seemed like all the others.

Files and the Rose Princess, who had by this time become good friends,
advanced a little way along one of the roads and found that it was
bordered by pretty wild flowers.

"Why don't you ask the flowers to tell you the way?" he said to his
companion.

"The flowers?" returned the Princess, surprised at the question.

"Of course," said Files. "The field-flowers must be second-cousins to a
Rose Princess, and I believe if you ask them they will tell you."

She looked more closely at the flowers. There were hundreds of white
daisies, golden buttercups, bluebells and daffodils growing by the
roadside, and each flower-head was firmly set upon its slender but
stout stem. There were even a few wild roses scattered here and there
and perhaps it was the sight of these that gave the Princess courage to
ask the important question.

She dropped to her knees, facing the flowers, and extended both her
arms pleadingly toward them.

"Tell me, pretty cousins," she said in her sweet, gentle voice, "which
way will lead us to the Kingdom of Ruggedo, the Nome King?"

At once all the stems bent gracefully to the right and the flower heads
nodded once--twice--thrice in that direction.

"That's it!" cried Files joyfully. "Now we know the way."

Ozga rose to her feet and looked wonderingly at the field-flowers,
which had now resumed their upright position.

"Was it the wind, do you think?" she asked in a low whisper.

"No, indeed," replied Files. "There is not a breath of wind stirring.
But these lovely blossoms are indeed your cousins and answered your
question at once, as I knew they would."




Chapter Nine

Ruggedo's Rage is Rash and Reckless


The way taken by the adventurers led up hill and down dale and wound
here and there in a fashion that seemed aimless. But always it drew
nearer to a range of low mountains and Files said more than once that
he was certain the entrance to Ruggedo's cavern would be found among
these rugged hills.

In this he was quite correct. Far underneath the nearest mountain was a
gorgeous chamber hollowed from the solid rock, the walls and roof of
which glittered with thousands of magnificent jewels. Here, on a throne
of virgin gold, sat the famous Nome King, dressed in splendid robes and
wearing a superb crown cut from a single blood-red ruby.

Ruggedo, the Monarch of all the Metals and Precious Stones of the
Underground World, was a round little man with a flowing white beard, a
red face, bright eyes and a scowl that covered all his forehead. One
would think, to look at him, that he ought to be jolly; one might
think, considering his enormous wealth, that he ought to be happy; but
this was not the case. The Metal Monarch was surly and cross because
mortals had dug so much treasure out of the earth and kept it above
ground, where all the power of Ruggedo and his nomes was unable to
recover it. He hated not only the mortals but also the fairies who live
upon the earth or above it, and instead of being content with the
riches he still possessed he was unhappy because he did not own all the
gold and jewels in the world.

Ruggedo had been nodding, half asleep, in his chair when suddenly he
sat upright, uttered a roar of rage and began pounding upon a huge gong
that stood beside him.

The sound filled the vast cavern and penetrated to many caverns beyond,
where countless thousands of nomes were working at their unending
tasks, hammering out gold and silver and other metals, or melting ores
in great furnaces, or polishing glittering gems. The nomes trembled at
the sound of the King's gong and whispered fearfully to one another
that something unpleasant was sure to happen; but none dared pause in
his task.

The heavy curtains of cloth-of-gold were pushed aside and Kaliko, the
King's High Chamberlain, entered the royal presence.

"What's up, Your Majesty?" he asked, with a wide yawn, for he had just
wakened.

"Up?" roared Ruggedo, stamping his foot viciously. "Those foolish
mortals are up, that's what! And they want to come down."

"Down here?" inquired Kaliko.

"Yes!"

"How do you know?" continued the Chamberlain, yawning again.

"I feel it in my bones," said Ruggedo. "I can always feel it when those
hateful earth-crawlers draw near to my Kingdom. I am positive, Kaliko,
that mortals are this very minute on their way here to annoy me--and I
hate mortals more than I do catnip tea!"

"Well, what's to be done?" demanded the nome.

"Look through your spyglass, and see where the invaders are," commanded
the King.

So Kaliko went to a tube in the wall of rock and put his eye to it. The
tube ran from the cavern up to the side of the mountain and turned
several curves and corners, but as it was a magic spyglass Kaliko was
able to see through it just as easily as if it had been straight.

"Ho--hum," said he. "I see 'em, Your Majesty."

"What do they look like?" inquired the Monarch.

"That's a hard question to answer, for a queerer assortment of
creatures I never yet beheld," replied the nome. "However, such a
collection of curiosities may prove dangerous. There's a copper man,
worked by machinery--"

"Bah! that's only Tik-Tok," said Ruggedo. "I'm not afraid of him. Why,
only the other day I met the fellow and threw him down a well."

"Then some one must have pulled him out again," said Kaliko. "And
there's a little girl--"

"Dorothy?" asked Ruggedo, jumping up in fear.

"No; some other girl. In fact, there are several girls, of various
sizes; but Dorothy is not with them, nor is Ozma."

"That's good!" exclaimed the King, sighing in relief.

Kaliko still had his eye to the spyglass.

"I see," said he, "an army of men from Oogaboo. They are all officers
and carry swords. And there is a Shaggy Man--who seems very
harmless--and a little donkey with big ears."

"Pooh!" cried Ruggedo, snapping his fingers in scorn. "I've no fear of
such a mob as that. A dozen of my nomes can destroy them all in a
jiffy."

"I'm not so sure of that," said Kaliko. "The people of Oogaboo are hard
to destroy, and I believe the Rose Princess is a fairy. As for
Polychrome, you know very well that the Rainbow's Daughter cannot be
injured by a nome."

"Polychrome! Is she among them?" asked the King.

"Yes; I have just recognized her."

"Then these people are coming here on no peaceful errand," declared
Ruggedo, scowling fiercely. "In fact, no one ever comes here on a
peaceful errand. I hate everybody, and everybody hates me!"

"Very true," said Kaliko.

"I must in some way prevent these people from reaching my dominions.
Where are they now?"

"Just now they are crossing the Rubber Country, Your Majesty."

"Good! Are your magnetic rubber wires in working order?"

"I think so," replied Kaliko. "Is it your Royal Will that we have some
fun with these invaders?"

"It is," answered Ruggedo. "I want to teach them a lesson they will
never forget."

Now, Shaggy had no idea that he was in a Rubber Country, nor had any of
his companions. They noticed that everything around them was of a dull
gray color and that the path upon which they walked was soft and
springy, yet they had no suspicion that the rocks and trees were rubber
and even the path they trod was made of rubber.

Presently they came to a brook where sparkling water dashed through a
deep channel and rushed away between high rocks far down the
mountain-side. Across the brook were stepping-stones, so placed that
travelers might easily leap from one to another and in that manner
cross the water to the farther bank.

Tik-Tok was marching ahead, followed by his officers and Queen Ann.
After them came Betsy Bobbin and Hank, Polychrome and Shaggy, and last
of all the Rose Princess with Files. The Clockwork Man saw the stream
and the stepping-stones and, without making a pause, placed his foot
upon the first stone.

The result was astonishing. First he sank down in the soft rubber,
which then rebounded and sent Tik-Tok soaring high in the air, where he
turned a succession of flip-flops and alighted upon a rubber rock far
in the rear of the party.

General Apple did not see Tik-Tok bound, so quickly had he disappeared;
therefore he also stepped upon the stone (which you will guess was
connected with Kaliko's magnetic rubber wire) and instantly shot upward
like an arrow. General Cone came next and met with a like fate, but the
others now noticed that something was wrong and with one accord they
halted the column and looked back along the path.

There was Tik-Tok, still bounding from one rubber rock to another, each
time rising a less distance from the ground. And there was General
Apple, bounding away in another direction, his three-cornered hat
jammed over his eyes and his long sword thumping him upon the arms and
head as it swung this way and that. And there, also, appeared General
Cone, who had struck a rubber rock headforemost and was so crumpled up
that his round body looked more like a bouncing-ball than the form of a
man.

Betsy laughed merrily at the strange sight and Polychrome echoed her
laughter. But Ozga was grave and wondering, while Queen Ann became
angry at seeing the chief officers of the Army of Oogaboo bounding
around in so undignified a manner. She shouted to them to stop, but
they were unable to obey, even though they would have been glad to do
so. Finally, however, they all ceased bounding and managed to get upon
their feet and rejoin the Army.

"Why did you do that?" demanded Ann, who seemed greatly provoked.

"Don't ask them why," said Shaggy earnestly. "I knew you would ask them
why, but you ought not to do it. The reason is plain. Those stones are
rubber; therefore they are not stones. Those rocks around us are
rubber, and therefore they are not rocks. Even this path is not a path;
it's rubber. Unless we are very careful, your Majesty, we are all
likely to get the bounce, just as your poor officers and Tik-Tok did."

"Then let's be careful," remarked Files, who was full of wisdom; but
Polychrome wanted to test the quality of the rubber, so she began
dancing. Every step sent her higher and higher into the air, so that
she resembled a big butterfly fluttering lightly. Presently she made a
great bound and bounded way across the stream, landing lightly and
steadily on the other side.

"There is no rubber over here," she called to them. "Suppose you all
try to bound over the stream, without touching the stepping-stones."

Ann and her officers were reluctant to undertake such a risky
adventure, but Betsy at once grasped the value of the suggestion and
began jumping up and down until she found herself bounding almost as
high as Polychrome had done. Then she suddenly leaned forward and the
next bound took her easily across the brook, where she alighted by the
side of the Rainbow's Daughter.

"Come on, Hank!" called the girl, and the donkey tried to obey. He
managed to bound pretty high but when he tried to bound across the
stream he misjudged the distance and fell with a splash into the middle
of the water.

"Hee-haw!" he wailed, struggling toward the far bank. Betsy rushed
forward to help him out, but when the mule stood safely beside her she
was amazed to find he was not wet at all.

"It's dry water," said Polychrome, dipping her hand into the stream and
showing how the water fell from it and left it perfectly dry.

"In that case," returned Betsy, "they can all walk through the water."

She called to Ozga and Shaggy to wade across, assuring them the water
was shallow and would not wet them. At once they followed her advice,
avoiding the rubber stepping stones, and made the crossing with ease.
This encouraged the entire party to wade through the dry water, and in
a few minutes all had assembled on the bank and renewed their journey
along the path that led to the Nome King's dominions.

When Kaliko again looked through his magic spyglass he exclaimed:

"Bad luck, Your Majesty! All the invaders have passed the Rubber
Country and now are fast approaching the entrance to your caverns."

Ruggedo raved and stormed at the news and his anger was so great that
several times, as he strode up and down his jeweled cavern, he paused
to kick Kaliko upon his shins, which were so sensitive that the poor
nome howled with pain. Finally the King said:

"There's no help for it; we must drop these audacious invaders down the
Hollow Tube."

Kaliko gave a jump, at this, and looked at his master wonderingly.

"If you do that, Your Majesty," he said, "you will make Tititi-Hoochoo
very angry."

"Never mind that," retorted Ruggedo. "Tititi-Hoochoo lives on the other
side of the world, so what do I care for his anger?"

Kaliko shuddered and uttered a little groan.

"Remember his terrible powers," he pleaded, "and remember that he
warned you, the last time you slid people through the Hollow Tube, that
if you did it again he would take vengeance upon you."

The Metal Monarch walked up and down in silence, thinking deeply.

"Of two dangers," said he, "it is wise to choose the least. What do you
suppose these invaders want?"

"Let the Long-Eared Hearer listen to them," suggested Kaliko.

"Call him here at once!" commanded Ruggedo eagerly.

So in a few minutes there entered the cavern a nome with enormous ears,
who bowed low before the King.

"Strangers are approaching," said Ruggedo, "and I wish to know their
errand. Listen carefully to their talk and tell me why they are coming
here, and what for."

The nome bowed again and spread out his great ears, swaying them gently
up and down and back and forth. For half an hour he stood silent, in an
attitude of listening, while both the King and Kaliko grew impatient at
the delay. At last the Long-Eared Hearer spoke:

"Shaggy Man is coming here to rescue his brother from captivity," said
he.

"Ha, the Ugly One!" exclaimed Ruggedo. "Well, Shaggy Man may have his
ugly brother, for all I care. He's too lazy to work and is always
getting in my way. Where is the Ugly One now, Kaliko?"

"The last time Your Majesty stumbled over the prisoner you commanded me
to send him to the Metal Forest, which I did. I suppose he is still
there."

"Very good. The invaders will have a hard time finding the Metal
Forest," said the King, with a grin of malicious delight, "for half the
time I can't find it myself. Yet I created the forest and made every
tree, out of gold and silver, so as to keep the precious metals in a
safe place and out of the reach of mortals. But tell me, Hearer, do the
strangers want anything else?"

"Yes, indeed they do!" returned the nome. "The Army of Oogaboo is
determined to capture all the rich metals and rare jewels in your
kingdom, and the officers and their Queen have arranged to divide the
spoils and carry them away."

When he heard this Ruggedo uttered a bellow of rage and began dancing
up and down, rolling his eyes, clicking his teeth together and swinging
his arms furiously. Then, in an ecstasy of anger he seized the long
ears of the Hearer and pulled and twisted them cruelly; but Kaliko
grabbed up the King's sceptre and rapped him over the knuckles with it,
so that Ruggedo let go the ears and began to chase his Royal
Chamberlain around the throne.

The Hearer took advantage of this opportunity to slip away from the
cavern and escape, and after the King had tired himself out chasing
Kaliko he threw himself into his throne and panted for breath, while he
glared wickedly at his defiant subject.

"You'd better save your strength to fight the enemy," suggested Kaliko.
"There will be a terrible battle when the Army of Oogaboo gets here."

"The Army won't get here," said the King, still coughing and panting.
"I'll drop 'em down the Hollow Tube--every man Jack and every girl Jill
of 'em!"

"And defy Tititi-Hoochoo?" asked Kaliko.

"Yes. Go at once to my Chief Magician and order him to turn the path
toward the Hollow Tube, and to make the tip of the Tube invisible, so
they'll all fall into it."

Kaliko went away shaking his head, for he thought Ruggedo was making a
great mistake.  He found the Magician and had the path twisted so that
it led directly to the opening of the Hollow Tube, and this opening he
made invisible.

Having obeyed the orders of his master, the Royal Chamberlain went to
his private room and began to write letters of recommendation of
himself, stating that he was an honest man, a good servant and a small
eater.

"Pretty soon," he said to himself, "I shall have to look for another
job, for it is certain that Ruggedo has ruined himself by this reckless
defiance of the mighty Tititi-Hoochoo. And in seeking a job nothing is
so effective as a letter of recommendation."




Chapter Ten

A Terrible Tumble Through a Tube


I suppose that Polychrome, and perhaps Queen Ann and her Army, might
have been able to dispel the enchantment of Ruggedo's Chief Magician
had they known that danger lay in their pathway; for the Rainbow's
Daughter was a fairy and as Oogaboo is a part of the Land of Oz its
inhabitants cannot easily be deceived by such common magic as the Nome
King could command. But no one suspected any especial danger until
after they had entered Ruggedo's cavern, and so they were journeying
along in quite a contented manner when Tik-Tok, who marched ahead,
suddenly disappeared.

The officers thought he must have turned a corner, so they kept on
their way and all of them likewise disappeared--one after another.
Queen Ann was rather surprised at this, and in hastening forward to
learn the reason she also vanished from sight.

Betsy Bobbin had tired her feet by walking, so she was now riding upon
the back of the stout little mule, facing backward and talking to
Shaggy and Polychrome, who were just behind. Suddenly Hank pitched
forward and began falling and Betsy would have tumbled over his head
had she not grabbed the mule's shaggy neck with both arms and held on
for dear life.

All around was darkness, and they were not falling directly downward
but seemed to be sliding along a steep incline. Hank's hoofs were
resting upon some smooth substance over which he slid with the
swiftness of the wind. Once Betsy's heels flew up and struck a similar
substance overhead. They were, indeed, descending the "Hollow Tube"
that led to the other side of the world.

"Stop, Hank--stop!" cried the girl; but Hank only uttered a plaintive
"Hee-haw!" for it was impossible for him to obey.

After several minutes had passed and no harm had befallen them, Betsy
gained courage. She could see nothing at all, nor could she hear
anything except the rush of air past her ears as they plunged downward
along the Tube. Whether she and Hank were alone, or the others were
with them, she could not tell. But had some one been able to take a
flash-light photograph of the Tube at that time a most curious picture
would have resulted. There was Tik-Tok, flat upon his back and sliding
headforemost down the incline. And there were the Officers of the Army
of Oogaboo, all tangled up in a confused crowd, flapping their arms and
trying to shield their faces from the clanking swords, which swung back
and forth during the swift journey and pommeled everyone within their
reach. Now followed Queen Ann, who had struck the Tube in a sitting
position and went flying along with a dash and abandon that thoroughly
bewildered the poor lady, who had no idea what had happened to her.
Then, a little distance away, but unseen by the others in the inky
darkness, slid Betsy and Hank, while behind them were Shaggy and
Polychrome and finally Files and the Princess.

When first they tumbled into the Tube all were too dazed to think
clearly, but the trip was a long one, because the cavity led straight
through the earth to a place just opposite the Nome King's dominions,
and long before the adventurers got to the end they had begun to
recover their wits.

"This is awful, Hank!" cried Betsy in a loud voice, and Queen Ann heard
her and called out: "Are you safe, Betsy?"

"Mercy, no!" answered the little girl. "How could anyone be safe when
she's going about sixty miles a minute?" Then, after a pause, she
added: "But where do you s'pose we're going to, Your Maj'sty?"

"Don't ask her that, please don't!" said Shaggy, who was not too far
away to overhear them. "And please don't ask me why, either."

"Why?" said Betsy.

"No one can tell where we are going until we get there," replied
Shaggy, and then he yelled "Ouch!" for Polychrome had overtaken him and
was now sitting on his head.

The Rainbow's Daughter laughed merrily, and so infectious was this
joyous laugh that Betsy echoed it and Hank said "Hee haw!" in a mild
and sympathetic tone of voice.

"I'd like to know where and when we'll arrive, just the same,"
exclaimed the little girl.

"Be patient and you'll find out, my dear," said Polychrome. "But isn't
this an odd experience? Here am I, whose home is in the skies, making a
journey through the center of the earth--where I never expected to be!"

"How do you know we're in the center of the earth?" asked Betsy, her
voice trembling a little through nervousness.

"Why, we can t be anywhere else," replied Polychrome. "I have often
heard of this passage, which was once built by a Magician who was a
great traveler. He thought it would save him the bother of going around
the earth's surface, but he tumbled through the Tube so fast that he
shot out at the other end and hit a star in the sky, which at once
exploded."

"The star exploded?" asked Betsy wonderingly.

"Yes; the Magician hit it so hard."

"And what became of the Magician?" inquired the girl.

"No one knows that," answered Polychrome. "But I don't think it matters
much."

"It matters a good deal, if we also hit the stars when we come out,"
said Queen Ann, with a moan.

"Don't worry," advised Polychrome. "I believe the Magician was going
the other way, and probably he went much faster than we are going."

"It's fast enough to suit me," remarked Shaggy, gently removing
Polychrome's heel from his left eye. "Couldn't you manage to fall all
by yourself, my dear?"

"I'll try," laughed the Rainbow's Daughter.

All this time they were swiftly falling through the Tube, and it was
not so easy for them to talk as you may imagine when you read their
words. But although they were so helpless and altogether in the dark as
to their fate, the fact that they were able to converse at all cheered
them, considerably.

Files and Ozga were also conversing as they clung tightly to one
another, and the young fellow bravely strove to reassure the Princess,
although he was terribly frightened, both on her account and on his own.

An hour, under such trying circumstances, is a very long time, and for
more than an hour they continued their fearful journey. Then, just as
they began to fear the Tube would never end, Tik-Tok popped out into
broad daylight and, after making a graceful circle in the air, fell
with a splash into a great marble fountain.

Out came the officers, in quick succession, tumbling heels over head
and striking the ground in many undignified attitudes.

"For the love of sassafras!" exclaimed a Peculiar Person who was hoeing
pink violets in a garden. "What can all this mean?"

For answer, Queen Ann sailed up from the Tube, took a ride through the
air as high as the treetops, and alighted squarely on top of the
Peculiar Person's head, smashing a jeweled crown over his eyes and
tumbling him to the ground.

The mule was heavier and had Betsy clinging to his back, so he did not
go so high up. Fortunately for his little rider he struck the ground
upon his four feet. Betsy was jarred a trifle but not hurt and when she
looked around her she saw the Queen and the Peculiar Person struggling
together upon the ground, where the man was trying to choke Ann and she
had both hands in his bushy hair and was pulling with all her might.
Some of the officers, when they got upon their feet, hastened to
separate the combatants and sought to restrain the Peculiar Person so
that he could not attack their Queen again.

By this time, Shaggy, Polychrome, Ozga and Files had all arrived and
were curiously examining the strange country in which they found
themselves and which they knew to be exactly on the opposite side of
the world from the place where they had fallen into the Tube. It was a
lovely place, indeed, and seemed to be the garden of some great Prince,
for through the vistas of trees and shrubbery could be seen the towers
of an immense castle. But as yet the only inhabitant to greet them was
the Peculiar Person just mentioned, who had shaken off the grasp of the
officers without effort and was now trying to pull the battered crown
from off his eyes.

Shaggy, who was always polite, helped him to do this and when the man
was free and could see again he looked at his visitors with evident
amazement.

"Well, well, well!" he exclaimed. "Where did you come from and how did
you get here?"

Betsy tried to answer him, for Queen Ann was surly and silent.

"I can't say, exac'ly where we came from, 'cause I don't know the name
of the place," said the girl, "but the way we got here was through the
Hollow Tube."

"Don't call it a 'hollow' Tube, please," exclaimed the Peculiar Person
in an irritated tone of voice. "If it's a tube, it's sure to be hollow."

"Why?" asked Betsy.

"Because all tubes are made that way. But this Tube is private property
and everyone is forbidden to fall into it."

"We didn't do it on purpose," explained Betsy, and Polychrome added: "I
am quite sure that Ruggedo, the Nome King, pushed us down that Tube."

"Ha! Ruggedo! Did  you say Ruggedo?" cried the man, becoming much
excited.

"That is what she said," replied Shaggy, "and I believe she is right.
We were on our way to conquer the Nome King when suddenly we fell into
the Tube."

"Then you are enemies of Ruggedo?" inquired the peculiar Person.

"Not exac'ly enemies," said Betsy, a little puzzled by the question,
"'cause we don't know him at all; but we started out to conquer him,
which isn't as friendly as it might be."

"True," agreed the man. He looked thoughtfully from one to another of
them for a while and then he turned his head over his shoulder and
said: "Never mind the fire and pincers, my good brothers. It will be
best to take these strangers to the Private Citizen."

"Very well, Tubekins," responded a Voice, deep and powerful, that
seemed to come out of the air, for the speaker was invisible.

All our friends gave a jump, at this. Even Polychrome was so startled
that her gauze draperies fluttered like a banner in a breeze. Shaggy
shook his head and sighed; Queen Ann looked very unhappy; the officers
clung to each other, trembling violently.

But soon they gained courage to look more closely at the Peculiar
Person. As he was a type of all the inhabitants of this extraordinary
land whom they afterward met, I will try to tell you what he looked
like.

His face was beautiful, but lacked expression. His eyes were large and
blue in color and his teeth finely formed and white as snow. His hair
was black and bushy and seemed inclined to curl at the ends. So far no
one could find any fault with his appearance. He wore a robe of
scarlet, which did not cover his arms and extended no lower than his
bare knees. On the bosom of the robe was embroidered a terrible
dragon's head, as horrible to look at as the man was beautiful. His
arms and legs were left bare and the skin of one arm was bright yellow
and the skin of the other arm a vivid green. He had one blue leg and
one pink one, while both his feet--which showed through the open
sandals he wore--were jet black.

Betsy could not decide whether these gorgeous colors were dyes or the
natural tints of the skin, but while she was thinking it over the man
who had been called "Tubekins" said:

"Follow me to the Residence--all of you!"

But just then a Voice exclaimed: "Here's another of them, Tubekins,
lying in the water of the fountain."

"Gracious!" cried Betsy; "it must be Tik-Tok, and he'll drown."

"Water is a bad thing for his clockworks, anyhow," agreed Shaggy, as
with one accord they all started for the fountain. But before they
could reach it, invisible hands raised Tik-Tok from the marble basin
and set him upon his feet beside it, water dripping from every joint of
his copper body.

"Ma--ny tha--tha--tha--thanks!" he said; and then his copper jaws
clicked together and he could say no more. He next made an attempt to
walk but after several awkward trials found he could not move his
joints.

Peals of jeering laughter from persons unseen greeted Tik-Tok's
failure, and the new arrivals in this strange land found it very
uncomfortable to realize that there were many creatures around them who
were invisible, yet could be heard plainly.

"Shall I wind him up?" asked Betsy, feeling very sorry for Tik-Tok.

"I think his machinery is wound; but he needs oiling," replied Shaggy.

At once an oil-can appeared before him, held on a level with his eyes
by some unseen hand. Shaggy took the can and tried to oil Tik-Tok's
joints. As if to assist him, a strong current of warm air was directed
against the copper man which quickly dried him. Soon he was able to say
"Ma-ny thanks!" quite smoothly and his joints worked fairly well.

"Come!" commanded Tubekins, and turning his back upon them he walked up
the path toward the castle.

"Shall we go?" asked Queen Ann, uncertainly; but just then she received
a shove that almost pitched her forward on her head; so she decided to
go. The officers who hesitated received several energetic kicks, but
could not see who delivered them; therefore they also decided--very
wisely--to go. The others followed willingly enough, for unless they
ventured upon another terrible journey through the Tube they must make
the best of the unknown country they were in, and the best seemed to be
to obey orders.




Chapter Eleven

The Famous Fellowship of Fairies


After a short walk through very beautiful gardens they came to the
castle and followed Tubekins through the entrance and into a great
domed chamber, where he commanded them to be seated.

From the crown which he wore, Betsy had thought this man must be the
King of the country they were in, yet after he had seated all the
strangers upon benches that were ranged in a semicircle before a high
throne, Tubekins bowed humbly before the vacant throne and in a flash
became invisible and disappeared.

The hall was an immense place, but there seemed to be no one in it
beside themselves. Presently, however, they heard a low cough near
them, and here and there was the faint rustling of a robe and a slight
patter as of footsteps. Then suddenly there rang out the clear tone of
a bell and at the sound all was changed.

Gazing around the hall in bewilderment they saw that it was filled with
hundreds of men and women, all with beautiful faces and staring blue
eyes and all wearing scarlet robes and jeweled crowns upon their heads.
In fact, these people seemed exact duplicates of Tubekins and it was
difficult to find any mark by which to tell them apart.

"My! what a lot of Kings and Queens!" whispered Betsy to Polychrome,
who sat beside her and appeared much interested in the scene but not a
bit worried.

"It is certainly a strange sight," was Polychrome's reply; "but I
cannot see how there can be more than one King, or Queen, in any one
country, for were these all rulers, no one could tell who was Master."

One of the Kings who stood near and overheard this remark turned to her
and said: "One who is Master of himself is always a King, if only to
himself. In this favored land all Kings and Queens are equal, and it is
our privilege to bow before one supreme Ruler--the Private Citizen."

"Who's he?" inquired Betsy.

As if to answer her, the clear tones of the bell again rang out and
instantly there appeared seated in the throne the man who was lord and
master of all these royal ones. This fact was evident when with one
accord they fell upon their knees and touched their foreheads to the
floor.

The Private Citizen was not unlike the others, except that his eyes
were black instead of blue and in the centers of the black irises
glowed red sparks that seemed like coals of fire. But his features were
very beautiful and dignified and his manner composed and stately.
Instead of the prevalent scarlet robe, he wore one of white, and the
same dragon's head that decorated the others was embroidered upon its
bosom.

"What charge lies against these people, Tubekins?" he asked in quiet,
even tones.

"They came through the forbidden Tube, O Mighty Citizen," was the reply.

"You see, it was this way," said Betsy. "We were marching to the Nome
King, to conquer him and set Shaggy's brother free, when on a sudden--"

"Who are you?" demanded the Private Citizen sternly.

"Me? Oh, I'm Betsy Bobbin, and--"

"Who is the leader of this party?" asked the Citizen.

"Sir, I am Queen Ann of Oogaboo, and--"

"Then keep quiet," said the Citizen. "Who is the leader?"

No one answered for a moment. Then General Bunn stood up.

"Sit down!" commanded the Citizen. "I can see that sixteen of you are
merely officers, and of no account."

"But we have an Army," said General Clock, blusteringly, for he didn't
like to be told he was of no account.

"Where is your Army?" asked the Citizen.

"It's me," said Tik-Tok, his voice sounding a little rusty. "I'm the
on-ly Pri-vate Sol-dier in the par-ty."

Hearing this, the Citizen rose and bowed respectfully to the Clockwork
Man.

"Pardon me for not realizing your importance before," said he. "Will
you oblige me by taking a seat beside me on my throne?"

Tik-Tok rose and walked over to the throne, all the Kings and Queens
making way for him. Then with clanking steps he mounted the platform
and sat on the broad seat beside the Citizen.

Ann was greatly provoked at this mark of favor shown to the humble
Clockwork Man, but Shaggy seemed much pleased that his old friend's
importance had been recognized by the ruler of this remarkable country.
The Citizen now began to question Tik-Tok, who told in his mechanical
voice about Shaggy's quest of his lost brother, and how Ozma of Oz had
sent the Clockwork Man to assist him, and how they had fallen in with
Queen Ann and her people from Oogaboo. Also he told how Betsy and Hank
and Polychrome and the Rose Princess had happened to join their party.

"And you intended to conquer Ruggedo, the Metal Monarch and King of the
Nomes?" asked the Citizen.

"Yes. That seemed the on-ly thing for us to do," was Tik-Tok's reply.
"But he was too clev-er for us. When we got close to his cav-ern he
made our path lead to the Tube, and made the op-en-ing in-vis-i-ble, so
that we all fell in-to it be-fore we knew it was there. It was an eas-y
way to get rid of us and now Rug-gedo is safe and we are far a-way in a
strange land."

The Citizen was silent a moment and seemed to be thinking. Then he said:

"Most noble Private Soldier, I must inform you that by the laws of our
country anyone who comes through the Forbidden Tube must be tortured
for nine days and ten nights and then thrown back into the Tube. But it
is wise to disregard laws when they conflict with justice, and it seems
that you and your followers did not disobey our laws willingly, being
forced into the Tube by Ruggedo. Therefore the Nome King is alone to
blame, and he alone must be punished."

"That suits me," said Tik-Tok. "But Rug-ge-do is on the o-ther side of
the world where he is a-way out of your reach."

The Citizen drew himself up proudly.

"Do you imagine anything in the world or upon it can be out of the
reach of the Great Jinjin?" he asked.

"Oh! Are you, then, the Great Jinjin?" inquired Tik-Tok.

"I am."

"Then your name is Ti-ti-ti-Hoo-choo?"

"It is."

Queen Ann gave a scream and began to tremble. Shaggy was so disturbed
that he took out a handkerchief and wiped the perspiration from his
brow. Polychrome looked sober and uneasy for the first time, while
Files put his arms around the Rose Princess as if to protect her. As
for the officers, the name of the great Jinjin set them moaning and
weeping at a great rate and every one fell upon his knees before the
throne, begging for mercy. Betsy was worried at seeing her companions
so disturbed, but did not know what it was all about. Only Tik-Tok was
unmoved at the discovery.

"Then," said he, "if you are Ti-ti-ti-Hoo-choo, and think Rug-ge-do is
to blame, I am sure that some-thing queer will hap-pen to the King of
the Nomes."

"I wonder what 'twill be," said Betsy.

The Private Citizen--otherwise known as Tititi-Hoochoo, the Great
Jinjin--looked at the little girl steadily.

"I will presently decide what is to happen to Ruggedo," said he in a
hard, stern voice. Then, turning to the throng of Kings and Queens, he
continued: "Tik-Tok has spoken truly, for his machinery will not allow
him to lie, nor will it allow his thoughts to think falsely. Therefore
these people are not our enemies and must be treated with consideration
and justice. Take them to your palaces and entertain them as guests
until to-morrow, when I command that they be brought again to my
Residence. By then I shall have formed my plans."

No sooner had Tititi-Hoochoo spoken than he disappeared from sight.
Immediately after, most of the Kings and Queens likewise disappeared.
But several of them remained visible and approached the strangers with
great respect. One of the lovely Queens said to Betsy:

"I trust you will honor me by being my guest. I am Erma, Queen of
Light."

"May Hank come with me?" asked the girl.

"The King of Animals will care for your mule," was the reply. "But do
not fear for him, for he will be treated royally. All of your party
will be reunited on the morrow."

"I--I'd like to have _some_ one with me," said Betsy, pleadingly.

Queen Erma looked around and smiled upon Polychrome.

"Will the Rainbow's Daughter be an agreeable companion?" she asked.

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed the girl.

So Polychrome and Betsy became guests of the Queen of Light, while
other beautiful Kings and Queens took charge of the others of the party.

The two girls followed Erma out of the hall and through the gardens of
the Residence to a village of pretty dwellings. None of these was so
large or imposing as the castle of the Private Citizen, but all were
handsome enough to be called palaces--as, in fact, they really were.




Chapter Twelve

The Lovely Lady of Light


The palace of the Queen of Light stood on a little eminence and was a
mass of crystal windows, surmounted by a vast crystal dome. When they
entered the portals Erma was greeted by six lovely maidens, evidently
of high degree, who at once aroused Betsy's admiration. Each bore a
wand in her hand, tipped with an emblem of light, and their costumes
were also emblematic of the lights they represented. Erma introduced
them to her guests and each made a graceful and courteous
acknowledgment.

First was Sunlight, radiantly beautiful and very fair; the second was
Moonlight, a soft, dreamy damsel with nut-brown hair; next came
Starlight, equally lovely but inclined to be retiring and shy. These
three were dressed in shimmering robes of silvery white. The fourth was
Daylight, a brilliant damsel with laughing eyes and frank manners, who
wore a variety of colors. Then came Firelight, clothed in a fleecy
flame-colored robe that wavered around her shapely form in a very
attractive manner. The sixth maiden, Electra, was the most beautiful of
all, and Betsy thought from the first that both Sunlight and Daylight
regarded Electra with envy and were a little jealous of her.

But all were cordial in their greetings to the strangers and seemed to
regard the Queen of Light with much affection, for they fluttered
around her in a flashing, radiant group as she led the way to her regal
drawing-room.

This apartment was richly and cosily furnished, the upholstery being of
many tints, and both Betsy and Polychrome enjoyed resting themselves
upon the downy divans after their strenuous adventures of the day.

The Queen sat down to chat with her guests, who noticed that Daylight
was the only maiden now seated beside Erma. The others had retired to
another part of the room, where they sat modestly with entwined arms
and did not intrude themselves at all.

The Queen told the strangers all about this beautiful land, which is
one of the chief residences of fairies who minister to the needs of
mankind. So many important fairies lived there that, to avoid rivalry,
they had elected as their Ruler the only important personage in the
country who had no duties to mankind to perform and was, in effect, a
Private Citizen. This Ruler, or Jinjin, as was his title, bore the name
of Tititi-Hoochoo, and the most singular thing about him was that he
had no heart. But instead of this he possessed a high degree of Reason
and Justice and while he showed no mercy in his judgments he never
punished unjustly or without reason. To wrong-doers Tititi-Hoochoo was
as terrible as he was heartless, but those who were innocent of evil
had nothing to fear from him.

All the Kings and Queens of this fairyland paid reverence to Jinjin,
for as they expected to be obeyed by others they were willing to obey
the one in authority over them.

The inhabitants of the Land of Oz had heard many tales of this
fearfully just Jinjin, whose punishments were always equal to the
faults committed. Polychrome also knew of him, although this was the
first time she had ever seen him face to face. But to Betsy the story
was all new, and she was greatly interested in Tititi-Hoochoo, whom she
no longer feared.

Time sped swiftly during their talk and suddenly Betsy noticed that
Moonlight was sitting beside the Queen of Light, instead of Daylight.

"But tell me, please," she pleaded, "why do you all wear a dragon's
head embroidered on your gowns?"

Erma's pleasant face became grave as she answered:

"The Dragon, as you must know, was the first living creature ever made;
therefore the Dragon is the oldest and wisest of living things. By good
fortune the Original Dragon, who still lives, is a resident of this
land and supplies us with wisdom whenever we are in need of it. He is
old as the world and remembers everything that has happened since the
world was created."

"Did he ever have any children?" inquired the girl.

"Yes, many of them. Some wandered into other lands, where men, not
understanding them, made war upon them; but many still reside in this
country. None, however, is as wise as the Original Dragon, for whom we
have great respect. As he was the first resident here, we wear the
emblem of the dragon's head to show that we are the favored people who
alone have the right to inhabit this fairyland, which in beauty almost
equals the Fairyland of Oz, and in power quite surpasses it."

"I understand about the dragon, now," said Polychrome, nodding her
lovely head. Betsy did not quite understand, but she was at present
interested in observing the changing lights. As Daylight had given way
to Moonlight, so now Starlight sat at the right hand of Erma the Queen,
and with her coming a spirit of peace and content seemed to fill the
room. Polychrome, being herself a fairy, had many questions to ask
about the various Kings and Queens who lived in this far-away, secluded
place, and before Erma had finished answering them a rosy glow filled
the room and Firelight took her place beside the Queen.

Betsy liked Firelight, but to gaze upon her warm and glowing features
made the little girl sleepy, and presently she began to nod. Thereupon
Erma rose and took Betsy's hand gently in her own.

"Come," said she; "the feast time has arrived and the feast is spread."

"That's nice," exclaimed the small mortal. "Now that I think of it, I'm
awful hungry. But p'raps I can't eat your fairy food."

The Queen smiled and led her to a doorway. As she pushed aside a heavy
drapery a flood of silvery light greeted them, and Betsy saw before her
a splendid banquet hall, with a table spread with snowy linen and
crystal and silver. At one side was a broad, throne-like seat for Erma
and beside her now sat the brilliant maid Electra. Polychrome was
placed on the Queen's right hand and Betsy upon her left. The other
five messengers of light now waited upon them, and each person was
supplied with just the food she liked best. Polychrome found her dish
of dewdrops, all fresh and sparkling, while Betsy was so lavishly
served that she decided she had never in her life eaten a dinner half
so good.

"I s'pose," she said to the Queen, "that Miss Electra is the youngest
of all these girls."

"Why do you suppose that?" inquired Erma, with a smile.

"'Cause electric'ty is the newest light we know of. Didn't Mr. Edison
discover it?"

"Perhaps he was the first mortal to discover it," replied the Queen.
"But electricity was a part of the world from its creation, and
therefore my Electra is as old as Daylight or Moonlight, and equally
beneficent to mortals and fairies alike."

Betsy was thoughtful for a time. Then she remarked, as she looked at
the six messengers of light:

"We couldn't very well do without any of 'em; could we?"

Erma laughed softly. "_I_ couldn't, I'm sure," she replied, "and I think
mortals would miss any one of my maidens, as well. Daylight cannot take
the place of Sunlight, which gives us strength and energy. Moonlight is
of value when Daylight, worn out with her long watch, retires to rest.
If the moon in its course is hidden behind the earth's rim, and my
sweet Moonlight cannot cheer us, Starlight takes her place, for the
skies always lend her power. Without Firelight we should miss much of
our warmth and comfort, as well as much cheer when the walls of houses
encompass us. But always, when other lights forsake us, our glorious
Electra is ready to flood us with bright rays. As Queen of Light, I
love all my maidens, for I know them to be faithful and true."

"I love 'em, too!" declared Betsy. "But sometimes, when I'm _real_
sleepy, I can get along without any light at all."

"Are you sleepy now?" inquired Erma, for the feast had ended.

"A little," admitted the girl.

So Electra showed her to a pretty chamber where there was a soft, white
bed, and waited patiently until Betsy had undressed and put on a
shimmery silken nightrobe that lay beside her pillow. Then the
light-maid bade her good night and opened the door.

When she closed it after her Betsy was in darkness. In six winks the
little girl was fast asleep.




Chapter Thirteen

The Jinjin's Just Judgment


All the adventurers were reunited next morning when they were brought
from various palaces to the Residence of Tititi-Hoochoo and ushered
into the great Hall of State.

As before, no one was visible except our friends and their escorts
until the first bell sounded. Then in a flash the room was seen to be
filled with the beautiful Kings and Queens of the land. The second bell
marked the appearance in the throne of the mighty Jinjin, whose
handsome countenance was as composed and expressionless as ever.

All bowed low to the Ruler. Their voices softly murmured: "We greet the
Private Citizen, mightiest of Rulers, whose word is Law and whose Law
is just."

Tititi-Hoochoo bowed in acknowledgment. Then, looking around the
brilliant assemblage, and at the little group of adventurers before
him, he said:

"An unusual thing has happened. Inhabitants of other lands than ours,
who are different from ourselves in many ways, have been thrust upon us
through the Forbidden Tube, which one of our people foolishly made
years ago and was properly punished for his folly. But these strangers
had no desire to come here and were wickedly thrust into the Tube by a
cruel King on the other side of the world, named Ruggedo. This King is
an immortal, but he is not good. His magic powers hurt mankind more
than they benefit them. Because he had unjustly kept the Shaggy Man's
brother a prisoner, this little band of honest people, consisting of
both mortals and immortals, determined to conquer Ruggedo and to punish
him. Fearing they might succeed in this, the Nome King misled them so
that they fell into the Tube.

"Now, this same Ruggedo has been warned by me, many times, that if ever
he used this Forbidden Tube in any way he would be severely punished. I
find, by referring to the Fairy Records, that this King's servant, a
nome named Kaliko, begged his master not to do such a wrong act as to
drop these people into the Tube and send them tumbling into our
country. But Ruggedo defied me and my orders.

"Therefore these strangers are innocent of any wrong. It is only
Ruggedo who deserves punishment, and I will punish him." He paused a
moment and then continued in the same cold, merciless voice:

"These strangers must return through the Tube to their own side of the
world; but I will make their fall more easy and pleasant than it was
before. Also I shall send with them an Instrument of Vengeance, who in
my name will drive Ruggedo from his underground caverns, take away his
magic powers and make him a homeless wanderer on the face of the
earth--a place he detests."

There was a little murmur of horror from the Kings and Queens at the
severity of this punishment, but no one uttered a protest, for all
realized that the sentence was just.

"In selecting my Instrument of Vengeance," went on Tititi-Hoochoo, "I
have realized that this will be an unpleasant mission. Therefore no one
of us who is blameless should be forced to undertake it. In this
wonderful land it is seldom one is guilty of wrong, even in the
slightest degree, and on examining the Records I found no King or Queen
had erred. Nor had any among their followers or servants done any
wrong. But finally I came to the Dragon Family, which we highly
respect, and then it was that I discovered the error of Quox.

"Quox, as you well know, is a young dragon who has not yet acquired the
wisdom of his race. Because of this lack, he has been disrespectful
toward his most ancient ancestor, the Original Dragon, telling him once
to mind his own business and again saying that the Ancient One had
grown foolish with age. We are aware that dragons are not the same as
fairies and cannot be altogether guided by our laws, yet such
disrespect as Quox has shown should not be unnoticed by us. Therefore I
have selected Quox as my royal Instrument of Vengeance and he shall go
through the Tube with these people and inflict upon Ruggedo the
punishment I have decreed."

All had listened quietly to this speech and now the Kings and Queens
bowed gravely to signify their approval of the Jinjin's judgment.

Tititi-Hoochoo turned to Tubekins.

"I command you," said he, "to escort these strangers to the Tube and
see that they all enter it."

The King of the Tube, who had first discovered our friends and brought
them to the Private Citizen, stepped forward and bowed. As he did so,
the Jinjin and all the Kings and Queens suddenly disappeared and only
Tubekins remained visible.

"All right," said Betsy, with a sigh; "I don't mind going back so
_very_ much, 'cause the Jinjin promised to make it easy for us."

Indeed, Queen Ann and her officers were the only ones who looked solemn
and seemed to fear the return journey. One thing that bothered Ann was
her failure to conquer this land of Tititi-Hoochoo. As they followed
their guide through the gardens to the mouth of the Tube she said to
Shaggy:

"How can I conquer the world, if I go away and leave this rich country
unconquered?"

"You can't," he replied. "Don't ask me why, please, for if you don't
know I can't inform you."

"Why not?" said Ann; but Shaggy paid no attention to the question.

This end of the Tube had a silver rim and around it was a gold railing
to which was attached a sign that read.

  "IF YOU ARE OUT, STAY THERE.
  IF YOU ARE IN, DON'T COME OUT."


On a little silver plate just inside the Tube was engraved the words:


  "Burrowed and built by
  Hiergargo the Magician,
  In the Year of the World
  1 9 6 2 5 4 7 8
  For his own exclusive uses."


"He was some builder, I must say," remarked Betsy, when she had read
the inscription; "but if he had known about that star I guess he'd have
spent his time playing solitaire."

"Well, what are we waiting for?" inquired Shaggy, who was impatient to
start.

"Quox," replied Tubekins. "But I think I hear him coming."

"Is the young dragon invisible?" asked Ann, who had never seen a live
dragon and was a little fearful of meeting one.

"No, indeed," replied the King of the Tube. "You'll see him in a
minute; but before you part company I'm sure you'll wish he _was_
invisible."

"Is he dangerous, then?" questioned Files.

"Not at all. But Quox tires me dreadfully," said Tubekins, "and I
prefer his room to his company."

At that instant a scraping sound was heard, drawing nearer and nearer
until from between two big bushes appeared a huge dragon, who
approached the party, nodded his head and said: "Good morning."

Had Quox been at all bashful I am sure he would have felt uncomfortable
at the astonished stare of every eye in the group--except Tubekins, of
course, who was not astonished because he had seen Quox so often.

Betsy had thought a "young" dragon must be a small dragon, yet here was
one so enormous that the girl decided he must be full grown, if not
overgrown. His body was a lovely sky-blue in color and it was thickly
set with glittering silver scales, each one as big as a serving-tray.
Around his neck was a pink ribbon with a bow just under his left ear,
and below the ribbon appeared a chain of pearls to which was attached a
golden locket about as large around as the end of a bass drum. This
locket was set with many large and beautiful jewels.

The head and face of Quox were not especially ugly, when you consider
that he was a dragon; but his eyes were so large that it took him a
long time to wink and his teeth seemed very sharp and terrible when
they showed, which they did whenever the beast smiled. Also his
nostrils were quite large and wide, and those who stood near him were
liable to smell brimstone--especially when he breathed out fire, as it
is the nature of dragons to do. To the end of his long tail was
attached a big electric light.

Perhaps the most singular thing about the dragon's appearance at this
time was the fact that he had a row of seats attached to his back, one
seat for each member of the party. These seats were double, with curved
backs, so that two could sit in them, and there were twelve of these
double seats, all strapped firmly around the dragon's thick body and
placed one behind the other, in a row that extended from his shoulders
nearly to his tail.

"Aha!" exclaimed Tubekins; "I see that Tititi-Hoochoo has transformed
Quox into a carryall."

"I'm glad of that," said Betsy. "I hope, Mr. Dragon, you won't mind our
riding on your back."

"Not a bit," replied Quox. "I'm in disgrace just now, you know, and the
only way to redeem my good name is to obey the orders of the Jinjin. If
he makes me a beast of burden, it is only a part of my punishment, and
I must bear it like a dragon. I don't blame you people at all, and I
hope you'll enjoy the ride. Hop on, please. All aboard for the other
side of the world!"

Silently they took their places. Hank sat in the front seat with Betsy,
so that he could rest his front hoofs upon the dragon's head. Behind
them were Shaggy and Polychrome, then Files and the Princess, and Queen
Ann and Tik-Tok. The officers rode in the rear seats. When all had
mounted to their places the dragon looked very like one of those
sightseeing wagons so common in big cities--only he had legs instead of
wheels.

"All ready?" asked Quox, and when they said they were he crawled to the
mouth of the Tube and put his head in.

"Good-bye, and good luck to you!" called Tubekins; but no one thought
to reply, because just then the dragon slid his great body into the
Tube and the journey to the other side of the world had begun.

At first they went so fast that they could scarcely catch their
breaths, but presently Quox slowed up and said with a sort of cackling
laugh:

"My scales! but that is some tumble. I think I shall take it easy and
fall slower, or I'm likely to get dizzy. Is it very far to the other
side of the world?"

"Haven't you ever been through this Tube before?" inquired Shaggy.

"Never. Nor has anyone else in our country; at least, not since I was
born."

"How long ago was that?" asked Betsy.

"That I was born? Oh, not very long ago. I'm only a mere child. If I
had not been sent on this journey, I would have celebrated my three
thousand and fifty-sixth birthday next Thursday. Mother was going to
make me a birthday cake with three thousand and fifty-six candles on
it; but now, of course, there will be no celebration, for I fear I
shall not get home in time for it."

"Three thousand and fifty-six years!" cried Betsy. "Why, I had no idea
anything could live that long!"

"My respected Ancestor, whom I would call a stupid old humbug if I had
not reformed, is so old that I am a mere baby compared with him," said
Quox. "He dates from the beginning of the world, and insists on telling
us stories of things that happened fifty thousand years ago, which are
of no interest at all to youngsters like me. In fact, Grandpa isn't up
to date. He lives altogether in the past, so I can't see any good
reason for his being alive to-day.... Are you people able to see your
way, or shall I turn on more light?"

"Oh, we can see very nicely, thank you; only there's nothing to see but
ourselves," answered Betsy.

This was true. The dragon's big eyes were like headlights on an
automobile and illuminated the Tube far ahead of them. Also he curled
his tail upward so that the electric light on the end of it enabled
them to see one another quite clearly. But the Tube itself was only
dark metal, smooth as glass but exactly the same from one of its ends
to the other. Therefore there was no scenery of interest to beguile the
journey.

They were now falling so gently that the trip was proving entirely
comfortable, as the Jinjin had promised it would be; but this meant a
longer journey and the only way they could make time pass was to engage
in conversation. The dragon seemed a willing and persistent talker and
he was of so much interest to them that they encouraged him to chatter.
His voice was a little gruff but not unpleasant when one became used to
it.

"My only fear," said he presently, "is that this constant sliding over
the surface of the Tube will dull my claws. You see, this hole isn't
straight down, but on a steep slant, and so instead of tumbling freely
through the air I must skate along the Tube. Fortunately, there is a
file in my tool-kit, and if my claws get dull they can be sharpened
again."

"Why do you want sharp claws?" asked Betsy.

"They are my natural weapons, and you must not forget that I have been
sent to conquer Ruggedo."

"Oh, you needn't mind about that," remarked Queen Ann, in her most
haughty manner; "for when we get to Ruggedo I and my invincible Army
can conquer him without your assistance."

"Very good," returned the dragon, cheerfully. "That will save me a lot
of bother--if you succeed. But I think I shall file my claws, just the
same."

He gave a long sigh, as he said this, and a sheet of flame, several
feet in length, shot from his mouth. Betsy shuddered and Hank said
"Hee-haw!" while some of the officers screamed in terror. But the
dragon did not notice that he had done anything unusual.

"Is there fire inside of you?" asked Shaggy.

"Of course," answered Quox. "What sort of a dragon would I be if my
fire went out?"

"What keeps it going?" Betsy inquired.

"I've no idea. I only know it's there," said Quox. "The fire keeps me
alive and enables me to move; also to think and speak."

"Ah! You are ver-y much like my-self," said Tik-Tok. "The on-ly
dif-fer-ence is that I move by clock-work, while you move by fire."

"I don't see a particle of likeness between us, I must confess,"
retorted Quox, gruffly. "You are not a live thing; you're a dummy."

"But I can do things, you must ad-mit," said Tik-Tok.

"Yes, when you are wound up," sneered the dragon. "But if you run down,
you are helpless."

"What would happen to you, Quox, if you ran out of gasoline?" inquired
Shaggy, who did not like this attack upon his friend.

"I don't use gasoline."

"Well, suppose you ran out of fire."

"What's the use of supposing that?" asked Quox.  "My
great-great-great-grandfather has lived since the world began, and he
has never once run out of fire to keep him going. But I will confide to
you that as he gets older he shows more smoke and less fire. As for
Tik-Tok, he's well enough in his way, but he's merely copper. And the
Metal Monarch knows copper through and through. I wouldn't be surprised
if Ruggedo melted Tik-Tok in one of his furnaces and made copper
pennies of him."

"In that case, I would still keep going," remarked Tik-Tok, calmly.

"Pennies do," said Betsy regretfully.

"This is all nonsense," said the Queen, with irritation. "Tik-Tok is my
great Army--all but the officers--and I believe he will be able to
conquer Ruggedo with ease. What do you think, Polychrome?"

"You might let him try," answered the Rainbow's Daughter, with her
sweet ringing laugh, that sounded like the tinkling of tiny bells. "And
if Tik-Tok fails, you have still the big fire-breathing dragon to fall
back on."

"Ah!" said the dragon, another sheet of flame gushing from his mouth
and nostrils; "it's a wise little girl, this Polychrome. Anyone would
know she is a fairy."




Chapter Fourteen

The Long-Eared Hearer Learns by Listening


During this time Ruggedo, the Metal Monarch and King of the Nomes, was
trying to amuse himself in his splendid jeweled cavern. It was hard
work for Ruggedo to find amusement to-day, for all the nomes were
behaving well and there was no one to scold or to punish. The King had
thrown his sceptre at Kaliko six times, without hitting him once. Not
that Kaliko had done anything wrong. On the contrary, he had obeyed the
King in every way but one: he would not stand still, when commanded to
do so, and let the heavy sceptre strike him.

We can hardly blame Kaliko for this, and even the cruel Ruggedo forgave
him; for he knew very well that if he mashed his Royal Chamberlain he
could never find another so intelligent and obedient. Kaliko could make
the nomes work when their King could not, for the nomes hated Ruggedo
and there were so many thousands of the quaint little underground
people that they could easily have rebelled and defied the King had
they dared to do so. Sometimes, when Ruggedo abused them worse than
usual, they grew sullen and threw down their hammers and picks. Then,
however hard the King scolded or whipped them, they would not work
until Kaliko came and begged them to. For Kaliko was one of themselves
and was as much abused by the King as any nome in the vast series of
caverns.

But to-day all the little people were working industriously at their
tasks and Ruggedo, having nothing to do, was greatly bored. He sent for
the Long-Eared Hearer and asked him to listen carefully and report what
was going on in the big world.

"It seems," said the Hearer, after listening for awhile, "that the
women in America have clubs."

"Are there spikes in them?" asked Ruggedo, yawning.

"I cannot hear any spikes, Your Majesty," was the reply.

"Then their clubs are not as good as my sceptre. What else do you hear?'

"There's a war.

"Bah! there's always a war. What else?"

For a time the Hearer was silent, bending forward and spreading out his
big ears to catch the slightest sound. Then suddenly he said:

"Here is an interesting thing, Your Majesty. These people are arguing
as to who shall conquer the Metal Monarch, seize his treasure and drive
him from his dominions."

"What people?" demanded Ruggedo, sitting up straight in his throne.

"The ones you threw down the Hollow Tube."

"Where are they now?"

"In the same Tube, and coming back this way," said the Hearer.

Ruggedo got out of his throne and began to pace up and down the cavern.

"I wonder what can be done to stop them," he mused.

"Well," said the Hearer, "if you could turn the Tube upside down, they
would be falling the other way, Your Majesty."

Ruggedo glared at him wickedly, for it was impossible to turn the Tube
upside down and he believed the Hearer was slyly poking fun at him.
Presently he asked:

"How far away are those people now?"

"About nine thousand three hundred and six miles, seventeen furlongs,
eight feet and four inches--as nearly as I can judge from the sound of
their voices," replied the Hearer.

"Aha! Then it will be some time before they arrive," said Ruggedo, "and
when they get here I shall be ready to receive them."

He rushed to his gong and pounded upon it so fiercely that Kaliko came
bounding into the cavern with one shoe off and one shoe on, for he was
just dressing himself after a swim in the hot bubbling lake of the
Underground Kingdom.

"Kaliko, those invaders whom we threw down the Tube are coming back
again!" he exclaimed.

"I thought they would," said the Royal Chamberlain, pulling on the
other shoe. "Tititi-Hoochoo would not allow them to remain in his
kingdom, of course, and so I've been expecting them back for some time.
That was a very foolish action of yours, Rug."

"What, to throw them down the Tube?"

"Yes. Tititi-Hoochoo has forbidden us to throw even rubbish into the
Tube."

"Pooh! what do I care for the Jinjin?" asked Ruggedo scornfully. "He
never leaves his own kingdom, which is on the other side of the world."

"True; but he might send some one through the Tube to punish you,"
suggested Kaliko.

"I'd like to see him do it! Who could conquer my thousands of nomes?"

"Why, they've been conquered before, if I remember aright," answered
Kaliko with a grin. "Once I saw you running from a little girl named
Dorothy, and her friends, as if you were really afraid."

"Well, I _was_ afraid, that time," admitted the Nome King, with a deep
sigh, "for Dorothy had a Yellow Hen that laid eggs!"

The King shuddered as he said "eggs," and Kaliko also shuddered, and so
did the Long-Eared Hearer; for eggs are the only things that the nomes
greatly dread. The reason for this is that eggs belong on the earth's
surface, where birds and fowl of all sorts live, and there is something
about a hen's egg, especially, that fills a nome with horror. If by
chance the inside of an egg touches one of these underground people, he
withers up and blows away and that is the end of him--unless he manages
quickly to speak a magical word which only a few of the nomes know.
Therefore Ruggedo and his followers had very good cause to shudder at
the mere mention of eggs.

"But Dorothy," said the King, "is not with this band of invaders; nor
is the Yellow Hen. As for Tititi-Hoochoo, he has no means of knowing
that we are afraid of eggs."

"You mustn't be too sure of that," Kaliko warned him. "Tititi-Hoochoo
knows a great many things, being a fairy, and his powers are far
superior to any we can boast."

Ruggedo shrugged impatiently and turned to the Hearer.

"Listen," said he, "and tell me if you hear any eggs coming through the
Tube."

The Long-Eared one listened and then shook his head. But Kaliko laughed
at the King.

"No one can hear an egg, Your Majesty," said he. "The only way to
discover the truth is to look through the Magic Spyglass."

"That's it!" cried the King. "Why didn't I think of it before? Look at
once, Kaliko!"

So Kaliko went to the Spyglass and by uttering a mumbled charm he
caused the other end of it to twist around, so that it pointed down the
opening of the Tube. Then he put his eye to the glass and was able to
gaze along all the turns and windings of the Magic Spyglass and then
deep into the Tube, to where our friends were at that time falling.

"Dear me!" he exclaimed. "Here comes a dragon."

"A big one?" asked Ruggedo.

"A monster. He has an electric light on the end of his tail, so I can
see him very plainly. And the other people are all riding upon his
back."

"How about the eggs?" inquired the King.

Kaliko looked again.

"I can see no eggs at all," said he; "but I imagine that the dragon is
as dangerous as eggs. Probably Tititi-Hoochoo has sent him here to
punish you for dropping those strangers into the Forbidden Tube. I
warned you not to do it, Your Majesty."

This news made the Nome King anxious. For a few minutes he paced up and
down, stroking his long beard and thinking with all his might. After
this he turned to Kaliko and said:

"All the harm a dragon can do is to scratch with his claws and bite
with his teeth."

"That is not all, but it's quite enough," returned Kaliko earnestly.
"On the other hand, no one can hurt a dragon, because he's the toughest
creature alive. One flop of his huge tail could smash a hundred nomes
to pancakes, and with teeth and claws he could tear even you or me into
small bits, so that it would be almost impossible to put us together
again. Once, a few hundred years ago, while wandering through some
deserted caverns, I came upon a small piece of a nome lying on the
rocky floor. I asked the piece of nome what had happened to it.
Fortunately the mouth was a part of this piece--the mouth and the left
eye--so it was able to tell me that a fierce dragon was the cause. It
had attacked the poor nome and scattered him in every direction, and as
there was no friend near to collect his pieces and put him together,
they had been separated for a great many years. So you see, Your
Majesty, it is not in good taste to sneer at a dragon."

The King had listened attentively to Kaliko. Said he:

"It will only be necessary to chain this dragon which Tititi-Hoochoo
has sent here, in order to prevent his reaching us with his claws and
teeth."

"He also breathes flames," Kaliko reminded him.

"My nomes are not afraid of fire, nor am I," said Ruggedo.

"Well, how about the Army of Oogaboo?"

"Sixteen cowardly officers and Tik-Tok! Why, I could defeat them
single-handed; but I won't try to. I'll summon my army of nomes to
drive the invaders out of my territory, and if we catch any of them I
intend to stick needles into them until they hop with pain."

"I hope you won't hurt any of the girls," said Kaliko.

"I'll hurt 'em all!" roared the angry Metal Monarch. "And that braying
Mule I'll make into hoof-soup, and feed it to my nomes, that it may add
to their strength."

"Why not be good to the strangers and release your prisoner, the Shaggy
Man's brother?" suggested Kaliko.

"Never!"

"It may save you a lot of annoyance. And you don't want the Ugly One."

"I don't want him; that's true. But I won't allow anybody to order me
around. I'm King of the Nomes and I'm the Metal Monarch, and I shall do
as I please and what I please and when I please!"

With this speech Ruggedo threw his sceptre at Kaliko's head, aiming it
so well that the Royal Chamberlain had to fall flat upon the floor in
order to escape it. But the Hearer did not see the sceptre coming and
it swept past his head so closely that it broke off the tip of one of
his long ears. He gave a dreadful yell that quite startled Ruggedo, and
the King was sorry for the accident because those long ears of the
Hearer were really valuable to him.

So the Nome King forgot to be angry with Kaliko and ordered his
Chamberlain to summon General Guph and the army of nomes and have them
properly armed. They were then to march to the mouth of the Tube, where
they could seize the travelers as soon as they appeared.




Chapter Fifteen

The Dragon Defies Danger


Although the journey through the Tube was longer, this time, than
before, it was so much more comfortable that none of our friends minded
it at all. They talked together most of the time and as they found the
dragon good-natured and fond of the sound of his own voice they soon
became well acquainted with him and accepted him as a companion.

"You see," said Shaggy, in his frank way, "Quox is on our side, and
therefore the dragon is a good fellow. If he happened to be an enemy,
instead of a friend, I am sure I should dislike him very much, for his
breath smells of brimstone, he is very conceited and he is so strong
and fierce that he would prove a dangerous foe."

"Yes, indeed," returned Quox, who had listened to this speech with
pleasure; "I suppose I am about as terrible as any living thing. I am
glad you find me conceited, for that proves I know my good qualities.
As for my breath smelling of brimstone, I really can't help it, and I
once met a man whose breath smelled of onions, which I consider far
worse."

"I don't," said Betsy; "I love onions.

"And I love brimstone," declared the dragon, "so don't let us quarrel
over one another's peculiarities."

Saying this, he breathed a long breath and shot a flame fifty feet from
his mouth. The brimstone made Betsy cough, but she remembered about the
onions and said nothing.

They had no idea how far they had gone through the center of the earth,
nor when to expect the trip to end. At one time the little girl
remarked:

"I wonder when we'll reach the bottom of this hole. And isn't it funny,
Shaggy Man, that what is the bottom to us now, was the top when we fell
the other way?"

"What puzzles me," said Files, "is that we are able to fall both ways."

"That," announced Tik-Tok, "is be-cause the world is round."

"Exactly," responded Shaggy. "The machinery in your head is in fine
working order, Tik-Tok. You know, Betsy, that there is such a thing as
the Attraction of Gravitation, which draws everything toward the center
of the earth. That is why we fall out of bed, and why everything clings
to the surface of the earth."

"Then why doesn't everything go on down to the center of the earth?"
inquired the little girl.

"I was afraid you were going to ask me that," replied Shaggy in a sad
tone. "The reason, my dear, is that the earth is so solid that other
solid things can't get through it. But when there's a hole, as there is
in this case, we drop right down to the center of the world."

"Why don't we stop there?" asked Betsy.

"Because we go so fast that we acquire speed enough to carry us right
up to the other end."

"I don't understand that, and it makes my head ache to try to figure it
out," she said after some thought. "One thing draws us to the center
and another thing pushes us away from it. But--"

"Don't ask me why, please," interrupted the Shaggy Man. "If you can't
understand it, let it go at that."

"Do _you_ understand it?" she inquired.

"All the magic isn't in fairyland," he said gravely. "There's lots of
magic in all Nature, and you may see it as well in the United States,
where you and I once lived, as you can here."

"I never did," she replied.

"Because you were so used to it all that you didn't realize it was
magic. Is anything more wonderful than to see a flower grow and
blossom, or to get light out of the electricity in the air? The cows
that manufacture milk for us must have machinery fully as remarkable as
that in Tik-Tok's copper body, and perhaps you've noticed that--"

And then, before Shaggy could finish his speech, the strong light of
day suddenly broke upon them, grew brighter, and completely enveloped
them. The dragon's claws no longer scraped against the metal Tube, for
he shot into the open air a hundred feet or more and sailed so far away
from the slanting hole that when he landed it was on the peak of a
mountain and just over the entrance to the many underground caverns of
the Nome King.

Some of the officers tumbled off their seats when Quox struck the
ground, but most of the dragon's passengers only felt a slight jar. All
were glad to be on solid earth again and they at once dismounted and
began to look about them. Queerly enough, as soon as they had left the
dragon, the seats that were strapped to the monster's back disappeared,
and this probably happened because there was no further use for them
and because Quox looked far more dignified in just his silver scales.
Of course he still wore the forty yards of ribbon around his neck, as
well as the great locket, but these only made him look "dressed up," as
Betsy remarked.

Now the army of nomes had gathered thickly around the mouth of the
Tube, in order to be ready to capture the band of invaders as soon as
they popped out. There were, indeed, hundreds of nomes assembled, and
they were led by Guph, their most famous General. But they did not
expect the dragon to fly so high, and he shot out of the Tube so
suddenly that it took them by surprise. When the nomes had rubbed the
astonishment out of their eyes and regained their wits, they discovered
the dragon quietly seated on the mountainside far above their heads,
while the other strangers were standing in a group and calmly looking
down upon them.

General Guph was very angry at the escape, which was no one's fault but
his own.

"Come down here and be captured!" he shouted, waving his sword at them.

"Come up here and capture us--if you dare!" replied Queen Ann, who was
winding up the clockwork of her Private Soldier, so he could fight more
briskly.

Guph's first answer was a roar of rage at the defiance; then he turned
and issued a command to his nomes. These were all armed with sharp
spears and with one accord they raised these spears and threw them
straight at their foes, so that they rushed through the air in a
perfect cloud of flying weapons.

Some damage might have been done had not the dragon quickly crawled
before the others, his body being so big that it shielded every one of
them, including Hank. The spears rattled against the silver scales of
Quox and then fell harmlessly to the ground. They were magic spears, of
course, and all straightway bounded back into the hands of those who
had thrown them, but even Guph could see that it was useless to repeat
the attack.

It was now Queen Ann's turn to attack, so the Generals yelled
"For--ward march!" and the Colonels and Majors and Captains repeated
the command and the valiant Army of Oogaboo, which seemed to be
composed mainly of Tik-Tok, marched forward in single column toward the
nomes, while Betsy and Polychrome cheered and Hank gave a loud
"Hee-haw!" and Shaggy shouted "Hooray!" and Queen Ann screamed: "At
'em, Tik-Tok--at 'em!"

The nomes did not await the Clockwork Man's attack but in a twinkling
disappeared into the underground caverns. They made a great mistake in
being so hasty, for Tik-Tok had not taken a dozen steps before he
stubbed his copper toe on a rock and fell flat to the ground, where he
cried: "Pick me up! Pick me up! Pick me up!" until Shaggy and Files ran
forward and raised him to his feet again.

The dragon chuckled softly to himself as he scratched his left ear with
his hind claw, but no one was paying much attention to Quox just then.

It was evident to Ann and her officers that there could be no fighting
unless the enemy was present, and in order to find the enemy they must
boldly enter the underground Kingdom of the nomes. So bold a step
demanded a council of war.

"Don't you think I'd better drop in on Ruggedo and obey the orders of
the Jinjin?" asked Quox.

"By no means!" returned Queen Ann. "We have already put the army of
nomes to flight and all that yet remains is to force our way into those
caverns, and conquer the Nome King and all his people."

"That seems to me something of a job," said the dragon, closing his
eyes sleepily. "But go ahead, if you like, and I'll wait here for you.
Don't be in any hurry on my account. To one who lives thousands of
years the delay of a few days means nothing at all, and I shall
probably sleep until the time comes for me to act."

Ann was provoked at this speech.

"You may as well go back to Tititi-Hoochoo now," she said, "for the
Nome King is as good as conquered already."

But Quox shook his head. "No," said he; "I'll wait."




Chapter Sixteen

The Naughty Nome


Shaggy Man had said nothing during the conversation between Queen Ann
and Quox, for the simple reason that he did not consider the matter
worth an argument. Safe within his pocket reposed the Love Magnet,
which had never failed to win every heart. The nomes, he knew, were not
like the heartless Roses and therefore could be won to his side as soon
as he exhibited the magic talisman.

Shaggy's chief anxiety had been to reach Ruggedo's Kingdom and now that
the entrance lay before him he was confident he would be able to rescue
his lost brother. Let Ann and the dragon quarrel as to who should
conquer the nomes, if they liked; Shaggy would let them try, and if
they failed he had the means of conquest in his own pocket.

But Ann was positive she could not fail, for she thought her Army could
do anything. So she called the officers together and told them how to
act, and she also instructed Tik-Tok what to do and what to say.

"Please do not shoot your gun except as a last resort," she added, "for
I do not wish to be cruel or to shed any blood--unless it is absolutely
necessary."

"All right," replied Tik-Tok; "but I do not think Rug-ge-do would bleed
if I filled him full of holes and put him in a ci-der press."

Then the officers fell in line, the four Generals abreast and then the
four Colonels and the four Majors and the four Captains. They drew
their glittering swords and commanded Tik-Tok to march, which he did.
Twice he fell down, being tripped by the rough rocks, but when he
struck the smooth path he got along better. Into the gloomy mouth of
the cavern entrance he stepped without hesitation, and after him
proudly pranced the officers and Queen Ann. The others held back a
little, waiting to see what would happen.

Of course the Nome King knew they were coming and was prepared to
receive them. Just within the rocky passage that led to the jeweled
throne-room was a deep pit, which was usually covered. Ruggedo had
ordered the cover removed and it now stood open, scarcely visible in
the gloom.

The pit was so large around that it nearly filled the passage and there
was barely room for one to walk around it by pressing close to the rock
walls. This Tik-Tok did, for his copper eyes saw the pit clearly and he
avoided it; but the officers marched straight into the hole and tumbled
in a heap on the bottom. An instant later Queen Ann also walked into
the pit, for she had her chin in the air and was careless where she
placed her feet. Then one of the nomes pulled a lever which replaced
the cover on the pit and made the officers of Oogaboo and their Queen
fast prisoners.

As for Tik-Tok, he kept straight on to the cavern where Ruggedo sat in
his throne and there he faced the Nome King and said:

"I here-by con-quer you in the name of Queen Ann So-forth of Oo-ga-boo,
whose Ar-my I am, and I de-clare that you are her pris-on-er!"

Ruggedo laughed at him.

"Where is this famous Queen?" he asked.

"She'll be here in a min-ute," said Tik-Tok. "Per-haps she stopped to
tie her shoe-string."

"Now, see here, Tik-Tok," began the Nome King, in a stern voice, "I've
had enough of this nonsense. Your Queen and her officers are all
prisoners, having fallen into my power, so perhaps you'll tell me what
you mean to do."

"My or-ders were to con-quer you," replied Tik-Tok, "and my
ma-chin-er-y has done the best it knows how to car-ry out those
or-ders."

Ruggedo pounded on his gong and Kaliko appeared, followed closely by
General Guph.

"Take this copper man into the shops and set him to work hammering
gold," commanded the King. "Being run by machinery he ought to be a
steady worker. He ought never to have been made, but since he exists I
shall hereafter put him to good use."

"If you try to cap-ture me," said Tik-Tok, "I shall fight."

"Don't do that!" exclaimed General Guph, earnestly, "for it will be
useless to resist and you might hurt some one."

But Tik-Tok raised his gun and took aim and not knowing what damage the
gun might do the nomes were afraid to face it.

While he was thus defying the Nome King and his high officials, Betsy
Bobbin rode calmly into the royal cavern, seated upon the back of Hank
the mule. The little girl had grown tired of waiting for "something to
happen" and so had come to see if Ruggedo had been conquered.

"Nails and nuggets!" roared the King; "how dare you bring that beast
here and enter my presence unannounced?"

"There wasn't anybody to announce me," replied Betsy. "I guess your
folks were all busy. Are you conquered yet?"

"No!" shouted the King, almost beside himself with rage.

"Then please give me something to eat, for I'm awful hungry," said the
girl. "You see, this conquering business is a good deal like waiting
for a circus parade; it takes a long time to get around and don't
amount to much anyhow."

The nomes were so much astonished at this speech that for a time they
could only glare at her silently, not finding words to reply. The King
finally recovered the use of his tongue and said:

"Earth-crawler! this insolence to my majesty shall be your
death-warrant. You are an ordinary mortal, and to stop a mortal from
living is so easy a thing to do that I will not keep you waiting half
so long as you did for my conquest."

"I'd rather you wouldn't stop me from living," remarked Betsy, getting
off Hank's back and standing beside him. "And it would be a pretty
cheap King who killed a visitor while she was hungry. If you'll give me
something to eat, I'll talk this killing business over with you
afterward; only, I warn you now that I don't approve of it, and never
will."

Her coolness and lack of fear impressed the Nome King, although he bore
an intense hatred toward all mortals.

"What do you wish to eat?" he asked gruffly.

"Oh, a ham-sandwich would do, or perhaps a couple of hard-boiled eggs--"

"Eggs!" shrieked the three nomes who were present, shuddering till
their teeth chattered.

"What's the matter?" asked Betsy wonderingly. "Are eggs as high here as
they are at home?"

"Guph," said the King in an agitated voice, turning to his General,
"let us destroy this rash mortal at once! Seize her and take her to the
Slimy Cave and lock her in."

Guph glanced at Tik-Tok, whose gun was still pointed, but just then
Kaliko stole softly behind the copper man and kicked his knee-joints so
that they suddenly bent forward and tumbled Tik-Tok to the floor, his
gun falling from his grasp.

Then Guph, seeing Tik-Tok helpless, made a grab at Betsy. At the same
time Hank's heels shot out and caught the General just where his belt
was buckled. He rose into the air swift as a cannon-ball, struck the
Nome King fairly and flattened his Majesty against the wall of rock on
the opposite side of the cavern. Together they fell to the floor in a
dazed and crumpled condition, seeing which Kaliko whispered to Betsy:

"Come with me--quick!--and I will save you."

She looked into Kaliko's face inquiringly and thought he seemed honest
and good-natured, so she decided to follow him. He led her and the mule
through several passages and into a small cavern very nicely and
comfortably furnished.

"This is my own room," said he, "but you are quite welcome to use it.
Wait here a minute and I'll get you something to eat."

When Kaliko returned he brought a tray containing some broiled
mushrooms, a loaf of mineral bread and some petroleum-butter. The
butter Betsy could not eat, but the bread was good and the mushrooms
delicious.

"Here's the door key," said Kaliko, "and you'd better lock yourself in."

"Won't you let Polychrome and the Rose Princess come here, too?" she
asked.

"I'll see. Where are they?"

"I don't know. I left them outside," said Betsy.

"Well, if you hear three raps on the door, open it," said Kaliko; "but
don't let anyone in unless they give the three raps."

"All right," promised Betsy, and when Kaliko left the cosy cavern she
closed and locked the door.

In the meantime Ann and her officers, finding themselves prisoners in
the pit, had shouted and screamed until they were tired out, but no one
had come to their assistance. It was very dark and damp in the pit and
they could not climb out because the walls were higher than their heads
and the cover was on. The Queen was first angry and then annoyed and
then discouraged; but the officers were only afraid. Every one of the
poor fellows heartily wished he was back in Oogaboo caring for his
orchard, and some were so unhappy that they began to reproach Ann for
causing them all this trouble and danger.

Finally the Queen sat down on the bottom of the pit and leaned her back
against the wall. By good luck her sharp elbow touched a secret spring
in the wall and a big flat rock swung inward. Ann fell over backward,
but the next instant she jumped up and cried to the others:

"A passage! A passage! Follow me, my brave men, and we may yet escape."

Then she began to crawl through the passage, which was as dark and dank
as the pit, and the officers followed her in single file. They crawled,
and they crawled, and they kept on crawling, for the passage was not
big enough to allow them to stand upright. It turned this way and
twisted that, sometimes like a corkscrew and sometimes zigzag, but
seldom ran for long in a straight line.

"It will never end--never!" moaned the officers, who were rubbing all
the skin off their knees on the rough rocks.

"It _must_ end," retorted Ann courageously, "or it never would have
been made. We don't know where it will lead us to, but any place is
better than that loathsome pit."

So she crawled on, and the officers crawled on, and while they were
crawling through this awful underground passage Polychrome and Shaggy
and Files and the Rose Princess, who were standing outside the entrance
to Ruggedo's domains, were wondering what had become of them.




Chapter Seventeen

A Tragic Transformation


"Don't let us worry," said Shaggy to his companions, "for it may take
the Queen some time to conquer the Metal Monarch, as Tik-Tok has to do
everything in his slow, mechanical way."

"Do you suppose they are likely to fail?" asked the Rose Princess.

"I do, indeed," replied Shaggy. "This Nome King is really a powerful
fellow and has a legion of nomes to assist him, whereas our bold Queen
commands a Clockwork Man and a band of faint-hearted officers."

"She ought to have let Quox do the conquering," said Polychrome,
dancing lightly upon a point of rock and fluttering her beautiful
draperies. "But perhaps the dragon was wise to let her go first, for
when she fails to conquer Ruggedo she may become more modest in her
ambitions."

"Where is the dragon now?" inquired Ozga.

"Up there on the rocks," replied Files. "Look, my dear; you may see him
from here. He said he would take a little nap while we were mixing up
with Ruggedo, and he added that after we had gotten into trouble he
would wake up and conquer the Nome King in a jiffy, as his master the
Jinjin has ordered him to do."

"Quox means well," said Shaggy, "but I do not think we shall need his
services; for just as soon as I am satisfied that Queen Ann and her
army have failed to conquer Ruggedo, I shall enter the caverns and show
the King my Love Magnet. That he cannot resist; therefore the conquest
will be made with ease."

This speech of Shaggy Man's was overheard by the Long-Eared Hearer, who
was at that moment standing by Ruggedo's side. For when the King and
Guph had recovered from Hank's kick and had picked themselves up, their
first act was to turn Tik-Tok on his back and put a heavy diamond on
top of him, so that he could not get up again. Then they carefully put
his gun in a corner of the cavern and the King sent Guph to fetch the
Long-Eared Hearer.

The Hearer was still angry at Ruggedo for breaking his ear, but he
acknowledged the Nome King to be his master and was ready to obey his
commands. Therefore he repeated Shaggy's speech to the King, who at
once realized that his Kingdom was in grave danger. For Ruggedo knew of
the Love Magnet and its powers and was horrified at the thought that
Shaggy might show him the magic talisman and turn all the hatred in his
heart into love. Ruggedo was proud of his hatred and abhorred love of
any sort.


"Really," said he, "I'd rather be conquered and lose my wealth and my
Kingdom than gaze at that awful Love Magnet. What can I do to prevent
the Shaggy Man from taking it out of his pocket?"

Kaliko returned to the cavern in time to overhear this question, and
being a loyal nome and eager to serve his King, he answered by saying:

"If we can manage to bind the Shaggy Man's arms, tight to his body, he
could not get the Love Magnet out of his pocket."

"True!" cried the King in delight at this easy solution of the problem.
"Get at once a dozen nomes, with ropes, and place them in the passage
where they can seize and bind Shaggy as soon as he enters."

This Kaliko did, and meanwhile the watchers outside the entrance were
growing more and more uneasy about their friends.

"I don't worry so much about the Oogaboo people," said Polychrome, who
had grown sober with waiting, and perhaps a little nervous, "for they
could not be killed, even though Ruggedo might cause them much
suffering and perhaps destroy them utterly. But we should not have
allowed Betsy and Hank to go alone into the caverns. The little girl is
mortal and possesses no magic powers whatever, so if Ruggedo captures
her she will be wholly at his mercy."

"That is indeed true," replied Shaggy. "I wouldn't like to have
anything happen to dear little Betsy, so I believe I'll go in right
away and put an end to all this worry."

"We may as well go with you," asserted Files, "for by means of the Love
Magnet, you can soon bring the Nome King to reason."

So it was decided to wait no longer. Shaggy walked through the entrance
first, and after him came the others. They had no thought of danger to
themselves, and Shaggy, who was going along with his hands thrust into
his pockets, was much surprised when a rope shot out from the darkness
and twined around his body, pinning down his arms so securely that he
could not even withdraw his hands from the pockets. Then appeared
several grinning nomes, who speedily tied knots in the ropes and then
led the prisoner along the passage to the cavern. No attention was paid
to the others, but Files and the Princess followed on after Shaggy,
determined not to desert their friend and hoping that an opportunity
might arise to rescue him.

As for Polychrome, as soon as she saw that trouble had overtaken Shaggy
she turned and ran lightly back through the passage and out of the
entrance. Then she easily leaped from rock to rock until she paused
beside the great dragon, who lay fast asleep.

"Wake up, Quox!" she cried. "It is time for you to act."

But Quox did not wake up. He lay as one in a trance, absolutely
motionless, with his enormous eyes tight closed. The eyelids had big
silver scales on them, like all the rest of his body.

Polychrome might have thought Quox was dead had she not known that
dragons do not die easily or had she not observed his huge body
swelling as he breathed. She picked up a piece of rock and pounded
against his eyelids with it, saying:

"Wake up, Quox--wake up!" But he would not waken.

"Dear me, how unfortunate!" sighed the lovely Rainbow's Daughter. "I
wonder what is the best and surest way to waken a dragon. All our
friends may be captured and destroyed while this great beast lies
asleep."

She walked around Quox two or three times, trying to discover some
tender place on his body where a thump or a punch might be felt; but he
lay extended along the rocks with his chin flat upon the ground and his
legs drawn underneath his body, and all that one could see was his
thick sky-blue skin--thicker than that of a rhinoceros--and his silver
scales.

Then, despairing at last of wakening the beast, and worried over the
fate of her friends, Polychrome again ran down to the entrance and
hurried along the passage into the Nome King's cavern.

Here she found Ruggedo lolling in his throne and smoking a long pipe.
Beside him stood General Guph and Kaliko, and ranged before the King
were the Rose Princess, Files and the Shaggy Man. Tik-Tok still lay
upon the floor, weighted down by the big diamond.

Ruggedo was now in a more contented frame of mind. One by one he had
met the invaders and easily captured them. The dreaded Love Magnet was
indeed in Shaggy's pocket, only a few feet away from the King, but
Shaggy was powerless to show it and unless Ruggedo's eyes beheld the
talisman it could not affect him. As for Betsy Bobbin and her mule, he
believed Kaliko had placed them in the Slimy Cave, while Ann and her
officers he thought safely imprisoned in the pit. Ruggedo had no fear
of Files or Ozga, but to be on the safe side he had ordered golden
handcuffs placed upon their wrists. These did not cause them any great
annoyance but prevented them from making an attack, had they been
inclined to do so.

The Nome King, thinking himself wholly master of the situation, was
laughing and jeering at his prisoners when Polychrome, exquisitely
beautiful and dancing like a ray of light, entered the cavern.

"Oho!" cried the King; "a Rainbow under ground, eh?" and then he stared
hard at Polychrome, and still harder, and then he sat up and pulled the
wrinkles out of his robe and arranged his whiskers. "On my word," said
he, "you are a very captivating creature; moreover, I perceive you are
a fairy."

"I am Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter," she said proudly.

"Well," replied Ruggedo, "I like you. The others I hate. I hate
everybody--but you! Wouldn't you like to live always in this beautiful
cavern, Polychrome? See! the jewels that stud the walls have every tint
and color of your Rainbow--and they are not so elusive. I'll have fresh
dewdrops gathered for your feasting every day and you shall be Queen of
all my nomes and pull Kaliko's nose whenever you like."

"No, thank you," laughed Polychrome. "My home is in the sky, and I'm
only on a visit to this solid, sordid earth. But tell me, Ruggedo, why
my friends have been wound with cords and bound with chains?"

"They threatened me," answered Ruggedo. "The fools did not know how
powerful I am."

"Then, since they are now helpless, why not release them and send them
back to the earth's surface?"

"Because I hate 'em and mean to make 'em suffer for their invasion. But
I'll make a bargain with you, sweet Polly. Remain here and live with me
and I'll set all these people free. You shall be my daughter or my wife
or my aunt or grandmother--whichever you like--only stay here to
brighten my gloomy kingdom and make me happy!"

Polychrome looked at him wonderingly. Then she turned to Shaggy and
asked:

"Are you sure he hasn't seen the Love Magnet?"

"I'm positive," answered Shaggy. "But you seem to be something of a
Love Magnet yourself, Polychrome."

She laughed again and said to Ruggedo: "Not even to rescue my friends
would I live in your kingdom. Nor could I endure for long the society
of such a wicked monster as you."

"You forget," retorted the King, scowling darkly, "that you also are in
my power."

"Not so, Ruggedo. The Rainbow's Daughter is beyond the reach of your
spite or malice."

"Seize her!" suddenly shouted the King, and General Guph sprang forward
to obey. Polychrome stood quite still, yet when Guph attempted to
clutch her his hands met in air, and now the Rainbow's Daughter was in
another part of the room, as smiling and composed as before.

Several times Guph endeavored to capture her and Ruggedo even came down
from his throne to assist his General; but never could they lay hands
upon the lovely sky fairy, who flitted here and there with the
swiftness of light and constantly defied them with her merry laughter
as she evaded their efforts.

So after a time they abandoned the chase and Ruggedo returned to his
throne and wiped the perspiration from his face with a finely-woven
handkerchief of cloth-of-gold.

"Well," said Polychrome, "what do you intend to do now?"

"I'm going to have some fun, to repay me for all my bother," replied
the Nome King. Then he said to Kaliko: "Summon the executioners."

Kaliko at once withdrew and presently returned with a score of nomes,
all of whom were nearly as evil looking as their hated master. They
bore great golden pincers, and prods of silver, and clamps and chains
and various wicked-looking instruments, all made of precious metals and
set with diamonds and rubies.

"Now, Pang," said Ruggedo, addressing the leader of the executioners,
"fetch the Army of Oogaboo and their Queen from the pit and torture
them here in my presence--as well as in the presence of their friends.
It will be great sport."

"I hear Your Majesty, and I obey Your Majesty," answered Pang, and went
with his nomes into the passage. In a few minutes he returned and bowed
to Ruggedo.

"They're all gone," said he.

"Gone!" exclaimed the Nome King. "Gone where?"

"They left no address, Your Majesty; but they are not in the pit."

"Picks and puddles!" roared the King; "who took the cover off?"

"No one," said Pang. "The cover was there, but the prisoners were not
under it."

"In that case," snarled the King, trying to control his disappointment,
"go to the Slimy Cave and fetch hither the girl and the donkey. And
while we are torturing them Kaliko must take a hundred nomes and search
for the escaped prisoners--the Queen of Oogaboo and her officers. If he
does not find them, I will torture Kaliko."

Kaliko went away looking sad and disturbed, for he knew the King was
cruel and unjust enough to carry out this threat. Pang and the
executioners also went away, in another direction, but when they came
back Betsy Bobbin was not with them, nor was Hank.

"There is no one in the Slimy Cave, Your Majesty," reported Pang.

"Jumping jellycakes!" screamed the King. "Another escape? Are you sure
you found the right cave?"

"There is but one Slimy Cave, and there is no one in it," returned Pang
positively.

Ruggedo was beginning to be alarmed as well as angry. However, these
disappointments but made him the more vindictive and he cast an evil
look at the other prisoners and said:

"Never mind the girl and the donkey. Here are four, at least, who
cannot escape my vengeance. Let me see; I believe I'll change my mind
about Tik-Tok. Have the gold crucible heated to a white, seething heat,
and then we'll dump the copper man into it and melt him up."

"But, Your Majesty," protested Kaliko, who had returned to the room
after sending a hundred nomes to search for the Oogaboo people, "you
must remember that Tik-Tok is a very curious and interesting machine.
It would be a shame to deprive the world of such a clever contrivance."

"Say another word, and you'll go into the furnace with him!" roared the
King. "I'm getting tired of you, Kaliko, and the first thing you know
I'll turn you into a potato and make Saratoga-chips of you! The next to
consider," he added more mildly, "is the Shaggy Man. As he owns the
Love Magnet, I think I'll transform him into a dove, and then we can
practice shooting at him with Tik-Tok's gun. Now, this is a very
interesting ceremony and I beg you all to watch me closely and see that
I've nothing up my sleeve."

He came out of his throne to stand before the Shaggy Man, and then he
waved his hands, palms downward, in seven semicircles over his victim's
head, saying in a low but clear tone of voice the magic wugwa:

  "Adi, edi, idi, odi, udi, oo-i-oo!
  Idu, ido, idi, ide, ida, woo!"

The effect of this well-known sorcery was instantaneous. Instead of the
Shaggy Man, a pretty dove lay fluttering upon the floor, its wings
confined by tiny cords wound around them. Ruggedo gave an order to
Pang, who cut the cords with a pair of scissors. Being freed, the dove
quickly flew upward and alighted on the shoulder of the Rose Princess,
who stroked it tenderly.

"Very good! Very good!" cried Ruggedo, rubbing his hands gleefully
together. "One enemy is out of my way, and now for the others."

(Perhaps my readers should be warned not to attempt the above
transformation; for, although the exact magical formula has been
described, it is unlawful in all civilized countries for anyone to
transform a person into a dove by muttering the words Ruggedo used.
There were no laws to prevent the Nome King from performing this
transformation, but if it should be attempted in any other country, and
the magic worked, the magician would be severely punished.)

When Polychrome saw Shaggy Man transformed into a dove and realized
that Ruggedo was about to do something as dreadful to the Princess and
Files, and that Tik-Tok would soon be melted in a crucible, she turned
and ran from the cavern, through the passage and back to the place
where Quox lay asleep.




Chapter Eighteen

A Clever Conquest


The great dragon still had his eyes closed and was even snoring in a
manner that resembled distant thunder; but Polychrome was now
desperate, because any further delay meant the destruction of her
friends. She seized the pearl necklace, to which was attached the great
locket, and jerked it with all her strength.

The result was encouraging. Quox stopped snoring and his eyelids
flickered. So Polychrome jerked again--and again--till slowly the great
lids raised and the dragon looked at her steadily. Said he, in a sleepy
tone:

"What's the matter, little Rainbow?"

"Come quick!" exclaimed Polychrome. "Ruggedo has captured all our
friends and is about to destroy them."

"Well, well," said Quox, "I suspected that would happen. Step a little
out of my path, my dear, and I'll make a rush for the Nome King's
cavern."

She fell back a few steps and Quox raised himself on his stout legs,
whisked his long tail and in an instant had slid down the rocks and
made a dive through the entrance.

Along the passage he swept, nearly filling it with his immense body,
and now he poked his head into the jeweled cavern of Ruggedo.

But the King had long since made arrangements to capture the dragon,
whenever he might appear. No sooner did Quox stick his head into the
room than a thick chain fell from above and encircled his neck. Then
the ends of the chain were drawn tight--for in an adjoining cavern a
thousand nomes were pulling on them--and so the dragon could advance no
further toward the King. He could not use his teeth or his claws and as
his body was still in the passage he had not even room to strike his
foes with his terrible tail.

Ruggedo was delighted with the success of his stratagem. He had just
transformed the Rose Princess into a fiddle and was about to transform
Files into a fiddle bow, when the dragon appeared to interrupt him. So
he called out:

"Welcome, my dear Quox, to my royal entertainment. Since you are here,
you shall witness some very neat magic, and after I have finished with
Files and Tik-Tok I mean to transform you into a tiny lizard--one of
the chameleon sort--and you shall live in my cavern and amuse me."

"Pardon me for contradicting Your Majesty," returned Quox in a quiet
voice, "but I don't believe you'll perform any more magic."

"Eh? Why not?" asked the King in surprise.

"There's a reason," said Quox. "Do you see this ribbon around my neck?"

"Yes; and I'm astonished that a dignified dragon should wear such a
silly thing."

"Do you see it plainly?" persisted the dragon, with a little chuckle of
amusement.

"I do," declared Ruggedo.

"Then you no longer possess any magical powers, and are as helpless as
a clam," asserted Quox. "My great master, Tititi-Hoochoo, the Jinjin,
enchanted this ribbon in such a way that whenever Your Majesty looked
upon it all knowledge of magic would desert you instantly, nor will any
magical formula you can remember ever perform your bidding."

"Pooh! I don't believe a word of it!" cried Ruggedo, half frightened,
nevertheless. Then he turned toward Files and tried to transform him
into a fiddle bow. But he could not remember the right words or the
right pass of the hands and after several trials he finally gave up the
attempt.

By this time the Nome King was so alarmed that he was secretly shaking
in his shoes.

"I told you not to anger Tititi-Hoochoo," grumbled Kaliko, "and now you
see the result of your disobedience."

Ruggedo promptly threw his sceptre at his Royal Chamberlain, who dodged
it with his usual cleverness, and then he said with an attempt to
swagger:

"Never mind; I don't need magic to enable me to destroy these invaders;
fire and the sword will do the business and I am still King of the
Nomes and lord and master of my Underground Kingdom!"

"Again I beg to differ with Your Majesty," said Quox. "The Great Jinjin
commands you to depart instantly from this Kingdom and seek the earth's
surface, where you will wander for all time to come, without a home or
country, without a friend or follower, and without any more riches than
you can carry with you in your pockets. The Great Jinjin is so generous
that he will allow you to fill your pockets with jewels or gold, but
you must take nothing more."

Ruggedo now stared at the dragon in amazement.

"Does Tititi-Hoochoo condemn me to such a fate?" he asked in a hoarse
voice.

"He does," said Quox.

"And just for throwing a few strangers down the Forbidden Tube?"

"Just for that," repeated Quox in a stern, gruff voice.

"Well, I won't do it. And your crazy old Jinjin can't make me do it,
either!" declared Ruggedo. "I intend to remain here, King of the Nomes,
until the end of the world, and I defy your Tititi-Hoochoo and all his
fairies--as well as his clumsy messenger, whom I have been obliged to
chain up!"

The dragon smiled again, but it was not the sort of smile that made
Ruggedo feel very happy. Instead, there was something so cold and
merciless in the dragon's expression that the condemned Nome King
trembled and was sick at heart.

There was little comfort for Ruggedo in the fact that the dragon was
now chained, although he had boasted of it. He glared at the immense
head of Quox as if fascinated and there was fear in the old King's eyes
as he watched his enemy's movements.

For the dragon was now moving; not abruptly, but as if he had something
to do and was about to do it. Very deliberately he raised one claw,
touched the catch of the great jeweled locket that was suspended around
his neck, and at once it opened wide.

Nothing much happened at first; half a dozen hen's eggs rolled out upon
the floor and then the locket closed with a sharp click. But the effect
upon the nomes of this simple thing was astounding. General Guph,
Kaliko, Pang and his band of executioners were all standing close to
the door that led to the vast series of underground caverns which
constituted the dominions of the nomes, and as soon as they saw the
eggs they raised a chorus of frantic screams and rushed through the
door, slamming it in Ruggedo's face and placing a heavy bronze bar
across it.

Ruggedo, dancing with terror and uttering loud cries, now leaped upon
the seat of his throne to escape the eggs, which had rolled steadily
toward him. Perhaps these eggs, sent by the wise and crafty
Tititi-Hoochoo, were in some way enchanted, for they all rolled
directly after Ruggedo and when they reached the throne where he had
taken refuge they began rolling up the legs to the seat.

This was too much for the King to bear. His horror of eggs was real and
absolute and he made a leap from the throne to the center of the room
and then ran to a far corner.

The eggs followed, rolling slowly but steadily in his direction.
Ruggedo threw his sceptre at them, and then his ruby crown, and then he
drew off his heavy golden sandals and hurled these at the advancing
eggs. But the eggs dodged every missile and continued to draw nearer.
The King stood trembling, his eyes staring in terror, until they were
but half a yard distant; then with an agile leap he jumped clear over
them and made a rush for the passage that led to the outer entrance.

Of course the dragon was in his way, being chained in the passage with
his head in the cavern, but when he saw the King making toward him he
crouched as low as he could and dropped his chin to the floor, leaving
a small space between his body and the roof of the passage.

Ruggedo did not hesitate an instant. Impelled by fear, he leaped to the
dragon's nose and then scrambled to his back, where he succeeded in
squeezing himself through the opening. After the head was passed there
was more room and he slid along the dragon's scales to his tail and
then ran as fast as his legs would carry him to the entrance. Not
pausing here, so great was his fright, the King dashed on down the
mountain path, but before he had gone very far he stumbled and fell.

When he picked himself up he observed that no one was following him,
and while he recovered his breath he happened to think of the decree of
the Jinjin--that he should be driven from his Kingdom and made a
wanderer on the face of the earth. Well, here he was, driven from his
cavern in truth; driven by those dreadful eggs; but he would go back
and defy them; he would not submit to losing his precious Kingdom and
his tyrannical powers, all because Tititi-Hoochoo had said he must.

So, although still afraid, Ruggedo nerved himself to creep back along
the path to the entrance, and when he arrived there he saw the six eggs
lying in a row just before the arched opening.

At first he paused a safe distance away to consider the case, for the
eggs were now motionless. While he was wondering what could be done, he
remembered there was a magical charm which would destroy eggs and
render them harmless to nomes. There were nine passes to be made and
six verses of incantation to be recited; but Ruggedo knew them all. Now
that he had ample time to be exact, he carefully went through the
entire ceremony.

But nothing happened. The eggs did not disappear, as he had expected;
so he repeated the charm a second time. When that also failed, he
remembered, with a moan of despair, that his magic power had been taken
away from him and in the future he could do no more than any common
mortal.

And there were the eggs, forever barring him from the Kingdom which he
had ruled so long with absolute sway! He threw rocks at them, but could
not hit a single egg. He raved and scolded and tore his hair and beard,
and danced in helpless passion, but that did nothing to avert the just
judgment of the Jinjin, which Ruggedo's own evil deeds had brought upon
him.

From this time on he was an outcast--a wanderer upon the face of the
earth--and he had even forgotten to fill his pockets with gold and
jewels before he fled from his former Kingdom!




Chapter Nineteen

King Kaliko


After the King had made good his escape Files said to the dragon, in a
sad voice:

"Alas! why did you not come before? Because you were sleeping instead
of conquering, the lovely Rose Princess has become a fiddle without a
bow, while poor Shaggy sits there a cooing dove!"

"Don't worry," replied Quox. "Tititi-Hoochoo knows his business, and I
have my orders from the Great Jinjin himself. Bring the fiddle here and
touch it lightly to my pink ribbon."

Files obeyed and at the moment of contact with the ribbon the Nome
King's charm was broken and the Rose Princess herself stood before them
as sweet and smiling as ever.

The dove, perched on the back of the throne, had seen and heard all
this, so without being told what to do it flew straight to the dragon
and alighted on the ribbon. Next instant Shaggy was himself again and
Quox said to him grumblingly:

"Please get off my left toe, Shaggy Man, and be more particular where
you step."

"I beg your pardon!" replied Shaggy, very glad to resume his natural
form. Then he ran to lift the heavy diamond off Tik-Tok's chest and to
assist the Clockwork Man to his feet.

"Ma-ny thanks!" said Tik-Tok. "Where is the wicked King who want-ed to
melt me in a cru-ci-ble?"

"He has gone, and gone for good," answered Polychrome, who had managed
to squeeze into the room beside the dragon and had witnessed the
occurrences with much interest. "But I wonder where Betsy Bobbin and
Hank can be, and if any harm has befallen them."

"We must search the cavern until we find them," declared Shaggy; but
when he went to the door leading to the other caverns he found it shut
and barred.

"I've a pretty strong push in my forehead," said Quox, "and I believe I
can break down that door, even though it's made of solid gold."

"But you are a prisoner, and the chains that hold you are fastened in
some other room, so that we cannot release you," Files said anxiously.

"Oh, never mind that," returned the dragon. "I have remained a prisoner
only because I wished to be one," and with this he stepped forward and
burst the stout chains as easily as if they had been threads.

But when he tried to push in the heavy metal door, even his mighty
strength failed, and after several attempts he gave it up and squatted
himself in a corner to think of a better way.

"I'll o-pen the door," asserted Tik-Tok, and going to the King's big
gong he pounded upon it until the noise was almost deafening.

Kaliko, in the next cavern, was wondering what had happened to Ruggedo
and if he had escaped the eggs and outwitted the dragon. But when he
heard the sound of the gong, which had so often called him into the
King's presence, he decided that Ruggedo had been victorious; so he
took away the bar, threw open the door and entered the royal cavern.

Great was his astonishment to find the King gone and the enchantments
removed from the Princess and Shaggy. But the eggs were also gone and
so Kaliko advanced to the dragon, whom he knew to be Tititi-Hoochoo's
messenger, and bowed humbly before the beast.

"What is your will?" he inquired.

"Where is Betsy?" demanded the dragon.

"Safe in my own private room," said Kaliko.

"Go and get her!" commanded Quox.

So Kaliko went to Betsy's room and gave three raps upon the door. The
little girl had been asleep, but she heard the raps and opened the door.

"You may come out now," said Kaliko. "The King has fled in disgrace and
your friends are asking for you."

So Betsy and Hank returned with the Royal Chamberlain to the throne
cavern, where she was received with great joy by her friends. They told
her what had happened to Ruggedo and she told them how kind Kaliko had
been to her. Quox did not have much to say until the conversation was
ended, but then he turned to Kaliko and asked:

"Do you suppose you could rule your nomes better than Ruggedo has done?"

"Me?" stammered the Chamberlain, greatly surprised by the question.
"Well, I couldn't be a worse King, I'm sure."

"Would the nomes obey you?" inquired the dragon.

"Of course," said Kaliko. "They like me better than ever they did
Ruggedo."

"Then hereafter you shall be the Metal Monarch, King of the Nomes, and
Tititi-Hoochoo expects you to rule your Kingdom wisely and well," said
Quox.

"Hooray!" cried Betsy; "I'm glad of that. King Kaliko, I salute Your
Majesty and wish you joy in your gloomy old Kingdom!"

"We all wish him joy," said Polychrome; and then the others made haste
to congratulate the new King.

"Will you release my dear brother?" asked Shaggy.

"The Ugly One? Very willingly," replied Kaliko. "I begged Ruggedo long
ago to send him away, but he would not do so. I also offered to help
your brother to escape, but he would not go."

"He's so conscientious!" said Shaggy, highly pleased. "All of our
family have noble natures. But is my dear brother well?" he added
anxiously.

"He eats and sleeps very steadily," replied the new King.

"I hope he doesn't work too hard," said Shaggy.

"He doesn't work at all. In fact, there is nothing he can do in these
dominions as well as our nomes, whose numbers are so great that it
worries us to keep them all busy. So your brother has only to amuse
himself."

"Why, it's more like visiting, than being a prisoner," asserted Betsy.

"Not exactly," returned Kaliko. "A prisoner cannot go where or when he
pleases, and is not his own master."

"Where is my brother now?" inquired Shaggy.

"In the Metal Forest."

"Where is that?"

"The Metal Forest is in the Great Domed Cavern, the largest in all our
dominions," replied Kaliko. "It is almost like being out of doors, it
is so big, and Ruggedo made the wonderful forest to amuse himself, as
well as to tire out his hard-working nomes. All the trees are gold and
silver and the ground is strewn with precious stones, so it is a sort
of treasury."

"Let us go there at once and rescue my dear brother," pleaded Shaggy
earnestly.

Kaliko hesitated.

"I don't believe I can find the way," said he. "Ruggedo made three
secret passages to the Metal Forest, but he changes the location of
these passages every week, so that no one can get to the Metal Forest
without his permission. However, if we look sharp, we may be able to
discover one of these secret ways."

"That reminds me to ask what has become of Queen Ann and the Officers
of Oogaboo," said Files.

"I'm sure I can't say," replied Kaliko.

"Do you suppose Ruggedo destroyed them?"

"Oh, no; I'm quite sure he didn't. They fell into the big pit in the
passage, and we put the cover on to keep them there; but when the
executioners went to look for them they had all disappeared from the
pit and we could find no trace of them."

"That's funny," remarked Betsy thoughtfully. "I don't believe Ann knew
any magic, or she'd have worked it before. But to disappear like that
_seems_ like magic; now, doesn't it?"

They agreed that it did, but no one could explain the mystery.

"However," said Shaggy, "they are gone, that is certain, so we cannot
help them or be helped by them. And the important thing just now is to
rescue my dear brother from captivity."

"Why do they call him the Ugly One?" asked Betsy.

"I do not know," confessed Shaggy. "I cannot remember his looks very
well, it is so long since I have seen him; but all of our family are
noted for their handsome faces."

Betsy laughed and Shaggy seemed rather hurt; but Polychrome relieved
his embarrassment by saying softly: "One can be ugly in looks, but
lovely in disposition."

"Our first task," said Shaggy, a little comforted by this remark, "is
to find one of those secret passages to the Metal Forest."

"True," agreed Kaliko. "So I think I will assemble the chief nomes of
my kingdom in this throne room and tell them that I am their new King.
Then I can ask them to assist us in searching for the secret passages.

"That's a good idea," said the dragon, who seemed to be getting sleepy
again.

Kaliko went to the big gong and pounded on it just as Ruggedo used to
do; but no one answered the summons.

"Of course not," said he, jumping up from the throne, where he had
seated himself. "That is my call, and I am still the Royal Chamberlain,
and will be until I appoint another in my place."

So he ran out of the room and found Guph and told him to answer the
summons of the King's gong. Having returned to the royal cavern, Kaliko
first pounded the gong and then sat in the throne, wearing Ruggedo's
discarded ruby crown and holding in his hand the sceptre which Ruggedo
had so often thrown at his head.

When Guph entered he was amazed.

"Better get out of that throne before old Ruggedo comes back," he said
warningly.

"He isn't coming back, and I am now the King of the Nomes, in his
stead," announced Kaliko.

"All of which is quite true," asserted the dragon, and all of those who
stood around the throne bowed respectfully to the new King.

Seeing this, Guph also bowed, for he was glad to be rid of such a hard
master as Ruggedo. Then Kaliko, in quite a kingly way, informed Guph
that he was appointed the Royal Chamberlain, and promised not to throw
the sceptre at his head unless he deserved it.

All this being pleasantly arranged, the new Chamberlain went away to
tell the news to all the nomes of the underground Kingdom, every one of
whom would be delighted with the change in Kings.




Chapter Twenty

Quox Quietly Quits


When the chief nomes assembled before their new King they joyfully
saluted him and promised to obey his commands. But, when Kaliko
questioned them, none knew the way to the Metal Forest, although all
had assisted in its making. So the King instructed them to search
carefully for one of the passages and to bring him the news as soon as
they had found it.

Meantime Quox had managed to back out of the rocky corridor and so
regain the open air and his old station on the mountain-side, and there
he lay upon the rocks, sound asleep, until the next day. The others of
the party were all given as good rooms as the caverns of the nomes
afforded, for King Kaliko felt that he was indebted to them for his
promotion and was anxious to be as hospitable as he could.

Much wonderment had been caused by the absolute disappearance of the
sixteen officers of Oogaboo and their Queen. Not a nome had seen them,
nor were they discovered during the search for the passages leading to
the Metal Forest. Perhaps no one was unhappy over their loss, but all
were curious to know what had become of them.

On the next day, when our friends went to visit the dragon, Quox said
to them: "I must now bid you good-bye, for my mission here is finished
and I must depart for the other side of the world, where I belong."

"Will you go through the Tube again?" asked Betsy.

"To be sure. But it will be a lonely trip this time, with no one to
talk to, and I cannot invite any of you to go with me. Therefore, as
soon as I slide into the hole I shall go to sleep, and when I pop out
at the other end I will wake up at home."

They thanked the dragon for befriending them and wished him a pleasant
journey. Also they sent their thanks to the great Jinjin, whose just
condemnation of Ruggedo had served their interests so well. Then Quox
yawned and stretched himself and ambled over to the Tube, into which he
slid headforemost and disappeared.

They really felt as if they had lost a friend, for the dragon had been
both kind and sociable during their brief acquaintance with him; but
they knew it was his duty to return to his own country. So they went
back to the caverns to renew the search for the hidden passages that
led to the forest, but for three days all efforts to find them proved
in vain.

It was Polychrome's custom to go every day to the mountain and watch
for her father, the Rainbow, for she was growing tired with wandering
upon the earth and longed to rejoin her sisters in their sky palaces.
And on the third day, while she sat motionless upon a point of rock,
whom should she see slyly creeping up the mountain but Ruggedo!

The former King looked very forlorn. His clothes were soiled and torn
and he had no sandals upon his feet or hat upon his head. Having left
his crown and sceptre behind when he fled, the old nome no longer
seemed kingly, but more like a beggerman.

Several times had Ruggedo crept up to the mouth of the caverns, only to
find the six eggs still on guard. He knew quite well that he must
accept his fate and become a homeless wanderer, but his chief regret
now was that he had neglected to fill his pockets with gold and jewels.
He was aware that a wanderer with wealth at his command would fare much
better than one who was a pauper, so he still loitered around the
caverns wherein he knew so much treasure was stored, hoping for a
chance to fill his pockets.

That was how he came to recollect the Metal Forest.

"Aha!" said he to himself, "I alone know the way to that Forest, and
once there I can fill my pockets with the finest jewels in all the
world."

He glanced at his pockets and was grieved to find them so small.
Perhaps they might be enlarged, so that they would hold more. He knew
of a poor woman who lived in a cottage at the foot of the mountain, so
he went to her and begged her to sew pockets all over his robe, paying
her with the gift of a diamond ring which he had worn upon his finger.
The woman was delighted to possess so valuable a ring and she sewed as
many pockets on Ruggedo's robe as she possibly could.

Then he returned up the mountain and, after gazing cautiously around to
make sure he was not observed, he touched a spring in a rock and it
swung slowly backward, disclosing a broad passageway. This he entered,
swinging the rock in place behind him.

However, Ruggedo had failed to look as carefully as he might have done,
for Polychrome was seated only a little distance off and her clear eyes
marked exactly the manner in which Ruggedo had released the hidden
spring. So she rose and hurried into the cavern, where she told Kaliko
and her friends of her discovery.

"I've no doubt that that is a way to the Metal Forest," exclaimed
Shaggy. "Come, let us follow Ruggedo at once and rescue my poor
brother!"

They agreed to this and King Kaliko called together a band of nomes to
assist them by carrying torches to light their way.

"The Metal Forest has a brilliant light of its own," said he, "but the
passage across the valley is likely to be dark."

Polychrome easily found the rock and touched the spring, so in less
than an hour after Ruggedo had entered they were all in the passage and
following swiftly after the former King.

"He means to rob the Forest, I'm sure," said Kaliko; "but he will find
he is no longer of any account in this Kingdom and I will have my nomes
throw him out."

"Then please throw him as hard as you can," said Betsy, "for he
deserves it. I don't mind an honest, out-an'-out enemy, who fights
square; but changing girls into fiddles and ordering 'em put into Slimy
Caves is mean and tricky, and Ruggedo doesn't deserve any sympathy. But
you'll have to let him take as much treasure as he can get in his
pockets, Kaliko."

"Yes, the Jinjin said so; but we won't miss it much. There is more
treasure in the Metal Forest than a million nomes could carry in their
pockets."

It was not difficult to walk through this passage, especially when the
torches lighted the way, so they made good progress. But it proved to
be a long distance and Betsy had tired herself with walking and was
seated upon the back of the mule when the passage made a sharp turn and
a wonderful and glorious light burst upon them. The next moment they
were all standing upon the edge of the marvelous Metal Forest.

It lay under another mountain and occupied a great domed cavern, the
roof of which was higher than a church steeple. In this space the
industrious nomes had built, during many years of labor, the most
beautiful forest in the world. The trees--trunks, branches and
leaves--were all of solid gold, while the bushes and underbrush were
formed of filigree silver, virgin pure. The trees towered as high as
natural live oaks do and were of exquisite workmanship.

On the ground were thickly strewn precious gems of every hue and size,
while here and there among the trees were paths pebbled with cut
diamonds of the clearest water. Taken all together, more treasure was
gathered in this Metal Forest than is contained in all the rest of the
world--if we except the land of Oz, where perhaps its value is equalled
in the famous Emerald City.

Our friends were so amazed at the sight that for a while they stood
gazing in silent wonder. Then Shaggy exclaimed.

"My brother! My dear lost brother! Is he indeed a prisoner in this
place?"

"Yes," replied Kaliko. "The Ugly One has been here for two or three
years, to my positive knowledge."

"But what could he find to eat?" inquired Betsy. "It's an awfully swell
place to live in, but one can't breakfast on rubies and di'monds, or
even gold."

"One doesn't need to, my dear," Kaliko assured her. "The Metal Forest
does not fill all of this great cavern, by any means. Beyond these gold
and silver trees are other trees of the real sort, which bear foods
very nice to eat. Let us walk in that direction, for I am quite sure we
will find Shaggy's brother in that part of the cavern, rather than in
this."

So they began to tramp over the diamond-pebbled paths, and at every
step they were more and more bewildered by the wondrous beauty of the
golden trees with their glittering foliage.

Suddenly they heard a scream. Jewels scattered in every direction as
some one hidden among the bushes scampered away before them. Then a
loud voice cried: "Halt!" and there was the sound of a struggle.




Chapter Twenty-One

A Bashful Brother


With fast beating hearts they all rushed forward and, beyond a group of
stately metal trees, came full upon a most astonishing scene.

There was Ruggedo in the hands of the officers of Oogaboo, a dozen of
whom were clinging to the old nome and holding him fast in spite of his
efforts to escape. There also was Queen Ann, looking grimly upon the
scene of strife; but when she observed her former companions
approaching she turned away in a shamefaced manner.

For Ann and her officers were indeed a sight to behold. Her Majesty's
clothing, once so rich and gorgeous, was now worn and torn into shreds
by her long crawl through the tunnel, which, by the way, had led her
directly into the Metal Forest. It was, indeed, one of the three secret
passages, and by far the most difficult of the three. Ann had not only
torn her pretty skirt and jacket, but her crown had become bent and
battered and even her shoes were so cut and slashed that they were
ready to fall from her feet.

The officers had fared somewhat worse than their leader, for holes were
worn in the knees of their trousers, while sharp points of rock in the
roof and sides of the tunnel had made rags of every inch of their once
brilliant uniforms. A more tattered and woeful army never came out of a
battle, than these harmless victims of the rocky passage. But it had
seemed their only means of escape from the cruel Nome King; so they had
crawled on, regardless of their sufferings.

When they reached the Metal Forest their eyes beheld more plunder than
they had ever dreamed of; yet they were prisoners in this huge dome and
could not escape with the riches heaped about them. Perhaps a more
unhappy and homesick lot of "conquerors" never existed than this band
from Oogaboo.

After several days of wandering in their marvelous prison they were
frightened by the discovery that Ruggedo had come among them. Rendered
desperate by their sad condition, the officers exhibited courage for
the first time since they left home and, ignorant of the fact that
Ruggedo was no longer King of the nomes, they threw themselves upon him
and had just succeeded in capturing him when their fellow adventurers
reached the spot.

"Goodness gracious!" cried Betsy. "What has happened to you all?"

Ann came forward to greet them, sorrowful and indignant.

"We were obliged to escape from the pit through a small tunnel, which
was lined with sharp and jagged rocks," said she, "and not only was our
clothing torn to rags but our flesh is so bruised and sore that we are
stiff and lame in every joint. To add to our troubles we find we are
still prisoners; but now that we have succeeded in capturing the wicked
Metal Monarch we shall force him to grant us our liberty."

"Ruggedo is no longer Metal Monarch, or King of the nomes," Files
informed her. "He has been deposed and cast out of his kingdom by Quox;
but here is the new King, whose name is Kaliko, and I am pleased to
assure Your Majesty that he is our friend."

"Glad to meet Your Majesty, I'm sure," said Kaliko, bowing as
courteously as if the Queen still wore splendid raiment.

The officers, having heard this explanation, now set Ruggedo free; but,
as he had no place to go, he stood by and faced his former servant, who
was now King in his place, in a humble and pleading manner.

"What are you doing here?" asked Kaliko sternly.

"Why, I was promised as much treasure as I could carry in my pockets,"
replied Ruggedo; "so I came here to get it, not wishing to disturb Your
Majesty."

"You were commanded to leave the country of the nomes forever!"
declared Kaliko.

"I know; and I'll go as soon as I have filled my pockets," said
Ruggedo, meekly.

"Then fill them, and be gone," returned the new King.

Ruggedo obeyed. Stooping down, he began gathering up jewels by the
handful and stuffing them into his many pockets. They were heavy
things, these diamonds and rubies and emeralds and amethysts and the
like, so before long Ruggedo was staggering with the weight he bore,
while the pockets were not yet filled. When he could no longer stoop
over without falling, Betsy and Polychrome and the Rose Princess came
to his assistance, picking up the finest gems and tucking them into his
pockets.

At last these were all filled and Ruggedo presented a comical sight,
for surely no man ever before had so many pockets, or any at all filled
with such a choice collection of precious stones. He neglected to thank
the young ladies for their kindness, but gave them a surly nod of
farewell and staggered down the path by the way he had come. They let
him depart in silence, for with all he had taken, the masses of jewels
upon the ground seemed scarcely to have been disturbed, so numerous
were they. Also they hoped they had seen the last of the degraded King.

"I'm awful glad he's gone," said Betsy, sighing deeply. "If he doesn't
get reckless and spend his wealth foolishly, he's got enough to start a
bank when he gets to Oklahoma."

"But my brother--my dear brother! Where is he?" inquired Shaggy
anxiously. "Have you seen him, Queen Ann?"

"What does your brother look like?" asked the Queen.

Shaggy hesitated to reply, but Betsy said: "He's called the Ugly One.
Perhaps you'll know him by that."

"The only person we have seen in this cavern," said Ann, "has run away
from us whenever we approached him. He hides over yonder, among the
trees that are not gold, and we have never been able to catch sight of
his face. So I cannot tell whether he is ugly or not."

"That must be my dear brother!" exclaimed Shaggy.

"Yes, it must be," assented Kaliko. "No one else inhabits this splendid
dome, so there can be no mistake."

"But why does he hide among those green trees, instead of enjoying all
these glittery golden ones?" asked Betsy.

"Because he finds food among the natural trees," replied Kaliko, "and I
remember that he has built a little house there, to sleep in. As for
these glittery golden trees, I will admit they are very pretty at first
sight. One cannot fail to admire them, as well as the rich jewels
scattered beneath them; but if one has to look at them always, they
become pretty tame."

"I believe that is true," declared Shaggy. "My dear brother is very
wise to prefer real trees to the imitation ones. But come; let us go
there and find him."

Shaggy started for the green grove at once, and the others followed
him, being curious to witness the final rescue of his long-sought,
long-lost brother.

Not far from the edge of the grove they came upon a small hut, cleverly
made of twigs and golden branches woven together. As they approached
the place they caught a glimpse of a form that darted into the hut and
slammed the door tight shut after him.

Shaggy Man ran to the door and cried aloud:

"Brother! Brother!"

"Who calls," demanded a sad, hollow voice from within.

"It is Shaggy--your own loving brother--who has been searching for you
a long time and has now come to rescue you."

"Too late!" replied the gloomy voice. "No one can rescue me now."

"Oh, but you are mistaken about that," said Shaggy. "There is a new
King of the nomes, named Kaliko, in Ruggedo's place, and he has
promised you shall go free."

"Free! I dare not go free!" said the Ugly One, in a voice of despair.

"Why not, Brother?" asked Shaggy, anxiously.

"Do you know what they have done to me?" came the answer through the
closed door.

"No. Tell me, Brother, what have they done?"

"When Ruggedo first captured me I was very handsome. Don't you
remember, Shaggy?"

"Not very well, Brother; you were so young when I left home. But I
remember that mother thought you were beautiful."

"She was right! I am sure she was right," wailed the prisoner. "But
Ruggedo wanted to injure me--to make me ugly in the eyes of all the
world--so he performed a wicked enchantment. I went to bed
beautiful--or you might say handsome--to be very modest I will merely
claim that I was good-looking--and I wakened the next morning the
homeliest man in all the world! I am so repulsive that when I look in a
mirror I frighten myself."

"Poor Brother!" said Shaggy softly, and all the others were silent from
sympathy.

"I was so ashamed of my looks," continued the voice of Shaggy's
brother, "that I tried to hide; but the cruel King Ruggedo forced me to
appear before all the legion of nomes, to whom he said: 'Behold the
Ugly One!' But when the nomes saw my face they all fell to laughing and
jeering, which prevented them from working at their tasks. Seeing this,
Ruggedo became angry and pushed me into a tunnel, closing the rock
entrance so that I could not get out. I followed the length of the
tunnel until I reached this huge dome, where the marvelous Metal Forest
stands, and here I have remained ever since."

"Poor Brother!" repeated Shaggy. "But I beg you now to come forth and
face us, who are your friends. None here will laugh or jeer, however
unhandsome you may be."

"No, indeed," they all added pleadingly.

But the Ugly One refused the invitation.

"I cannot," said he; "indeed, I cannot face strangers, ugly as I am."

Shaggy Man turned to the group surrounding him.

"What shall I do?" he asked in sorrowful tones. "I cannot leave my dear
brother here, and he refuses to come out of that house and face us."

"I'll tell you," replied Betsy. "Let him put on a mask."

"The very idea I was seeking!" exclaimed Shaggy joyfully; and then he
called out: "Brother, put a mask over your face, and then none of us
can see what your features are like."

"I have no mask," answered the Ugly One.

"Look here," said Betsy; "he can use my handkerchief."

Shaggy looked at the little square of cloth and shook his head.

"It isn't big enough," he objected; "I'm sure it isn't big enough to
hide a man's face. But he can use mine."

Saying this he took from his pocket his own handkerchief and went to
the door of the hut.

"Here, my Brother," he called, "take this handkerchief and make a mask
of it. I will also pass you my knife, so that you may cut holes for the
eyes, and then you must tie it over your face."

The door slowly opened, just far enough for the Ugly One to thrust out
his hand and take the handkerchief and the knife. Then it closed again.

"Don't forget a hole for your nose," cried Betsy. "You must breathe,
you know."

For a time there was silence. Queen Ann and her army sat down upon the
ground to rest. Betsy sat on Hank's back. Polychrome danced lightly up
and down the jeweled paths while Files and the Princess wandered
through the groves arm in arm. Tik-Tok, who never tired, stood
motionless.

By and by a noise sounded from within the hut.

"Are you ready?" asked Shaggy.

"Yes, Brother," came the reply and the door was thrown open to allow
the Ugly One to step forth.

Betsy might have laughed aloud had she not remembered how sensitive to
ridicule Shaggy's brother was, for the handkerchief with which he had
masked his features was a red one covered with big white polka dots. In
this two holes had been cut--in front of the eyes--while two smaller
ones before the nostrils allowed the man to breathe freely. The cloth
was then tightly drawn over the Ugly One's face and knotted at the back
of his neck.

He was dressed in clothes that had once been good, but now were sadly
worn and frayed. His silk stockings had holes in them, and his shoes
were stub-toed and needed blackening. "But what can you expect,"
whispered Betsy, "when the poor man has been a prisoner for so many
years?"

Shaggy had darted forward, and embraced his newly found brother with
both his arms. The brother also embraced Shaggy, who then led him
forward and introduced him to all the assembled company.

"This is the new Nome King," he said when he came to Kaliko. "He is our
friend, and has granted you your freedom."

"That is a kindly deed," replied Ugly in a sad voice, "but I dread to
go back to the world in this direful condition. Unless I remain forever
masked, my dreadful face would curdle all the milk and stop all the
clocks."

"Can't the enchantment be broken in some way?" inquired Betsy.

Shaggy looked anxiously at Kaliko, who shook his head.

"I am sure I can't break the enchantment," he said. "Ruggedo was fond
of magic, and learned a good many enchantments that we nomes know
nothing of."

"Perhaps Ruggedo himself might break his own enchantment," suggested
Ann; "but unfortunately we have allowed the old King to escape."

"Never mind, my dear Brother," said Shaggy consolingly; "I am very
happy to have found you again, although I may never see your face. So
let us make the most of this joyful reunion."

The Ugly One was affected to tears by this tender speech, and the tears
began to wet the red handkerchief; so Shaggy gently wiped them away
with his coat sleeve.




Chapter Twenty-Two

Kindly Kisses


"Won't you be dreadful sorry to leave this lovely place?" Betsy asked
the Ugly One.

"No, indeed," said he. "Jewels and gold are cold and heartless things,
and I am sure I would presently have died of loneliness had I not found
this natural forest at the edge of the artificial one. Anyhow, without
these real trees I should soon have starved to death."

Betsy looked around at the quaint trees.

"I don't just understand that," she admitted. "What could you find to
eat here?"

"The best food in the world," Ugly answered. "Do you see that grove at
your left?" he added, pointing it out; "well, such trees as those do
not grow in your country, or in any other place but this cavern. I have
named them 'Hotel Trees,' because they bear a certain kind of table
d'hote fruit called 'Three-Course Nuts.'"

"That's funny!" said Betsy. "What are the 'Three-Course Nuts' like?"

"Something like cocoanuts, to look at," explained the Ugly One. "All
you have to do is to pick one of them and then sit down and eat your
dinner. You first unscrew the top part and find a cupfull of good soup.
After you've eaten that, you unscrew the middle part and find a hollow
filled with meat and potatoes, vegetables and a fine salad. Eat that,
and unscrew the next section, and you come to the dessert in the bottom
of the nut. That is, pie and cake, cheese and crackers, and nuts and
raisins. The Three-Course Nuts are not all exactly alike in flavor or
in contents, but they are all good and in each one may be found a
complete three-course dinner."

"But how about breakfasts?" inquired Betsy.

"Why, there are Breakfast Trees for that, which grow over there at the
right. They bear nuts, like the others, only the nuts contain coffee or
chocolate, instead of soup; oatmeal instead of meat-and-potatoes, and
fruits instead of dessert. Sad as has been my life in this wonderful
prison, I must admit that no one could live more luxuriously in the
best hotel in the world than I have lived here; but I will be glad to
get into the open air again and see the good old sun and the silvery
moon and the soft green grass and the flowers that are kissed by the
morning dew. Ah, how much more lovely are those blessed things than the
glitter of gems or the cold gleam of gold!"

"Of course," said Betsy. "I once knew a little boy who wanted to catch
the measles, because all the little boys in his neighborhood but him
had had 'em, and he was really unhappy 'cause he couldn't catch 'em, try as
he would. So I'm pretty certain that the things we want, and can't
have, are not good for us. Isn't that true, Shaggy?"

"Not always, my dear," he gravely replied. "If we didn't want anything,
we would never get anything, good or bad. I think our longings are
natural, and if we act as nature prompts us we can't go far wrong."

"For my part," said Queen Ann, "I think the world would be a dreary
place without the gold and jewels."

"All things are good in their way," said Shaggy; "but we may have too
much of any good thing. And I have noticed that the value of anything
depends upon how scarce it is, and how difficult it is to obtain."

"Pardon me for interrupting you," said King Kaliko, coming to their
side, "but now that we have rescued Shaggy's brother I would like to
return to my royal cavern. Being the King of the Nomes, it is my duty
to look after my restless subjects and see that they behave themselves."

So they all turned and began walking through the Metal Forest to the
other side of the great domed cave, where they had first entered it.
Shaggy and his brother walked side by side and both seemed rejoiced
that they were together after their long separation. Betsy didn't dare
look at the polka dot handkerchief, for fear she would laugh aloud; so
she walked behind the two brothers and led Hank by holding fast to his
left ear.

When at last they reached the place where the passage led to the outer
world, Queen Ann said, in a hesitating way that was unusual with her:

"I have not conquered this Nome Country, nor do I expect to do so; but
I would like to gather a few of these pretty jewels before I leave this
place."

"Help yourself, ma'am," said King Kaliko, and at once the officers of
the Army took advantage of his royal permission and began filling their
pockets, while Ann tied a lot of diamonds in a big handkerchief.

This accomplished, they all entered the passage, the nomes going first
to light the way with their torches. They had not proceeded far when
Betsy exclaimed:

"Why, there are jewels here, too!"

All eyes were turned upon the ground and they found a regular trail of
jewels strewn along the rock floor.

"This is queer!" said Kaliko, much surprised. "I must send some of my
nomes to gather up these gems and replace them in the Metal Forest,
where they belong. I wonder how they came to be here?"

All the way along the passage they found this trail of jewels, but when
they neared the end the mystery was explained. For there, squatted upon
the floor with his back to the rock wall, sat old Ruggedo, puffing and
blowing as if he was all tired out. Then they realized it was he who
had scattered the jewels, from his many pockets, which one by one had
burst with the weight of their contents as he had stumbled along the
passage.

"But I don't mind," said Ruggedo, with a deep sigh. "I now realize that
I could not have carried such a weighty load very far, even had I
managed to escape from this passage with it. The woman who sewed the
pockets on my robe used poor thread, for which I shall thank her."

"Have you any jewels left?" inquired Betsy.

He glanced into some of the remaining pockets.

"A few," said he, "but they will be sufficient to supply my wants, and
I no longer have any desire to be rich. If some of you will kindly help
me to rise, I'll get out of here and leave you, for I know you all
despise me and prefer my room to my company."

Shaggy and Kaliko raised the old King to his feet, when he was
confronted by Shaggy's brother, whom he now noticed for the first time.
The queer and unexpected appearance of the Ugly One so startled Ruggedo
that he gave a wild cry and began to tremble, as if he had seen a ghost.

"Wh--wh--who is this?" he faltered.

"I am that helpless prisoner whom your cruel magic transformed from a
handsome man into an ugly one!" answered Shaggy's brother, in a voice
of stern reproach.

"Really, Ruggedo," said Betsy, "you ought to be ashamed of that mean
trick."

"I am, my dear," admitted Ruggedo, who was now as meek and humble as
formerly he had been cruel and vindictive.

"Then," returned the girl, "you'd better do some more magic and give
the poor man his own face again."

"I wish I could," answered the old King; "but you must remember that
Tititi-Hoochoo has deprived me of all my magic powers. However, I never
took the trouble to learn just how to break the charm I cast over
Shaggy's brother, for I intended he should always remain ugly."

"Every charm," remarked pretty Polychrome, "has its antidote; and, if
you knew this charm of ugliness, Ruggedo, you must have known how to
dispel it."

He shook his head.

"If I did, I--I've forgotten," he stammered regretfully.

"Try to think!" pleaded Shaggy, anxiously. "_Please_ try to think!"

Ruggedo ruffled his hair with both hands, sighed, slapped his chest,
rubbed his ear, and stared stupidly around the group.

"I've a faint recollection that there _was_ one thing that would break
the charm," said he; "but misfortune has so addled my brain that I
can't remember what it was."

"See here, Ruggedo," said Betsy, sharply, "we've treated you pretty
well, so far, but we won't stand for any nonsense, and if you know
what's good for yourself you'll think of that charm!"

"Why?" he demanded, turning to look wonderingly at the little girl.

"Because it means so much to Shaggy's brother. He's dreadfully ashamed
of himself, the way he is now, and you're to blame for it. Fact is,
Ruggedo, you've done so much wickedness in your life that it won't hurt
you to do a kind act now."

Ruggedo blinked at her, and sighed again, and then tried very hard to
think.

"I seem to remember, dimly," said he, "that a certain kind of a kiss
will break the charm of ugliness."

"What kind of a kiss?"

"What kind? Why, it was--it was--it was either the kiss of a Mortal
Maid; or--or--the kiss of a Mortal Maid who had once been a Fairy;
or--or the kiss of one who is still a Fairy. I can't remember which.
But of course no maid, mortal or fairy, would ever consent to kiss a
person so ugly--so dreadfully, fearfully, terribly ugly--as Shaggy's
brother."

"I'm not so sure of that," said Betsy, with admirable courage; "I'm a
Mortal Maid, and if it is _my_ kiss that will break this awful charm,
I--I'll do it!"

"Oh, you really couldn't," protested Ugly. "I would be obliged to
remove my mask, and when you saw my face, nothing could induce you to
kiss me, generous as you are."

"Well, as for that," said the little girl, "I needn't see your face at
all. Here's my plan: You stay in this dark passage, and we'll send away
the nomes with their torches. Then you'll take off the handkerchief,
and I--I'll kiss you."

"This is awfully kind of you, Betsy!" said Shaggy, gratefully.

"Well, it surely won't kill me," she replied; "and, if it makes you and
your brother happy, I'm willing to take some chances."

So Kaliko ordered the torch-bearers to leave the passage, which they
did by going through the rock opening. Queen Ann and her army also went
out; but the others were so interested in Betsy's experiment that they
remained grouped at the mouth of the passageway. When the big rock
swung into place, closing tight the opening, they were left in total
darkness.

"Now, then," called Betsy in a cheerful voice, "have you got that
handkerchief off your face, Ugly?"

"Yes," he replied.

"Well, where are you, then?" she asked, reaching out her arms.

"Here," said he.

"You'll have to stoop down, you know."

He found her hands and clasping them in his own stooped until his face
was near to that of the little girl. The others heard a clear, smacking
kiss, and then Betsy exclaimed:

"There! I've done it, and it didn't hurt a bit!"

"Tell me, dear brother; is the charm broken?" asked Shaggy.

"I do not know," was the reply. "It may be, or it may not be. I cannot
tell."

"Has anyone a match?" inquired Betsy.

"I have several," said Shaggy.

"Then let Ruggedo strike one of them and look at your brother's face,
while we all turn our backs. Ruggedo made your brother ugly, so I guess
he can stand the horror of looking at him, if the charm isn't broken."

Agreeing to this, Ruggedo took the match and lighted it. He gave one
look and then blew out the match.

"Ugly as ever!" he said with a shudder. "So it wasn't the kiss of a
Mortal Maid, after all."

"Let me try," proposed the Rose Princess, in her sweet voice. "I am a
Mortal Maid who was once a Fairy. Perhaps my kiss will break the charm."

Files did not wholly approve of this, but he was too generous to
interfere. So the Rose Princess felt her way through the darkness to
Shaggy's brother and kissed him.

Ruggedo struck another match, while they all turned away.

"No," announced the former King; "that didn't break the charm, either.
It must be the kiss of a Fairy that is required--or else my memory has
failed me altogether."

"Polly," said Betsy, pleadingly, "won't _you_ try?"

"Of course I will!" answered Polychrome, with a merry laugh. "I've
never kissed a mortal man in all the thousands of years I have existed,
but I'll do it to please our faithful Shaggy Man, whose unselfish
affection for his ugly brother deserves to be rewarded."

Even as Polychrome was speaking she tripped lightly to the side of the
Ugly One and quickly touched his cheek with her lips.

"Oh, thank you--thank you!" he fervently cried. "I've changed, this
time, I know. I can feel it! I'm different. Shaggy--dear Shaggy--I am
myself again!"

Files, who was near the opening, touched the spring that released the
big rock and it suddenly swung backward and let in a flood of daylight.

Everyone stood motionless, staring hard at Shaggy's brother, who, no
longer masked by the polka-dot handkerchief, met their gaze with a glad
smile.

"Well," said Shaggy Man, breaking the silence at last and drawing a
long, deep breath of satisfaction, "you are no longer the Ugly One, my
dear brother; but, to be entirely frank with you, the face that belongs
to you is no more handsome than it ought to be."

"I think he's rather good looking," remarked Betsy, gazing at the man
critically.

"In comparison with what he was," said King Kaliko, "he is really
beautiful. You, who never beheld his ugliness, may not understand that;
but it was my misfortune to look at the Ugly One many times, and I say
again that, in comparison with what he was, the man is now beautiful."

"All right," returned Betsy, briskly, "we'll take your word for it,
Kaliko. And now let us get out of this tunnel and into the world again."




Chapter Twenty-Three

Ruggedo Reforms


It did not take them long to regain the royal cavern of the Nome King,
where Kaliko ordered served to them the nicest refreshments the place
afforded.

Ruggedo had come trailing along after the rest of the party and while
no one paid any attention to the old King they did not offer any
objection to his presence or command him to leave them. He looked
fearfully to see if the eggs were still guarding the entrance, but they
had now disappeared; so he crept into the cavern after the others and
humbly squatted down in a corner of the room.

There Betsy discovered him. All of the little girl's companions were
now so happy at the success of Shaggy's quest for his brother, and the
laughter and merriment seemed so general, that Betsy's heart softened
toward the friendless old man who had once been their bitter enemy, and
she carried to him some of the food and drink. Ruggedo's eyes filled
with tears at this unexpected kindness. He took the child's hand in his
own and pressed it gratefully.

"Look here, Kaliko," said Betsy, addressing the new King, "what's the
use of being hard on Ruggedo? All his magic power is gone, so he can't
do any more harm, and I'm sure he's sorry he acted so badly to
everybody."

"Are you?" asked Kaliko, looking down at his former master.

"I am," said Ruggedo. "The girl speaks truly. I'm sorry and I'm
harmless. I don't want to wander through the wide world, on top of the
ground, for I'm a nome. No nome can ever be happy any place but
underground."

"That being the case," said Kaliko, "I will let you stay here as long
as you behave yourself; but, if you try to act badly again, I shall
drive you out, as Tititi-Hoochoo has commanded, and you'll have to
wander."

"Never fear. I'll behave," promised Ruggedo. "It is hard work being a
King, and harder still to be a good King. But now that I am a common
nome I am sure I can lead a blameless life."

They were all pleased to hear this and to know that Ruggedo had really
reformed.

"I hope he'll keep his word," whispered Betsy to Shaggy; "but if he
gets bad again we will be far away from the Nome Kingdom and Kaliko
will have to 'tend to the old nome himself."

Polychrome had been a little restless during the last hour or two. The
lovely Daughter of the Rainbow knew that she had now done all in her
power to assist her earth friends, and so she began to long for her sky
home.

"I think," she said, after listening intently, "that it is beginning to
rain. The Rain King is my uncle, you know, and perhaps he has read my
thoughts and is going to help me. Anyway I must take a look at the sky
and make sure."

So she jumped up and ran through the passage to the outer entrance, and
they all followed after her and grouped themselves on a ledge of the
mountain-side. Sure enough, dark clouds had filled the sky and a slow,
drizzling rain had set in.

"It can't last for long," said Shaggy, looking upward, "and when it
stops we shall lose the sweet little fairy we have learned to love.
Alas," he continued, after a moment, "the clouds are already breaking
in the west, and--see!--isn't that the Rainbow coming?"

Betsy didn't look at the sky; she looked at Polychrome, whose happy,
smiling face surely foretold the coming of her father to take her to
the Cloud Palaces. A moment later a gleam of sunshine flooded the
mountain and a gorgeous Rainbow appeared.

With a cry of gladness Polychrome sprang upon a point of rock and held
out her arms. Straightway the Rainbow descended until its end was at
her very feet, when with a graceful leap she sprang upon it and was at
once clasped in the arms of her radiant sisters, the Daughters of the
Rainbow. But Polychrome released herself to lean over the edge of the
glowing arch and nod, and smile and throw a dozen kisses to her late
comrades.

"Good-bye!" she called, and they all shouted "Good-bye!" in return and
waved their hands to their pretty friend.

Slowly the magnificent bow lifted and melted into the sky, until the
eyes of the earnest watchers saw only fleecy clouds flitting across the
blue.

"I'm dreadful sorry to see Polychrome go," said Betsy, who felt like
crying; "but I s'pose she'll be a good deal happier with her sisters in
the sky palaces."

"To be sure," returned Shaggy, nodding gravely. "It's her home, you
know, and those poor wanderers who, like ourselves, have no home, can
realize what that means to her."

"Once," said Betsy, "I, too, had a home. Now, I've only--only--dear old
Hank!"

She twined her arms around her shaggy friend who was not human, and he
said: "Hee-haw!" in a tone that showed he understood her mood. And the
shaggy friend who was human stroked the child's head tenderly and said:
"You're wrong about that, Betsy, dear. I will never desert you."

"Nor I!" exclaimed Shaggy's brother, in earnest tones.

The little girl looked up at them gratefully, and her eyes smiled
through their tears.

"All right," she said. "It's raining again, so let's go back into the
cavern."

Rather soberly, for all loved Polychrome and would miss her, they
reentered the dominions of the Nome King.




Chapter Twenty-Four

Dorothy is Delighted


"Well," said Queen Ann, when all were again seated in Kaliko's royal
cavern, "I wonder what we shall do next. If I could find my way back to
Oogaboo I'd take my army home at once, for I'm sick and tired of these
dreadful hardships."

"Don't you want to conquer the world?" asked Betsy.

"No; I've changed my mind about that," admitted the Queen. "The world
is too big for one person to conquer and I was happier with my own
people in Oogaboo. I wish--Oh, how earnestly I wish--that I was back
there this minute!"

"So do I!" yelled every officer in a fervent tone.

Now, it is time for the reader to know that in the far-away Land of Oz
the lovely Ruler, Ozma, had been following the adventures of her Shaggy
Man, and Tik-Tok, and all the others they had met. Day by day Ozma,
with the wonderful Wizard of Oz seated beside her, had gazed upon a
Magic Picture in a radium frame, which occupied one side of the Ruler's
cosy boudoir in the palace of the Emerald City. The singular thing
about this Magic Picture was that it showed whatever scene Ozma wished
to see, with the figures all in motion, just as it was taking place. So
Ozma and the Wizard had watched every action of the adventurers from
the time Shaggy had met shipwrecked Betsy and Hank in the Rose Kingdom,
at which time the Rose Princess, a distant cousin of Ozma, had been
exiled by her heartless subjects.

When Ann and her people so earnestly wished to return to Oogaboo, Ozma
was sorry for them and remembered that Oogaboo was a corner of the Land
of Oz. She turned to her attendant and asked:

"Can not your magic take these unhappy people to their old home,
Wizard?"

"It can, Your Highness," replied the little Wizard.

"I think the poor Queen has suffered enough in her misguided effort to
conquer the world," said Ozma, smiling at the absurdity of the
undertaking, "so no doubt she will hereafter be contented in her own
little Kingdom. Please send her there, Wizard, and with her the
officers and Files."

"How about the Rose Princess?" asked the Wizard.

"Send her to Oogaboo with Files," answered Ozma. "They have become such
good friends that I am sure it would make them unhappy to separate
them."

"Very well," said the Wizard, and without any fuss or mystery whatever
he performed a magical rite that was simple and effective. Therefore
those seated in the Nome King's cavern were both startled and amazed
when all the people of Oogaboo suddenly disappeared from the room, and
with them the Rose Princess. At first they could not understand it at
all; but presently Shaggy suspected the truth, and believing that Ozma
was now taking an interest in the party he drew from his pocket a tiny
instrument which he placed against his ear.

Ozma, observing this action in her Magic Picture, at once caught up a
similar instrument from a table beside her and held it to her own ear.
The two instruments recorded the same delicate vibrations of sound and
formed a wireless telephone, an invention of the Wizard. Those
separated by any distance were thus enabled to converse together with
perfect ease and without any wire connection.

"Do you hear me, Shaggy Man?" asked Ozma.

"Yes, Your Highness," he replied.

"I have sent the people of Oogaboo back to their own little valley,"
announced the Ruler of Oz; "so do not worry over their disappearance."

"That was very kind of you," said Shaggy. "But Your Highness must
permit me to report that my own mission here is now ended. I have found
my lost brother, and he is now beside me, freed from the enchantment of
ugliness which Ruggedo cast upon him. Tik-Tok has served me and my
comrades faithfully, as you requested him to do, and I hope you will
now transport the Clockwork Man back to your fairyland of Oz."

"I will do that," replied Ozma. "But how about yourself, Shaggy?"

"I have been very happy in Oz," he said, "but my duty to others forces
me to exile myself from that delightful land. I must take care of my
new-found brother, for one thing, and I have a new comrade in a dear
little girl named Betsy Bobbin, who has no home to go to, and no other
friends but me and a small donkey named Hank. I have promised Betsy
never to desert her as long as she needs a friend, and so I must give
up the delights of the Land of Oz forever."

He said this with a sigh of regret, and Ozma made no reply but laid the
tiny instrument on her table, thus cutting off all further
communication with the Shaggy Man. But the lovely Ruler of Oz still
watched her magic picture, with a thoughtful expression upon her face,
and the little Wizard of Oz watched Ozma and smiled softly to himself.

In the cavern of the Nome King Shaggy replaced the wireless telephone
in his pocket and turning to Betsy said in as cheerful a voice as he
could muster:

"Well, little comrade, what shall we do next?"

"I don't know, I'm sure," she answered with a puzzled face. "I'm kind
of sorry our adventures are over, for I enjoyed them, and now that
Queen Ann and her people are gone, and Polychrome is gone, and--dear
me!--where's Tik-Tok, Shaggy?"

"He also has disappeared," said Shaggy, looking around the cavern and
nodding wisely. "By this time he is in Ozma's palace in the Land of Oz,
which is his home."

"Isn't it your home, too?" asked Betsy.

"It used to be, my dear; but now my home is wherever you and my brother
are. We are wanderers, you know, but if we stick together I am sure we
shall have a good time."

"Then," said the girl, "let us get out of this stuffy, underground
cavern and go in search of new adventures. I'm sure it has stopped
raining."

"I'm ready," said Shaggy, and then they bade good-bye to King Kaliko,
and thanked him for his assistance, and went out to the mouth of the
passage.

The sky was now clear and a brilliant blue in color; the sun shone
brightly and even this rugged, rocky country seemed delightful after
their confinement underground. There were but four of them now--Betsy
and Hank, and Shaggy and his brother--and the little party made their
way down the mountain and followed a faint path that led toward the
southwest.

During this time Ozma had been holding a conference with the Wizard,
and later with Tik-Tok, whom the magic of the Wizard had quickly
transported to Ozma's palace. Tik-Tok had only words of praise for
Betsy Bobbin, "who," he said, "is al-most as nice as Dor-o-thy
her-self."

"Let us send for Dorothy," said Ozma, and summoning her favorite maid,
who was named Jellia Jamb, she asked her to request Princess Dorothy to
attend her at once. So a few moments later Dorothy entered Ozma's room
and greeted her and the Wizard and Tik-Tok with the same gentle smile
and simple manner that had won for the little girl the love of everyone
she met.

"Did you want to see me, Ozma?" she asked.

"Yes, dear. I am puzzled how to act, and I want your advice."

"I don't b'lieve it's worth much," replied Dorothy, "but I'll do the
best I can. What is it all about, Ozma?"

"You all know," said the girl Ruler, addressing her three friends,
"what a serious thing it is to admit any mortals into this fairyland of
Oz. It is true I have invited several mortals to make their home here,
and all of them have proved true and loyal subjects. Indeed, no one of
you three was a native of Oz. Dorothy and the Wizard came here from the
United States, and Tik-Tok came from the Land of Ev. But of course he
is not a mortal. Shaggy is another American, and he is the cause of all
my worry, for our dear Shaggy will not return here and desert the new
friends he has found in his recent adventures, because he believes they
need his services."

"Shaggy Man was always kind-hearted," remarked Dorothy. "But who are
these new friends he has found?"

"One is his brother, who for many years has been a prisoner of the Nome
King, our old enemy Ruggedo. This brother seems a kindly, honest
fellow, but he has done nothing to entitle him to a home in the Land of
Oz."

"Who else?" asked Dorothy.

"I have told you about Betsy Bobbin, the little girl who was
shipwrecked--in much the same way you once were--and has since been
following the Shaggy Man in his search for his lost brother. You
remember her, do you not?"

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed Dorothy. "I've often watched her and Hank in the
Magic Picture, you know. She's a dear little girl, and old Hank is a
darling! Where are they now?"

"Look and see," replied Ozma with a smile at her friend's enthusiasm.

Dorothy turned to the Picture, which showed Betsy and Hank, with Shaggy
and his brother, trudging along the rocky paths of a barren country.

"Seems to me," she said, musingly, "that they're a good way from any
place to sleep, or any nice things to eat."

"You are right," said Tik-Tok. "I have been in that coun-try, and it is
a wil-der-ness."

"It is the country of the nomes," explained the Wizard, "who are so
mischievous that no one cares to live near them. I'm afraid Shaggy and
his friends will endure many hardships before they get out of that
rocky place, unless--"

He turned to Ozma and smiled.

"Unless I ask you to transport them all here?" she asked.

"Yes, your Highness."

"Could your magic do that?" inquired Dorothy.

"I think so," said the Wizard.

"Well," said Dorothy, "as far as Betsy and Hank are concerned, I'd like
to have them here in Oz. It would be such fun to have a girl playmate
of my own age, you see. And Hank is such a dear little mule!"

Ozma laughed at the wistful expression in the girl's eyes, and then she
drew Dorothy to her and kissed her.

"Am I not your friend and playmate?" she asked.

Dorothy flushed.

"You know how dearly I love you, Ozma!" she cried. "But you're so busy
ruling all this Land of Oz that we can't always be together."

"I know, dear. My first duty is to my subjects, and I think it would be
a delight to us all to have Betsy with us. There's a pretty suite of
rooms just opposite your own where she can live, and I'll build a
golden stall for Hank in the stable where the Sawhorse lives. Then
we'll introduce the mule to the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger, and
I'm sure they will soon become firm friends. But I cannot very well
admit Betsy and Hank into Oz unless I also admit Shaggy's brother."

"And, unless you admit Shaggy's brother, you will keep out poor Shaggy,
whom we are all very fond of," said the Wizard.

"Well, why not ad-mit him?" demanded Tik-Tok.

"The Land of Oz is not a refuge for all mortals in distress," explained
Ozma. "I do not wish to be unkind to Shaggy Man, but his brother has no
claim on me."

"The Land of Oz isn't crowded," suggested Dorothy.

"Then you advise me to admit Shaggy's brother?" inquired Ozma.

"Well, we can't afford to lose our Shaggy Man, can we?"

"No, indeed!" returned Ozma. "What do you say, Wizard?"

"I'm getting my magic ready to transport them all."

"And you, Tik-Tok?"

"Shag-gy's broth-er is a good fel-low, and we can't spare Shag-gy."

"So, then; the question is settled," decided Ozma. "Perform your magic,
Wizard!"

He did so, placing a silver plate upon a small standard and pouring
upon the plate a small quantity of pink powder which was contained in a
crystal vial. Then he muttered a rather difficult incantation which the
sorceress Glinda the Good had taught him, and it all ended in a puff of
perfumed smoke from the silver plate. This smoke was so pungent that it
made both Ozma and Dorothy rub their eyes for a moment.

"You must pardon these disagreeable fumes," said the Wizard. "I assure
you the smoke is a very necessary part of my wizardry."

"Look!" cried Dorothy, pointing to the Magic Picture; "they're gone!
All of them are gone."

Indeed, the picture now showed the same rocky landscape as before, but
the three people and the mule had disappeared from it.

"They are gone," said the Wizard, polishing the silver plate and
wrapping it in a fine cloth, "because they are here."

At that moment Jellia Jamb entered the room.

"Your Highness," she said to Ozma, "the Shaggy Man and another man are
in the waiting room and ask to pay their respects to you. Shaggy is
crying like a baby, but he says they are tears of joy."

"Send them here at once, Jellia!" commanded Ozma.

"Also," continued the maid, "a girl and a small-sized mule have
mysteriously arrived, but they don't seem to know where they are or how
they came here. Shall I send them here, too?"

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Dorothy, eagerly jumping up from her chair; "I'll
go to meet Betsy myself, for she'll feel awful strange in this big
palace."

And she ran down the stairs two at a time to greet her new friend,
Betsy Bobbin.




Chapter Twenty-Five

The Land of Love


"Well, is 'hee-haw' all you are able to say?" inquired the Sawhorse, as
he examined Hank with his knot eyes and slowly wagged the branch that
served him for a tail.

They were in a beautiful stable in the rear of Ozma's palace, where the
wooden Sawhorse--very much alive--lived in a gold-paneled stall, and
where there were rooms for the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger,
which were filled with soft cushions for them to lie upon and golden
troughs for them to eat from.

Beside the stall of the Sawhorse had been placed another for Hank, the
mule. This was not quite so beautiful as the other, for the Sawhorse
was Ozma's favorite steed; but Hank had a supply of cushions for a bed
(which the Sawhorse did not need because he never slept) and all this
luxury was so strange to the little mule that he could only stand still
and regard his surroundings and his queer companions with wonder and
amazement.

The Cowardly Lion, looking very dignified, was stretched out upon the
marble floor of the stable, eyeing Hank with a calm and critical gaze,
while near by crouched the huge Hungry Tiger, who seemed equally
interested in the new animal that had just arrived. The Sawhorse,
standing stiffly before Hank, repeated his question:

"Is 'hee-haw' all you are able to say?"

Hank moved his ears in an embarrassed manner.

"I have never said anything else, until now," he replied; and then he
began to tremble with fright to hear himself talk.

"I can well understand that," remarked the Lion, wagging his great head
with a swaying motion. "Strange things happen in this Land of Oz, as
they do everywhere else. I believe you came here from the cold,
civilized, outside world, did you not?"

"I did," replied Hank. "One minute I was outside of Oz--and the next
minute I was inside! That was enough to give me a nervous shock, as you
may guess; but to find myself able to talk, as Betsy does, is a marvel
that staggers me."

"That is because you are in the Land of Oz," said the Sawhorse. "All
animals talk, in this favored country, and you must admit it is more
sociable than to bray your dreadful 'hee-haw,' which nobody can
understand."

"Mules understand it very well," declared Hank.

"Oh, indeed! Then there must be other mules in your outside world,"
said the Tiger, yawning sleepily.

"There are a great many in America," said Hank. "Are you the only Tiger
in Oz?"

"No," acknowledged the Tiger, "I have many relatives living in the
Jungle Country; but I am the only Tiger living in the Emerald City."

"There are other Lions, too," said the Sawhorse; "but I am the only
horse, of any description, in this favored Land."

"That is why this Land is favored," said the Tiger. "You must
understand, friend Hank, that the Sawhorse puts on airs because he is
shod with plates of gold, and because our beloved Ruler, Ozma of Oz,
likes to ride upon his back."

"Betsy rides upon _my_ back," declared Hank proudly.

"Who is Betsy?"

"The dearest, sweetest girl in all the world!"

The Sawhorse gave an angry snort and stamped his golden feet. The Tiger
crouched and growled. Slowly the great Lion rose to his feet, his mane
bristling.

"Friend Hank," said he, "either you are mistaken in judgment or you are
willfully trying to deceive us. The dearest, sweetest girl in the world
is our Dorothy, and I will fight anyone--animal or human--who dares to
deny it!"

"So will I!" snarled the Tiger, showing two rows of enormous white
teeth.

"You are all wrong!" asserted the Sawhorse in a voice of scorn. "No
girl living can compare with my mistress, Ozma of Oz!"

Hank slowly turned around until his heels were toward the others. Then
he said stubbornly:

"I am not mistaken in my statement, nor will I admit there can be a
sweeter girl alive than Betsy Bobbin. If you want to fight, come
on--I'm ready for you!"

While they hesitated, eyeing Hank's heels doubtfully, a merry peal of
laughter startled the animals and turning their heads they beheld three
lovely girls standing just within the richly carved entrance to the
stable. In the center was Ozma, her arms encircling the waists of
Dorothy and Betsy, who stood on either side of her. Ozma was nearly
half a head taller than the two other girls, who were almost of one
size. Unobserved, they had listened to the talk of the animals, which
was a very strange experience indeed to little Betsy Bobbin.

"You foolish beasts!" exclaimed the Ruler of Oz, in a gentle but
chiding tone of voice. "Why should you fight to defend us, who are
all three loving friends and in no sense rivals? Answer me!" she
continued, as they bowed their heads sheepishly.

"I have the right to express my opinion, your Highness," pleaded the
Lion.

"And so have the others," replied Ozma. "I am glad you and the Hungry
Tiger love Dorothy best, for she was your first friend and companion.
Also I am pleased that my Sawhorse loves me best, for together we have
endured both joy and sorrow. Hank has proved his faith and loyalty by
defending his own little mistress; and so you are all right in one way,
but wrong in another. Our Land of Oz is a Land of Love, and here
friendship outranks every other quality. Unless you can all be friends,
you cannot retain our love."

They accepted this rebuke very meekly.

"All right," said the Sawhorse, quite cheerfully; "shake hoofs, friend
Mule."

Hank touched his hoof to that of the wooden horse.

"Let us be friends and rub noses," said the Tiger. So Hank modestly
rubbed noses with the big beast.

The Lion merely nodded and said, as he crouched before the mule:

"Any friend of a friend of our beloved Ruler is a friend of the
Cowardly Lion. That seems to cover your case. If ever you need help or
advice, friend Hank, call on me."

"Why, this is as it should be," said Ozma, highly pleased to see them
so fully reconciled. Then she turned to her companions: "Come, my
dears, let us resume our walk."

As they turned away Betsy said wonderingly:

"Do all the animals in Oz talk as we do?"

"Almost all," answered Dorothy. "There's a Yellow Hen here, and she can
talk, and so can her chickens; and there's a Pink Kitten upstairs in my
room who talks very nicely; but I've a little fuzzy black dog, named
Toto, who has been with me in Oz a long time, and he's never said a
single word but 'Bow-wow!'"

"Do you know why?" asked Ozma.

"Why, he's a Kansas dog; so I s'pose he's different from these fairy
animals," replied Dorothy.

"Hank isn't a fairy animal, any more than Toto," said Ozma, "yet as
soon as he came under the spell of our fairyland he found he could
talk. It was the same way with Billina, the Yellow Hen whom you brought
here at one time. The same spell has affected Toto, I assure you; but
he's a wise little dog and while he knows everything that is said to
him he prefers not to talk."

"Goodness me!" exclaimed Dorothy. "I never s'pected Toto was fooling me
all this time." Then she drew a small silver whistle from her pocket
and blew a shrill note upon it. A moment later there was a sound of
scurrying footsteps, and a shaggy black dog came running up the path.

Dorothy knelt down before him and shaking her finger just above his
nose she said:

"Toto, haven't I always been good to you?"

Toto looked up at her with his bright black eyes and wagged his tail.

"Bow-wow!" he said, and Betsy knew at once that meant yes, as well as
Dorothy and Ozma knew it, for there was no mistaking the tone of Toto's
voice.

"That's a dog answer," said Dorothy. "How would you like it, Toto, if I
said nothing to you but 'bow-wow'?"

Toto's tail was wagging furiously now, but otherwise he was silent.

"Really, Dorothy," said Betsy, "he can talk with his bark and his tail
just as well as we can. Don't you understand such dog language?"

"Of course I do," replied Dorothy. "But Toto's got to be more sociable.
See here, sir!" she continued, addressing the dog, "I've just learned,
for the first time, that you can say words--if you want to. Don't you
want to, Toto?"

"Woof!" said Toto, and that meant "no."

"Not just one word, Toto, to prove you're as any other animal in Oz?"

"Woof!"

"Just one word, Toto--and then you may run away."

He looked at her steadily a moment.

"All right. Here I go!" he said, and darted away as swift as an arrow.

Dorothy clapped her hands in delight, while Betsy and Ozma both laughed
heartily at her pleasure and the success of her experiment. Arm in arm
they sauntered away through the beautiful gardens of the palace, where
magnificent flowers bloomed in abundance and fountains shot their
silvery sprays far into the air. And by and by, as they turned a
corner, they came upon Shaggy Man and his brother, who were seated
together upon a golden bench.

The two arose to bow respectfully as the Ruler of Oz approached them.

"How are you enjoying our Land of Oz?" Ozma asked the stranger.

"I am very happy here, Your Highness," replied Shaggy's brother. "Also
I am very grateful to you for permitting me to live in this delightful
place."

"You must thank Shaggy for that," said Ozma. "Being his brother, I have
made you welcome here."

"When you know Brother better," said Shaggy earnestly, "you will be
glad he has become one of your loyal subjects. I am just getting
acquainted with him myself and I find much in his character to admire."

Leaving the brothers, Ozma and the girls continued their walk.
Presently Betsy exclaimed:

"Shaggy's brother can't ever be as happy in Oz as _I_ am. Do you know,
Dorothy, I didn't believe any girl could ever have such a good
time--_anywhere_--as I'm having now?"

"I know," answered Dorothy. "I've felt that way myself, lots of times."

"I wish," continued Betsy, dreamily, "that every little girl in the
world could live in the Land of Oz; and every little boy, too!"

Ozma laughed at this.

"It is quite fortunate for us, Betsy, that your wish cannot be
granted," said she, "for all that army of girls and boys would crowd us
so that we would have to move away."

"Yes," agreed Betsy, after a little thought, "I guess that's true."

THE END





The Wonderful Oz Books by L. Frank Baum

  THE WIZARD OF OZ
  THE LAND OF OZ
  OZMA OF OZ
  DOROTHY AND THE WIZARD IN OZ
  THE ROAD TO OZ
  THE EMERALD CITY OF OZ
  THE PATCHWORK GIRL OF OZ
  TIK-TOK OF OZ
  THE SCARECROW OF OZ
  RINKITINK IN OZ
  THE LOST PRINCESS OF OZ
  THE TIN WOODMAN OF OZ
  THE MAGIC OF OZ
  GLINDA OF OZ

========================================
========================================

THE PATCHWORK GIRL OF OZ


by

L. FRANK BAUM




  Affectionately Dedicated to my young friend
  Sumner Hamilton Britton of Chicago




Prologue

Through the kindness of Dorothy Gale of Kansas, afterward Princess
Dorothy of Oz, an humble writer in the United States of America was
once appointed Royal Historian of Oz, with the privilege of writing the
chronicle of that wonderful fairyland. But after making six books about
the adventures of those interesting but queer people who live in the
Land of Oz, the Historian learned with sorrow that by an edict of the
Supreme Ruler, Ozma of Oz, her country would thereafter be rendered
invisible to all who lived outside its borders and that all
communication with Oz would, in the future, be cut off.

The children who had learned to look for the books about Oz and who
loved the stories about the gay and happy people inhabiting that
favored country, were as sorry as their Historian that there would be
no more books of Oz stories. They wrote many letters asking if the
Historian did not know of some adventures to write about that had
happened before the Land of Oz was shut out from all the rest of the
world. But he did not know of any. Finally one of the children inquired
why we couldn't hear from Princess Dorothy by wireless telegraph, which
would enable her to communicate to the Historian whatever happened in
the far-off Land of Oz without his seeing her, or even knowing just
where Oz is.

That seemed a good idea; so the Historian rigged up a high tower in his
back yard, and took lessons in wireless telegraphy until he understood
it, and then began to call "Princess Dorothy of Oz" by sending messages
into the air.

Now, it wasn't likely that Dorothy would be looking for wireless
messages or would heed the call; but one thing the Historian was sure
of, and that was that the powerful Sorceress, Glinda, would know what
he was doing and that he desired to communicate with Dorothy. For
Glinda has a big book in which is recorded every event that takes place
anywhere in the world, just the moment that it happens, and so of
course the book would tell her about the wireless message.

And that was the way Dorothy heard that the Historian wanted to speak
with her, and there was a Shaggy Man in the Land of Oz who knew how to
telegraph a wireless reply. The result was that the Historian begged so
hard to be told the latest news of Oz, so that he could write it down
for the children to read, that Dorothy asked permission of Ozma and
Ozma graciously consented.

That is why, after two long years of waiting, another Oz story is now
presented to the children of America. This would not have been possible
had not some clever man invented the "wireless" and an equally clever
child suggested the idea of reaching the mysterious Land of Oz by its
means.

L. Frank Baum.

"OZCOT"
  at Hollywood
    in California




LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1 - Ojo and Unc Nunkie
   2 - The Crooked Magician
   3 - The Patchwork Girl
   4 - The Glass Cat
   5 - A Terrible Accident
   6 - The Journey
   7 - The Troublesome Phonograph
   8 - The Foolish Owl and the Wise Donkey
   9 - They Meet the Woozy
  10 - Shaggy Man to the Rescue
  11 - A Good Friend
  12 - The Giant Porcupine
  13 - Scraps and the Scarecrow
  14 - Ojo Breaks the Law
  15 - Ozma's Prisoner
  16 - Princess Dorothy
  17 - Ozma and Her Friends
  18 - Ojo is Forgiven
  19 - Trouble with the Tottenhots
  20 - The Captive Yoop
  21 - Hip Hopper the Champion
  22 - The Joking Horners
  23 - Peace is Declared
  24 - Ojo Finds the Dark Well
  25 - They Bribe the Lazy Quadling
  26 - The Trick River
  27 - The Tin Woodman Objects
  28 - The Wonderful Wizard of Oz




The Patchwork Girl of Oz




Chapter One

Ojo and Unc Nunkie


"Where's the butter, Unc Nunkie?" asked Ojo.

Unc looked out of the window and stroked his long beard. Then he turned
to the Munchkin boy and shook his head.

"Isn't," said he.

"Isn't any butter? That's too bad, Unc. Where's the jam then?" inquired
Ojo, standing on a stool so he could look through all the shelves of
the cupboard. But Unc Nunkie shook his head again.

"Gone," he said.

"No jam, either? And no cake--no jelly--no apples--nothing but bread?"

"All," said Unc, again stroking his beard as he gazed from the window.

The little boy brought the stool and sat beside his uncle, munching the
dry bread slowly and seeming in deep thought.

"Nothing grows in our yard but the bread tree," he mused, "and there
are only two more loaves on that tree; and they're not ripe yet. Tell
me, Unc; why are we so poor?"

The old Munchkin turned and looked at Ojo. He had kindly eyes, but he
hadn't smiled or laughed in so long that the boy had forgotten that Unc
Nunkie could look any other way than solemn. And Unc never spoke any
more words than he was obliged to, so his little nephew, who lived
alone with him, had learned to understand a great deal from one word.

"Why are we so poor, Unc?" repeated the boy.

"Not," said the old Munchkin.

"I think we are," declared Ojo. "What have we got?"

"House," said Unc Nunkie.

"I know; but everyone in the Land of Oz has a place to live. What else,
Unc?"

"Bread."

"I'm eating the last loaf that's ripe. There; I've put aside your
share, Unc. It's on the table, so you can eat it when you get hungry.
But when that is gone, what shall we eat, Unc?"

The old man shifted in his chair but merely shook his head.

"Of course," said Ojo, who was obliged to talk because his uncle would
not, "no one starves in the Land of Oz, either. There is plenty for
everyone, you know; only, if it isn't just where you happen to be, you
must go where it is."

The aged Munchkin wriggled again and stared at his small nephew as if
disturbed by his argument.

"By to-morrow morning," the boy went on, "we must go where there is
something to eat, or we shall grow very hungry and become very unhappy."

"Where?" asked Unc.

"Where shall we go? I don't know, I'm sure," replied Ojo. "But you must
know, Unc. You must have traveled, in your time, because you're so old.
I don't remember it, because ever since I could remember anything we've
lived right here in this lonesome, round house, with a little garden
back of it and the thick woods all around. All I've ever seen of the
great Land of Oz, Unc dear, is the view of that mountain over at the
south, where they say the Hammerheads live--who won't let anybody go by
them--and that mountain at the north, where they say nobody lives."

"One," declared Unc, correcting him.

"Oh, yes; one family lives there, I've heard. That's the Crooked
Magician, who is named Dr. Pipt, and his wife Margolotte. One year you
told me about them; I think it took you a whole year, Unc, to say as
much as I've just said about the Crooked Magician and his wife. They
live high up on the mountain, and the good Munchkin Country, where the
fruits and flowers grow, is just the other side. It's funny you and I
should live here all alone, in the middle of the forest, isn't it?"

"Yes," said Unc.

"Then let's go away and visit the Munchkin Country and its jolly,
good-natured people. I'd love to get a sight of something besides
woods, Unc Nunkie."

"Too little," said Unc.

"Why, I'm not so little as I used to be," answered the boy earnestly.
"I think I can walk as far and as fast through the woods as you can,
Unc. And now that nothing grows in our back yard that is good to eat,
we must go where there is food."

Unc Nunkie made no reply for a time. Then he shut down the window and
turned his chair to face the room, for the sun was sinking behind the
tree-tops and it was growing cool.

By and by Ojo lighted the fire and the logs blazed freely in the broad
fireplace. The two sat in the firelight a long time--the old,
white-bearded Munchkin and the little boy. Both were thinking. When it
grew quite dark outside, Ojo said:

"Eat your bread, Unc, and then we will go to bed."

But Unc Nunkie did not eat the bread; neither did he go directly to
bed. Long after his little nephew was sound asleep in the corner of the
room the old man sat by the fire, thinking.




Chapter Two

The Crooked Magician


Just at dawn next morning Unc Nunkie laid his hand tenderly on Ojo's
head and awakened him.

"Come," he said.

Ojo dressed. He wore blue silk stockings, blue knee pants with gold
buckles, a blue ruffled waist and a jacket of bright blue braided with
gold. His shoes were of blue leather and turned up at the toes, which
were pointed. His hat had a peaked crown and a flat brim, and around
the brim was a row of tiny golden bells that tinkled when he moved.
This was the native costume of those who inhabited the Munchkin Country
of the Land of Oz, so Unc Nunkie's dress was much like that of his
nephew. Instead of shoes, the old man wore boots with turnover tops and
his blue coat had wide cuffs of gold braid.

The boy noticed that his uncle had not eaten the bread, and supposed
the old man had not been hungry. Ojo was hungry, though; so he divided
the piece of bread upon the table and ate his half for breakfast,
washing it down with fresh, cool water from the brook. Unc put the
other piece of bread in his jacket pocket, after which he again said,
as he walked out through the doorway: "Come."

Ojo was well pleased. He was dreadfully tired of living all alone in
the woods and wanted to travel and see people. For a long time he had
wished to explore the beautiful Land of Oz in which they lived. When
they were outside, Unc simply latched the door and started up the path.
No one would disturb their little house, even if anyone came so far
into the thick forest while they were gone.

At the foot of the mountain that separated the Country of the Munchkins
from the Country of the Gillikins, the path divided. One way led to the
left and the other to the right--straight up the mountain. Unc Nunkie
took this right-hand path and Ojo followed without asking why. He knew
it would take them to the house of the Crooked Magician, whom he had
never seen but who was their nearest neighbor.

All the morning they trudged up the mountain path and at noon Unc and
Ojo sat on a fallen tree-trunk and ate the last of the bread which the
old Munchkin had placed in his pocket. Then they started on again and
two hours later came in sight of the house of Dr. Pipt.

It was a big house, round, as were all the Munchkin houses, and painted
blue, which is the distinctive color of the Munchkin Country of Oz.
There was a pretty garden around the house, where blue trees and blue
flowers grew in abundance and in one place were beds of blue cabbages,
blue carrots and blue lettuce, all of which were delicious to eat. In
Dr. Pipt's garden grew bun-trees, cake-trees, cream-puff bushes, blue
buttercups which yielded excellent blue butter and a row of
chocolate-caramel plants. Paths of blue gravel divided the vegetable
and flower beds and a wider path led up to the front door. The place
was in a clearing on the mountain, but a little way off was the grim
forest, which completely surrounded it.

Unc knocked at the door of the house and a chubby, pleasant-faced
woman, dressed all in blue, opened it and greeted the visitors with a
smile.

"Ah," said Ojo; "you must be Dame Margolotte, the good wife of Dr.
Pipt."

"I am, my dear, and all strangers are welcome to my home."

"May we see the famous Magician, Madam?"

"He is very busy just now," she said, shaking her head doubtfully. "But
come in and let me give you something to eat, for you must have
traveled far in order to get our lonely place."

"We have," replied Ojo, as he and Unc entered the house. "We have come
from a far lonelier place than this."

"A lonelier place! And in the Munchkin Country?" she exclaimed. "Then
it must be somewhere in the Blue Forest."

"It is, good Dame Margolotte."

"Dear me!" she said, looking at the man, "you must be Unc Nunkie, known
as the Silent One." Then she looked at the boy. "And you must be Ojo
the Unlucky," she added.

"Yes," said Unc.

"I never knew I was called the Unlucky," said Ojo, soberly; "but it is
really a good name for me."

"Well," remarked the woman, as she bustled around the room and set the
table and brought food from the cupboard, "you were unlucky to live all
alone in that dismal forest, which is much worse than the forest around
here; but perhaps your luck will change, now you are away from it. If,
during your travels, you can manage to lose that 'Un' at the beginning
of your name 'Unlucky,' you will then become Ojo the Lucky, which will
be a great improvement."

"How can I lose that 'Un,' Dame Margolotte?"

"I do not know how, but you must keep the matter in mind and perhaps
the chance will come to you," she replied.

Ojo had never eaten such a fine meal in all his life. There was a
savory stew, smoking hot, a dish of blue peas, a bowl of sweet milk of
a delicate blue tint and a blue pudding with blue plums in it. When the
visitors had eaten heartily of this fare the woman said to them:

"Do you wish to see Dr. Pipt on business or for pleasure?"

Unc shook his head.

"We are traveling," replied Ojo, "and we stopped at your house just to
rest and refresh ourselves. I do not think Unc Nunkie cares very much
to see the famous Crooked Magician; but for my part I am curious to
look at such a great man."

The woman seemed thoughtful.

"I remember that Unc Nunkie and my husband used to be friends, many
years ago," she said, "so perhaps they will be glad to meet again. The
Magician is very busy, as I said, but if you will promise not to
disturb him you may come into his workshop and watch him prepare a
wonderful charm."

"Thank you," replied the boy, much pleased. "I would like to do that."

She led the way to a great domed hall at the back of the house, which
was the Magician's workshop. There was a row of windows extending
nearly around the sides of the circular room, which rendered the place
very light, and there was a back door in addition to the one leading to
the front part of the house. Before the row of windows a broad seat was
built and there were some chairs and benches in the room besides. At
one end stood a great fireplace, in which a blue log was blazing with a
blue flame, and over the fire hung four kettles in a row, all bubbling
and steaming at a great rate. The Magician was stirring all four of
these kettles at the same time, two with his hands and two with his
feet, to the latter, wooden ladles being strapped, for this man was so
very crooked that his legs were as handy as his arms.

Unc Nunkie came forward to greet his old friend, but not being able to
shake either his hands or his feet, which were all occupied in
stirring, he patted the Magician's bald head and asked: "What?"

"Ah, it's the Silent One," remarked Dr. Pipt, without looking up, "and
he wants to know what I'm making. Well, when it is quite finished this
compound will be the wonderful Powder of Life, which no one knows how
to make but myself. Whenever it is sprinkled on anything, that thing
will at once come to life, no matter what it is. It takes me several
years to make this magic Powder, but at this moment I am pleased to say
it is nearly done. You see, I am making it for my good wife Margolotte,
who wants to use some of it for a purpose of her own. Sit down and make
yourself comfortable, Unc Nunkie, and after I've finished my task I
will talk to you."

"You must know," said Margolotte, when they were all seated together on
the broad window-seat, "that my husband foolishly gave away all the
Powder of Life he first made to old Mombi the Witch, who used to live
in the Country of the Gillikins, to the north of here. Mombi gave to
Dr. Pipt a Powder of Perpetual Youth in exchange for his Powder of
Life, but she cheated him wickedly, for the Powder of Youth was no good
and could work no magic at all."

"Perhaps the Powder of Life couldn't either," said Ojo.

"Yes; it is perfection," she declared. "The first lot we tested on our
Glass Cat, which not only began to live but has lived ever since. She's
somewhere around the house now."

"A Glass Cat!" exclaimed Ojo, astonished.

"Yes; she makes a very pleasant companion, but admires herself a little
more than is considered modest, and she positively refuses to catch
mice," explained Margolotte. "My husband made the cat some pink brains,
but they proved to be too high-bred and particular for a cat, so she
thinks it is undignified in her to catch mice. Also she has a pretty
blood-red heart, but it is made of stone--a ruby, I think--and so is
rather hard and unfeeling. I think the next Glass Cat the Magician
makes will have neither brains nor heart, for then it will not object
to catching mice and may prove of some use to us."

"What did old Mombi the Witch do with the Powder of Life your husband
gave her?" asked the boy.

"She brought Jack Pumpkinhead to life, for one thing," was the reply.
"I suppose you've heard of Jack Pumpkinhead. He is now living near the
Emerald City and is a great favorite with the Princess Ozma, who rules
all the Land of Oz."

"No; I've never heard of him," remarked Ojo. "I'm afraid I don't know
much about the Land of Oz. You see, I've lived all my life with Unc
Nunkie, the Silent One, and there was no one to tell me anything."

"That is one reason you are Ojo the Unlucky," said the woman, in a
sympathetic tone. "The more one knows, the luckier he is, for knowledge
is the greatest gift in life."

"But tell me, please, what you intend to do with this new lot of the
Powder of Life, which Dr. Pipt is making. He said his wife wanted it
for some especial purpose."

"So I do," she answered. "I want it to bring my Patchwork Girl to life."

"Oh! A Patchwork Girl? What is that?" Ojo asked, for this seemed even
more strange and unusual than a Glass Cat.

"I think I must show you my Patchwork Girl," said Margolotte, laughing
at the boy's astonishment, "for she is rather difficult to explain. But
first I will tell you that for many years I have longed for a servant
to help me with the housework and to cook the meals and wash the
dishes. No servant will come here because the place is so lonely and
out-of-the-way, so my clever husband, the Crooked Magician, proposed
that I make a girl out of some sort of material and he would make her
live by sprinkling over her the Powder of Life. This seemed an
excellent suggestion and at once Dr. Pipt set to work to make a new
batch of his magic powder. He has been at it a long, long while, and so
I have had plenty of time to make the girl. Yet that task was not so
easy as you may suppose. At first I couldn't think what to make her of,
but finally in searching through a chest I came across an old patchwork
quilt, which my grandmother once made when she was young."

"What is a patchwork quilt?" asked Ojo.

"A bed-quilt made of patches of different kinds and colors of cloth,
all neatly sewed together. The patches are of all shapes and sizes, so
a patchwork quilt is a very pretty and gorgeous thing to look at.
Sometimes it is called a 'crazy-quilt,' because the patches and colors
are so mixed up. We never have used my grandmother's many-colored
patchwork quilt, handsome as it is, for we Munchkins do not care for
any color other than blue, so it has been packed away in the chest for
about a hundred years. When I found it, I said to myself that it would
do nicely for my servant girl, for when she was brought to life she
would not be proud nor haughty, as the Glass Cat is, for such a
dreadful mixture of colors would discourage her from trying to be as
dignified as the blue Munchkins are."

"Is blue the only respectable color, then?" inquired Ojo.

"Yes, for a Munchkin. All our country is blue, you know. But in other
parts of Oz the people favor different colors. At the Emerald City,
where our Princess Ozma lives, green is the popular color. But all
Munchkins prefer blue to anything else and when my housework girl is
brought to life she will find herself to be of so many unpopular colors
that she'll never dare be rebellious or impudent, as servants are
sometimes liable to be when they are made the same way their mistresses
are."

Unc Nunkie nodded approval.

"Good i-dea," he said; and that was a long speech for Unc Nunkie
because it was two words.

"So I cut up the quilt," continued Margolotte, "and made from it a very
well-shaped girl, which I stuffed with cotton-wadding. I will show you
what a good job I did," and she went to a tall cupboard and threw open
the doors.

Then back she came, lugging in her arms the Patchwork Girl, which she
set upon the bench and propped up so that the figure would not tumble
over.




Chapter Three

The Patchwork Girl


Ojo examined this curious contrivance with wonder. The Patchwork Girl
was taller than he, when she stood upright, and her body was plump and
rounded because it had been so neatly stuffed with cotton. Margolotte
had first made the girl's form from the patchwork quilt and then she
had dressed it with a patchwork skirt and an apron with pockets in
it--using the same gay material throughout. Upon the feet she had sewn
a pair of red leather shoes with pointed toes. All the fingers and
thumbs of the girl's hands had been carefully formed and stuffed and
stitched at the edges, with gold plates at the ends to serve as
finger-nails.

"She will have to work, when she comes to life," said Margolotte.

The head of the Patchwork Girl was the most curious part of her. While
she waited for her husband to finish making his Powder of Life the
woman had found ample time to complete the head as her fancy dictated,
and she realized that a good servant's head must be properly
constructed. The hair was of brown yarn and hung down on her neck in
several neat braids. Her eyes were two silver suspender-buttons cut
from a pair of the Magician's old trousers, and they were sewed on with
black threads, which formed the pupils of the eyes. Margolotte had
puzzled over the ears for some time, for these were important if the
servant was to hear distinctly, but finally she had made them out of
thin plates of gold and attached them in place by means of stitches
through tiny holes bored in the metal. Gold is the most common metal in
the Land of Oz and is used for many purposes because it is soft and
pliable.

The woman had cut a slit for the Patchwork Girl's mouth and sewn two
rows of white pearls in it for teeth, using a strip of scarlet plush
for a tongue. This mouth Ojo considered very artistic and lifelike, and
Margolotte was pleased when the boy praised it. There were almost too
many patches on the face of the girl for her to be considered strictly
beautiful, for one cheek was yellow and the other red, her chin blue,
her forehead purple and the center, where her nose had been formed and
padded, a bright yellow.

"You ought to have had her face all pink," suggested the boy.

"I suppose so; but I had no pink cloth," replied the woman. "Still, I
cannot see as it matters much, for I wish my Patchwork Girl to be
useful rather than ornamental. If I get tired looking at her patched
face I can whitewash it."

"Has she any brains?" asked Ojo.

"No; I forgot all about the brains!" exclaimed the woman. "I am glad
you reminded me of them, for it is not too late to supply them, by any
means. Until she is brought to life I can do anything I please with
this girl. But I must be careful not to give her too much brains, and
those she has must be such as are fitted to the station she is to
occupy in life. In other words, her brains mustn't be very good."

"Wrong," said Unc Nunkie.

"No; I am sure I am right about that," returned the woman.

"He means," explained Ojo, "that unless your servant has good brains
she won't know how to obey you properly, nor do the things you ask her
to do."

"Well, that may be true," agreed Margolotte; "but, on the contrary, a
servant with too much brains is sure to become independent and
high-and-mighty and feel above her work. This is a very delicate task,
as I said, and I must take care to give the girl just the right
quantity of the right sort of brains. I want her to know just enough,
but not too much."

With this she went to another cupboard which was filled with shelves.
All the shelves were lined with blue glass bottles, neatly labeled by
the Magician to show what they contained. One whole shelf was marked:
"Brain Furniture," and the bottles on this shelf were labeled as
follows: "Obedience," "Cleverness," "Judgment," "Courage," "Ingenuity,"
"Amiability," "Learning," "Truth," "Poesy," "Self Reliance."

"Let me see," said Margolotte; "of those qualities she must have
'Obedience' first of all," and she took down the bottle bearing that
label and poured from it upon a dish several grains of the contents.
"'Amiability' is also good and 'Truth.'" She poured into the dish a
quantity from each of these bottles. "I think that will do," she
continued, "for the other qualities are not needed in a servant."

Unc Nunkie, who with Ojo stood beside her, touched the bottle marked
"Cleverness."

"Little," said he.

"A little 'Cleverness'? Well, perhaps you are right, sir," said she,
and was about to take down the bottle when the Crooked Magician
suddenly called to her excitedly from the fireplace.

"Quick, Margolotte! Come and help me."

She ran to her husband's side at once and helped him lift the four
kettles from the fire. Their contents had all boiled away, leaving in
the bottom of each kettle a few grains of fine white powder. Very
carefully the Magician removed this powder, placing it all together in
a golden dish, where he mixed it with a golden spoon. When the mixture
was complete there was scarcely a handful, all told.

"That," said Dr. Pipt, in a pleased and triumphant tone, "is the
wonderful Powder of Life, which I alone in the world know how to make.
It has taken me nearly six years to prepare these precious grains of
dust, but the little heap on that dish is worth the price of a kingdom
and many a king would give all he has to possess it. When it has become
cooled I will place it in a small bottle; but meantime I must watch it
carefully, lest a gust of wind blow it away or scatter it."

Unc Nunkie, Margolotte and the Magician all stood looking at the
marvelous Powder, but Ojo was more interested just then in the
Patchwork Girl's brains. Thinking it both unfair and unkind to deprive
her of any good qualities that were handy, the boy took down every
bottle on the shelf and poured some of the contents in Margolotte's
dish. No one saw him do this, for all were looking at the Powder of
Life; but soon the woman remembered what she had been doing, and came
back to the cupboard.

"Let's see," she remarked; "I was about to give my girl a little
'Cleverness,' which is the Doctor's substitute for 'Intelligence'--a
quality he has not yet learned how to manufacture." Taking down the
bottle of "Cleverness" she added some of the powder to the heap on the
dish. Ojo became a bit uneasy at this, for he had already put quite a
lot of the "Cleverness" powder in the dish; but he dared not interfere
and so he comforted himself with the thought that one cannot have too
much cleverness.

Margolotte now carried the dish of brains to the bench. Ripping the
seam of the patch on the girl's forehead, she placed the powder within
the head and then sewed up the seam as neatly and securely as before.

"My girl is all ready for your Powder of Life, my dear," she said to
her husband. But the Magician replied:

"This powder must not be used before to-morrow morning; but I think it
is now cool enough to be bottled."

He selected a small gold bottle with a pepper-box top, so that the
powder might be sprinkled on any object through the small holes. Very
carefully he placed the Powder of Life in the gold bottle and then
locked it up in a drawer of his cabinet.

"At last," said he, rubbing his hands together gleefully, "I have ample
leisure for a good talk with my old friend Unc Nunkie. So let us sit
down cosily and enjoy ourselves. After stirring those four kettles for
six years I am glad to have a little rest."

"You will have to do most of the talking," said Ojo, "for Unc is called
the Silent One and uses few words."

"I know; but that renders your uncle a most agreeable companion and
gossip," declared Dr. Pipt. "Most people talk too much, so it is a
relief to find one who talks too little."

Ojo looked at the Magician with much awe and curiosity.

"Don't you find it very annoying to be so crooked?" he asked.

"No; I am quite proud of my person," was the reply. "I suppose I am the
only Crooked Magician in all the world. Some others are accused of
being crooked, but I am the only genuine."

He was really very crooked and Ojo wondered how he managed to do so
many things with such a twisted body. When he sat down upon a crooked
chair that had been made to fit him, one knee was under his chin and
the other near the small of his back; but he was a cheerful man and his
face bore a pleasant and agreeable expression.

"I am not allowed to perform magic, except for my own amusement," he
told his visitors, as he lighted a pipe with a crooked stem and began
to smoke. "Too many people were working magic in the Land of Oz, and so
our lovely Princess Ozma put a stop to it. I think she was quite right.
There were several wicked Witches who caused a lot of trouble; but now
they are all out of business and only the great Sorceress, Glinda the
Good, is permitted to practice her arts, which never harm anybody. The
Wizard of Oz, who used to be a humbug and knew no magic at all, has
been taking lessons of Glinda, and I'm told he is getting to be a
pretty good Wizard; but he is merely the assistant of the great
Sorceress. I've the right to make a servant girl for my wife, you know,
or a Glass Cat to catch our mice--which she refuses to do--but I am
forbidden to work magic for others, or to use it as a profession."

"Magic must be a very interesting study," said Ojo.

"It truly is," asserted the Magician. "In my time I've performed some
magical feats that were worthy of the skill of Glinda the Good. For
instance, there's the Powder of Life, and my Liquid of Petrifaction,
which is contained in that bottle on the shelf yonder--over the window."

"What does the Liquid of Petrifaction do?" inquired the boy.

"Turns everything it touches to solid marble. It's an invention of my
own, and I find it very useful. Once two of those dreadful Kalidahs,
with bodies like bears and heads like tigers, came here from the forest
to attack us; but I sprinkled some of that Liquid on them and instantly
they turned to marble. I now use them as ornamental statuary in my
garden. This table looks to you like wood, and once it really was wood;
but I sprinkled a few drops of the Liquid of Petrifaction on it and now
it is marble. It will never break nor wear out."

"Fine!" said Unc Nunkie, wagging his head and stroking his long gray
beard.

"Dear me; what a chatterbox you're getting to be, Unc," remarked the
Magician, who was pleased with the compliment. But just then there came
a scratching at the back door and a shrill voice cried:

"Let me in! Hurry up, can't you? Let me in!"

Margolotte got up and went to the door.

"Ask like a good cat, then," she said.

"Mee-ee-ow-w-w! There; does that suit your royal highness?" asked the
voice, in scornful accents.

"Yes; that's proper cat talk," declared the woman, and opened the door.

At once a cat entered, came to the center of the room and stopped short
at the sight of strangers. Ojo and Unc Nunkie both stared at it with
wide open eyes, for surely no such curious creature had ever existed
before--even in the Land of Oz.




Chapter Four

The Glass Cat


The cat was made of glass, so clear and transparent that you could see
through it as easily as through a window. In the top of its head,
however, was a mass of delicate pink balls which looked like jewels,
and it had a heart made of a blood-red ruby. The eyes were two large
emeralds, but aside from these colors all the rest of the animal was
clear glass, and it had a spun-glass tail that was really beautiful.

"Well, Doc Pipt, do you mean to introduce us, or not?" demanded the
cat, in a tone of annoyance. "Seems to me you are forgetting your
manners."

"Excuse me," returned the Magician. "This is Unc Nunkie, the descendant
of the former kings of the Munchkins, before this country became a part
of the Land of Oz."

"He needs a haircut," observed the cat, washing its face.

"True," replied Unc, with a low chuckle of amusement.

"But he has lived alone in the heart of the forest for many years," the
Magician explained; "and, although that is a barbarous country, there
are no barbers there."

"Who is the dwarf?" asked the cat.

"That is not a dwarf, but a boy," answered the Magician. "You have
never seen a boy before. He is now small because he is young. With more
years he will grow big and become as tall as Unc Nunkie."

"Oh. Is that magic?" the glass animal inquired.

"Yes; but it is Nature's magic, which is more wonderful than any art
known to man. For instance, my magic made you, and made you live; and
it was a poor job because you are useless and a bother to me; but I
can't make you grow. You will always be the same size--and the same
saucy, inconsiderate Glass Cat, with pink brains and a hard ruby heart."

"No one can regret more than I the fact that you made me," asserted the
cat, crouching upon the floor and slowly swaying its spun-glass tail
from side to side. "Your world is a very uninteresting place. I've
wandered through your gardens and in the forest until I'm tired of it
all, and when I come into the house the conversation of your fat wife
and of yourself bores me dreadfully."

"That is because I gave you different brains from those we ourselves
possess--and much too good for a cat," returned Dr. Pipt.

"Can't you take 'em out, then, and replace 'em with pebbles, so that I
won't feel above my station in life?" asked the cat, pleadingly.

"Perhaps so. I'll try it, after I've brought the Patchwork Girl to
life," he said.

The cat walked up to the bench on which the Patchwork Girl reclined and
looked at her attentively.

"Are you going to make that dreadful thing live?" she asked.

The Magician nodded.

"It is intended to be my wife's servant maid," he said. "When she is
alive she will do all our work and mind the house. But you are not to
order her around, Bungle, as you do us. You must treat the Patchwork
Girl respectfully."

"I won't. I couldn't respect such a bundle of scraps under any
circumstances."

"If you don't, there will be more scraps than you will like," cried
Margolotte, angrily.

"Why didn't you make her pretty to look at?" asked the cat. "You made
me pretty--very pretty, indeed--and I love to watch my pink brains roll
around when they're working, and to see my precious red heart beat."
She went to a long mirror, as she said this, and stood before it,
looking at herself with an air of much pride. "But that poor patched
thing will hate herself, when she's once alive," continued the cat. "If
I were you I'd use her for a mop, and make another servant that is
prettier."

"You have a perverted taste," snapped Margolotte, much annoyed at this
frank criticism. "I think the Patchwork Girl is beautiful, considering
what she's made of. Even the rainbow hasn't as many colors, and you
must admit that the rainbow is a pretty thing."

The Glass Cat yawned and stretched herself upon the floor.

"Have your own way," she said. "I'm sorry for the Patchwork Girl,
that's all."

Ojo and Unc Nunkie slept that night in the Magician's house, and the
boy was glad to stay because he was anxious to see the Patchwork Girl
brought to life. The Glass Cat was also a wonderful creature to little
Ojo, who had never seen or known anything of magic before, although he
had lived in the Fairyland of Oz ever since he was born. Back there in
the woods nothing unusual ever happened. Unc Nunkie, who might have
been King of the Munchkins, had not his people united with all the
other countries of Oz in acknowledging Ozma as their sole ruler, had
retired into this forgotten forest nook with his baby nephew and they
had lived all alone there. Only that the neglected garden had failed to
grow food for them, they would always have lived in the solitary Blue
Forest; but now they had started out to mingle with other people, and
the first place they came to proved so interesting that Ojo could
scarcely sleep a wink all night.

Margolotte was an excellent cook and gave them a fine breakfast. While
they were all engaged in eating, the good woman said:

"This is the last meal I shall have to cook for some time, for right
after breakfast Dr. Pipt has promised to bring my new servant to life.
I shall let her wash the breakfast dishes and sweep and dust the house.
What a relief it will be!"

"It will, indeed, relieve you of much drudgery," said the Magician. "By
the way, Margolotte, I thought I saw you getting some brains from the
cupboard, while I was busy with my kettles. What qualities have you
given your new servant?"

"Only those that an humble servant requires," she answered. "I do not
wish her to feel above her station, as the Glass Cat does. That would
make her discontented and unhappy, for of course she must always be a
servant."

Ojo was somewhat disturbed as he listened to this, and the boy began to
fear he had done wrong in adding all those different qualities of
brains to the lot Margolotte had prepared for the servant. But it was
too late now for regret, since all the brains were securely sewn up
inside the Patchwork Girl's head. He might have confessed what he had
done and thus allowed Margolotte and her husband to change the brains;
but he was afraid of incurring their anger. He believed that Unc had
seen him add to the brains, and Unc had not said a word against it; but
then, Unc never did say anything unless it was absolutely necessary.

As soon as breakfast was over they all went into the Magician's big
workshop, where the Glass Cat was lying before the mirror and the
Patchwork Girl lay limp and lifeless upon the bench.

"Now, then," said Dr. Pipt, in a brisk tone, "we shall perform one of
the greatest feats of magic possible to man, even in this marvelous
Land of Oz. In no other country could it be done at all. I think we
ought to have a little music while the Patchwork Girl comes to life. It
is pleasant to reflect that the first sounds her golden ears will hear
will be delicious music."

As he spoke he went to a phonograph, which screwed fast to a small
table, and wound up the spring of the instrument and adjusted the big
gold horn.

"The music my servant will usually hear," remarked Margolotte, "will be
my orders to do her work. But I see no harm in allowing her to listen
to this unseen band while she wakens to her first realization of life.
My orders will beat the band, afterward."

The phonograph was now playing a stirring march tune and the Magician
unlocked his cabinet and took out the gold bottle containing the Powder
of Life.

They all bent over the bench on which the Patchwork Girl reclined. Unc
Nunkie and Margolotte stood behind, near the windows, Ojo at one side
and the Magician in front, where he would have freedom to sprinkle the
powder. The Glass Cat came near, too, curious to watch the important
scene.

"All ready?" asked Dr. Pipt.

"All is ready," answered his wife.

So the Magician leaned over and shook from the bottle some grains of
the wonderful Powder, and they fell directly on the Patchwork Girl's
head and arms.




Chapter Five

A Terrible Accident


"It will take a few minutes for this powder to do its work," remarked
the Magician, sprinkling the body up and down with much care.

But suddenly the Patchwork Girl threw up one arm, which knocked the
bottle of powder from the crooked man's hand and sent it flying across
the room. Unc Nunkie and Margolotte were so startled that they both
leaped backward and bumped together, and Unc's head joggled the shelf
above them and upset the bottle containing the Liquid of Petrifaction.

The Magician uttered such a wild cry that Ojo jumped away and the
Patchwork Girl sprang after him and clasped her stuffed arms around him
in terror. The Glass Cat snarled and hid under the table, and so it was
that when the powerful Liquid of Petrifaction was spilled it fell only
upon the wife of the Magician and the uncle of Ojo. With these two the
charm worked promptly. They stood motionless and stiff as marble
statues, in exactly the positions they were in when the Liquid struck
them.

Ojo pushed the Patchwork Girl away and ran to Unc Nunkie, filled with a
terrible fear for the only friend and protector he had ever known. When
he grasped Unc's hand it was cold and hard. Even the long gray beard
was solid marble. The Crooked Magician was dancing around the room in a
frenzy of despair, calling upon his wife to forgive him, to speak to
him, to come to life again!

The Patchwork Girl, quickly recovering from her fright, now came nearer
and looked from one to another of the people with deep interest. Then
she looked at herself and laughed. Noticing the mirror, she stood
before it and examined her extraordinary features with amazement--her
button eyes, pearl bead teeth and puffy nose. Then, addressing her
reflection in the glass, she exclaimed:

    "Whee, but there's a gaudy dame!
    Makes a paint-box blush with shame.
    Razzle-dazzle, fizzle-fazzle!
    Howdy-do, Miss What's-your-name?"


She bowed, and the reflection bowed. Then she laughed again, long and
merrily, and the Glass Cat crept out from under the table and said:

"I don't blame you for laughing at yourself. Aren't you horrid?"

"Horrid?" she replied. "Why, I'm thoroughly delightful. I'm an
Original, if you please, and therefore incomparable. Of all the comic,
absurd, rare and amusing creatures the world contains, I must be the
supreme freak. Who but poor Margolotte could have managed to invent
such an unreasonable being as I? But I'm glad--I'm awfully glad!--that
I'm just what I am, and nothing else."

"Be quiet, will you?" cried the frantic Magician; "be quiet and let me
think! If I don't think I shall go mad."

"Think ahead," said the Patchwork Girl, seating herself in a chair.
"Think all you want to. I don't mind."

"Gee! but I'm tired playing that tune," called the phonograph, speaking
through its horn in a brazen, scratchy voice. "If you don't mind, Pipt,
old boy, I'll cut it out and take a rest."

The Magician looked gloomily at the music-machine.

"What dreadful luck!" he wailed, despondently. "The Powder of Life must
have fallen on the phonograph."

He went up to it and found that the gold bottle that contained the
precious powder had dropped upon the stand and scattered its
life-giving grains over the machine. The phonograph was very much
alive, and began dancing a jig with the legs of the table to which it
was attached, and this dance so annoyed Dr. Pipt that he kicked the
thing into a corner and pushed a bench against it, to hold it quiet.

"You were bad enough before," said the Magician, resentfully; "but a
live phonograph is enough to drive every sane person in the Land of Oz
stark crazy."

"No insults, please," answered the phonograph in a surly tone. "You did
it, my boy; don't blame me."

"You've bungled everything, Dr. Pipt," added the Glass Cat,
contemptuously.

"Except me," said the Patchwork Girl, jumping up to whirl merrily
around the room.

"I think," said Ojo, almost ready to cry through grief over Unc
Nunkie's sad fate, "it must all be my fault, in some way. I'm called
Ojo the Unlucky, you know."

"That's nonsense, kiddie," retorted the Patchwork Girl cheerfully. "No
one can be unlucky who has the intelligence to direct his own actions.
The unlucky ones are those who beg for a chance to think, like poor Dr.
Pipt here. What's the row about, anyway, Mr. Magic-maker?"

"The Liquid of Petrifaction has accidentally fallen upon my dear wife
and Unc Nunkie and turned them into marble," he sadly replied.

"Well, why don't you sprinkle some of that powder on them and bring
them to life again?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

The Magician gave a jump.

"Why, I hadn't thought of that!" he joyfully cried, and grabbed up the
golden bottle, with which he ran to Margolotte.

Said the Patchwork Girl:

    "Higgledy, piggledy, dee--
    What fools magicians be!
    His head's so thick
    He can't think quick,
    So he takes advice from me."


Standing upon the bench, for he was so crooked he could not reach the
top of his wife's head in any other way, Dr. Pipt began shaking the
bottle. But not a grain of powder came out. He pulled off the cover,
glanced within, and then threw the bottle from him with a wail of
despair.

"Gone--gone! Every bit gone," he cried. "Wasted on that miserable
phonograph when it might have saved my dear wife!"

Then the Magician bowed his head on his crooked arms and began to cry.

Ojo was sorry for him. He went up to the sorrowful man and said softly:

"You can make more Powder of Life, Dr. Pipt."

"Yes; but it will take me six years--six long, weary years of stirring
four kettles with both feet and both hands," was the agonized reply.
"Six years! while poor Margolotte stands watching me as a marble image."

"Can't anything else be done?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

The Magician shook his head. Then he seemed to remember something and
looked up.

"There is one other compound that would destroy the magic spell of the
Liquid of Petrifaction and restore my wife and Unc Nunkie to life,"
said he. "It may be hard to find the things I need to make this magic
compound, but if they were found I could do in an instant what will
otherwise take six long, weary years of stirring kettles with both
hands and both feet."

"All right; let's find the things, then," suggested the Patchwork Girl.
"That seems a lot more sensible than those stirring times with the
kettles."

"That's the idea, Scraps," said the Glass Cat, approvingly. "I'm glad
to find you have decent brains. Mine are exceptionally good. You can
see 'em work; they're pink."

"Scraps?" repeated the girl. "Did you call me 'Scraps'? Is that my
name?"

"I--I believe my poor wife had intended to name you 'Angeline,'" said
the Magician.

"But I like 'Scraps' best," she replied with a laugh. "It fits me
better, for my patchwork is all scraps, and nothing else. Thank you for
naming me, Miss Cat. Have you any name of your own?"

"I have a foolish name that Margolotte once gave me, but which is quite
undignified for one of my importance," answered the cat. "She called me
'Bungle.'"

"Yes," sighed the Magician; "you were a sad bungle, taken all in all. I
was wrong to make you as I did, for a more useless, conceited and
brittle thing never before existed."

"I'm not so brittle as you think," retorted the cat. "I've been alive a
good many years, for Dr. Pipt experimented on me with the first magic
Powder of Life he ever made, and so far I've never broken or cracked or
chipped any part of me."

"You seem to have a chip on your shoulder," laughed the Patchwork Girl,
and the cat went to the mirror to see.

"Tell me," pleaded Ojo, speaking to the Crooked Magician, "what must we
find to make the compound that will save Unc Nunkie?"

"First," was the reply, "I must have a six-leaved clover. That can only
be found in the green country around the Emerald City, and six-leaved
clovers are very scarce, even there."

"I'll find it for you," promised Ojo.

"The next thing," continued the Magician, "is the left wing of a yellow
butterfly. That color can only be found in the yellow country of the
Winkies, West of the Emerald City."

"I'll find it," declared Ojo. "Is that all?"

"Oh, no; I'll get my Book of Recipes and see what comes next."

Saying this, the Magician unlocked a drawer of his cabinet and drew out
a small book covered with blue leather. Looking through the pages he
found the recipe he wanted and said: "I must have a gill of water from
a dark well."

"What kind of a well is that, sir?" asked the boy.

"One where the light of day never penetrates. The water must be put in
a gold bottle and brought to me without any light ever reaching it."

"I'll get the water from the dark well," said Ojo.

"Then I must have three hairs from the tip of a Woozy's tail, and a
drop of oil from a live man's body."

Ojo looked grave at this.

"What is a Woozy, please?" he inquired.

"Some sort of an animal. I've never seen one, so I can't describe it,"
replied the Magician.

"If I can find a Woozy, I'll get the hairs from its tail," said Ojo.
"But is there ever any oil in a man's body?"

The Magician looked in the book again, to make sure.

"That's what the recipe calls for," he replied, "and of course we must
get everything that is called for, or the charm won't work. The book
doesn't say 'blood'; it says 'oil,' and there must be oil somewhere in
a live man's body or the book wouldn't ask for it."

"All right," returned Ojo, trying not to feel discouraged; "I'll try to
find it."

The Magician looked at the little Munchkin boy in a doubtful way and
said:

"All this will mean a long journey for you; perhaps several long
journeys; for you must search through several of the different
countries of Oz in order to get the things I need."

"I know it, sir; but I must do my best to save Unc Nunkie."

"And also my poor wife Margolotte. If you save one you will save the
other, for both stand there together and the same compound will restore
them both to life. Do the best you can, Ojo, and while you are gone I
shall begin the six years job of making a new batch of the Powder of
Life. Then, if you should unluckily fail to secure any one of the
things needed, I will have lost no time. But if you succeed you must
return here as quickly as you can, and that will save me much tiresome
stirring of four kettles with both feet and both hands."

"I will start on my journey at once, sir," said the boy.

"And I will go with you," declared the Patchwork Girl.

"No, no!" exclaimed the Magician. "You have no right to leave this
house. You are only a servant and have not been discharged."

Scraps, who had been dancing up and down the room, stopped and looked
at him.

"What is a servant?" she asked.

"One who serves. A--a sort of slave," he explained.

"Very well," said the Patchwork Girl, "I'm going to serve you and your
wife by helping Ojo find the things you need. You need a lot, you know,
such as are not easily found."

"It is true," sighed Dr. Pipt. "I am well aware that Ojo has undertaken
a serious task."

Scraps laughed, and resuming her dance she said:

    "Here's a job for a boy of brains:
    A drop of oil from a live man's veins;
    A six-leaved clover; three nice hairs
    From a Woozy's tail, the book declares
    Are needed for the magic spell,
    And water from a pitch-dark well.
    The yellow wing of a butterfly
    To find must Ojo also try,
    And if he gets them without harm,
    Doc Pipt will make the magic charm;
    But if he doesn't get 'em, Unc
    Will always stand a marble chunk."


The Magician looked at her thoughtfully.

"Poor Margolotte must have given you some of the quality of poesy, by
mistake," he said. "And, if that is true, I didn't make a very good
article when I prepared it, or else you got an overdose or an
underdose. However, I believe I shall let you go with Ojo, for my poor
wife will not need your services until she is restored to life. Also I
think you may be able to help the boy, for your head seems to contain
some thoughts I did not expect to find in it. But be very careful of
yourself, for you're a souvenir of my dear Margolotte. Try not to get
ripped, or your stuffing may fall out. One of your eyes seems loose,
and you may have to sew it on tighter. If you talk too much you'll wear
out your scarlet plush tongue, which ought to have been hemmed on the
edges. And remember you belong to me and must return here as soon as
your mission is accomplished."

"I'm going with Scraps and Ojo," announced the Glass Cat.

"You can't," said the Magician.

"Why not?"

"You'd get broken in no time, and you couldn't be a bit of use to the
boy and the Patchwork Girl."

"I beg to differ with you," returned the cat, in a haughty tone. "Three
heads are better than two, and my pink brains are beautiful. You can
see 'em work."

"Well, go along," said the Magician, irritably. "You're only an
annoyance, anyhow, and I'm glad to get rid of you."

"Thank you for nothing, then," answered the cat, stiffly.

Dr. Pipt took a small basket from a cupboard and packed several things
in it. Then he handed it to Ojo.

"Here is some food and a bundle of charms," he said. "It is all I can
give you, but I am sure you will find friends on your journey who will
assist you in your search. Take care of the Patchwork Girl and bring
her safely back, for she ought to prove useful to my wife. As for the
Glass Cat--properly named Bungle--if she bothers you I now give you my
permission to break her in two, for she is not respectful and does not
obey me. I made a mistake in giving her the pink brains, you see."

Then Ojo went to Unc Nunkie and kissed the old man's marble face very
tenderly.

"I'm going to try to save you, Unc," he said, just as if the marble
image could hear him; and then he shook the crooked hand of the Crooked
Magician, who was already busy hanging the four kettles in the
fireplace, and picking up his basket left the house.

The Patchwork Girl followed him, and after them came the Glass Cat.




Chapter Six

The Journey


Ojo had never traveled before and so he only knew that the path down
the mountainside led into the open Munchkin Country, where large
numbers of people dwelt. Scraps was quite new and not supposed to know
anything of the Land of Oz, while the Glass Cat admitted she had never
wandered very far away from the Magician's house. There was only one
path before them, at the beginning, so they could not miss their way,
and for a time they walked through the thick forest in silent thought,
each one impressed with the importance of the adventure they had
undertaken.

Suddenly the Patchwork Girl laughed. It was funny to see her laugh,
because her cheeks wrinkled up, her nose tipped, her silver button eyes
twinkled and her mouth curled at the corners in a comical way.

"Has something pleased you?" asked Ojo, who was feeling solemn and
joyless through thinking upon his uncle's sad fate.

"Yes," she answered. "Your world pleases me, for it's a queer world,
and life in it is queerer still. Here am I, made from an old bedquilt
and intended to be a slave to Margolotte, rendered free as air by an
accident that none of you could foresee. I am enjoying life and seeing
the world, while the woman who made me is standing helpless as a block
of wood. If that isn't funny enough to laugh at, I don't know what is."

"You're not seeing much of the world yet, my poor, innocent Scraps,"
remarked the Cat. "The world doesn't consist wholly of the trees that
are on all sides of us."

"But they're part of it; and aren't they pretty trees?" returned
Scraps, bobbing her head until her brown yarn curls fluttered in the
breeze. "Growing between them I can see lovely ferns and wild-flowers,
and soft green mosses. If the rest of your world is half as beautiful I
shall be glad I'm alive."

"I don't know what the rest of the world is like, I'm sure," said the
cat; "but I mean to find out."

"I have never been out of the forest," Ojo added; "but to me the trees
are gloomy and sad and the wild-flowers seem lonesome. It must be nicer
where there are no trees and there is room for lots of people to live
together."

"I wonder if any of the people we shall meet will be as splendid as I
am," said the Patchwork Girl. "All I have seen, so far, have pale,
colorless skins and clothes as blue as the country they live in, while
I am of many gorgeous colors--face and body and clothes. That is why I
am bright and contented, Ojo, while you are blue and sad."

"I think I made a mistake in giving you so many sorts of brains,"
observed the boy. "Perhaps, as the Magician said, you have an overdose,
and they may not agree with you."

"What had you to do with my brains?" asked Scraps.

"A lot," replied Ojo. "Old Margolotte meant to give you only a
few--just enough to keep you going--but when she wasn't looking I added
a good many more, of the best kinds I could find in the Magician's
cupboard."

"Thanks," said the girl, dancing along the path ahead of Ojo and then
dancing back to his side. "If a few brains are good, many brains must
be better."

"But they ought to be evenly balanced," said the boy, "and I had no
time to be careful. From the way you're acting, I guess the dose was
badly mixed."

"Scraps hasn't enough brains to hurt her, so don't worry," remarked the
cat, which was trotting along in a very dainty and graceful manner.
"The only brains worth considering are mine, which are pink. You can
see 'em work."

After walking a long time they came to a little brook that trickled
across the path, and here Ojo sat down to rest and eat something from
his basket. He found that the Magician had given him part of a loaf of
bread and a slice of cheese. He broke off some of the bread and was
surprised to find the loaf just as large as it was before. It was the
same way with the cheese: however much he broke off from the slice, it
remained exactly the same size.

"Ah," said he, nodding wisely; "that's magic. Dr. Pipt has enchanted
the bread and the cheese, so it will last me all through my journey,
however much I eat."

"Why do you put those things into your mouth?" asked Scraps, gazing at
him in astonishment. "Do you need more stuffing? Then why don't you use
cotton, such as I am stuffed with?"

"I don't need that kind," said Ojo.

"But a mouth is to talk with, isn't it?"

"It is also to eat with," replied the boy. "If I didn't put food into
my mouth, and eat it, I would get hungry and starve.

"Ah, I didn't know that," she said. "Give me some."

Ojo handed her a bit of the bread and she put it in her mouth.

"What next?" she asked, scarcely able to speak.

"Chew it and swallow it," said the boy.

Scraps tried that. Her pearl teeth were unable to chew the bread and
beyond her mouth there was no opening. Being unable to swallow she
threw away the bread and laughed.

"I must get hungry and starve, for I can't eat," she said.

"Neither can I," announced the cat; "but I'm not fool enough to try.
Can't you understand that you and I are superior people and not made
like these poor humans?"

"Why should I understand that, or anything else?" asked the girl.
"Don't bother my head by asking conundrums, I beg of you. Just let me
discover myself in my own way."

With this she began amusing herself by leaping across the brook and
back again.

"Be careful, or you'll fall in the water," warned Ojo.

"Never mind."

"You'd better. If you get wet you'll be soggy and can't walk. Your
colors might run, too," he said.

"Don't my colors run whenever I run?" she asked.

"Not in the way I mean. If they get wet, the reds and greens and
yellows and purples of your patches might run into each other and
become just a blur--no color at all, you know."

"Then," said the Patchwork Girl, "I'll be careful, for if I spoiled my
splendid colors I would cease to be beautiful."

"Pah!" sneered the Glass Cat, "such colors are not beautiful; they're
ugly, and in bad taste. Please notice that my body has no color at all.
I'm transparent, except for my exquisite red heart and my lovely pink
brains--you can see 'em work."

"Shoo--shoo--shoo!" cried Scraps, dancing around and laughing. "And
your horrid green eyes, Miss Bungle! You can't see your eyes, but we
can, and I notice you're very proud of what little color you have.
Shoo, Miss Bungle, shoo--shoo--shoo! If you were all colors and many
colors, as I am, you'd be too stuck up for anything." She leaped over
the cat and back again, and the startled Bungle crept close to a tree
to escape her. This made Scraps laugh more heartily than ever, and she
said:

    "Whoop-te-doodle-doo!
    The cat has lost her shoe.
    Her tootsie's bare, but she don't care,
    So what's the odds to you?"


"Dear me, Ojo," said the cat; "don't you think the creature is a little
bit crazy?"

"It may be," he answered, with a puzzled look.

"If she continues her insults I'll scratch off her suspender-button
eyes," declared the cat.

"Don't quarrel, please," pleaded the boy, rising to resume the journey.
"Let us be good comrades and as happy and cheerful as possible, for we
are likely to meet with plenty of trouble on our way."

It was nearly sundown when they came to the edge of the forest and saw
spread out before them a delightful landscape. There were broad blue
fields stretching for miles over the valley, which was dotted
everywhere with pretty, blue domed houses, none of which, however, was
very near to the place where they stood. Just at the point where the
path left the forest stood a tiny house covered with leaves from the
trees, and before this stood a Munchkin man with an axe in his hand. He
seemed very much surprised when Ojo and Scraps and the Glass Cat came
out of the woods, but as the Patchwork Girl approached nearer he sat
down upon a bench and laughed so hard that he could not speak for a
long time.

This man was a woodchopper and lived all alone in the little house. He
had bushy blue whiskers and merry blue eyes and his blue clothes were
quite old and worn.

"Mercy me!" exclaimed the woodchopper, when at last he could stop
laughing. "Who would think such a funny harlequin lived in the Land of
Oz? Where did you come from, Crazy-quilt?"

"Do you mean me?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

"Of course," he replied.

"You misjudge my ancestry. I'm not a crazy-quilt; I'm patchwork," she
said.

"There's no difference," he replied, beginning to laugh again. "When my
old grandmother sews such things together she calls it a crazy-quilt;
but I never thought such a jumble could come to life."

"It was the Magic Powder that did it," explained Ojo.

"Oh, then you have come from the Crooked Magician on the mountain. I
might have known it, for--Well, I declare! here's a glass cat. But the
Magician will get in trouble for this; it's against the law for anyone
to work magic except Glinda the Good and the royal Wizard of Oz. If you
people--or things--or glass spectacles--or crazy-quilts--or whatever
you are, go near the Emerald City, you'll be arrested."

"We're going there, anyhow," declared Scraps, sitting upon the bench
and swinging her stuffed legs.

    "If any of us takes a rest,
    We'll be arrested sure,
    And get no restitution
    'Cause the rest we must endure."


"I see," said the woodchopper, nodding; "you're as crazy as the
crazy-quilt you're made of."

"She really is crazy," remarked the Glass Cat. "But that isn't to be
wondered at when you remember how many different things she's made of.
For my part, I'm made of pure glass--except my jewel heart and my
pretty pink brains. Did you notice my brains, stranger? You can see 'em
work."

"So I can," replied the woodchopper; "but I can't see that they
accomplish much. A glass cat is a useless sort of thing, but a
Patchwork Girl is really useful. She makes me laugh, and laughter is
the best thing in life. There was once a woodchopper, a friend of mine,
who was made all of tin, and I used to laugh every time I saw him."

"A tin woodchopper?" said Ojo. "That is strange."

"My friend wasn't always tin," said the man, "but he was careless with
his axe, and used to chop himself very badly. Whenever he lost an arm
or a leg he had it replaced with tin; so after a while he was all tin."

"And could he chop wood then?" asked the boy.

"He could if he didn't rust his tin joints. But one day he met Dorothy
in the forest and went with her to the Emerald City, where he made his
fortune. He is now one of the favorites of Princess Ozma, and she has
made him the Emperor of the Winkies--the Country where all is yellow."

"Who is Dorothy?" inquired the Patchwork Girl.

"A little maid who used to live in Kansas, but is now a Princess of Oz.
She's Ozma's best friend, they say, and lives with her in the royal
palace."

"Is Dorothy made of tin?" inquired Ojo.

"Is she patchwork, like me?" inquired Scraps.

"No," said the man; "Dorothy is flesh, just as I am. I know of only one
tin person, and that is Nick Chopper, the Tin Woodman; and there will
never be but one Patchwork Girl, for any magician that sees you will
refuse to make another one like you."

"I suppose we shall see the Tin Woodman, for we are going to the
Country of the Winkies," said the boy.

"What for?" asked the woodchopper.

"To get the left wing of a yellow butterfly."

"It is a long journey," declared the man, "and you will go through
lonely parts of Oz and cross rivers and traverse dark forests before
you get there."

"Suits me all right," said Scraps. "I'll get a chance to see the
country."

"You're crazy, girl. Better crawl into a rag-bag and hide there; or
give yourself to some little girl to play with. Those who travel are
likely to meet trouble; that's why I stay at home."

The woodchopper then invited them all to stay the night at his little
hut, but they were anxious to get on and so left him and continued
along the path, which was broader, now, and more distinct.

They expected to reach some other house before it grew dark, but the
twilight was brief and Ojo soon began to fear they had made a mistake
in leaving the woodchopper.

"I can scarcely see the path," he said at last. "Can you see it,
Scraps?"

"No," replied the Patchwork Girl, who was holding fast to the boy's arm
so he could guide her.

"I can see," declared the Glass Cat. "My eyes are better than yours,
and my pink brains--"

"Never mind your pink brains, please," said Ojo hastily; "just run
ahead and show us the way. Wait a minute and I'll tie a string to you;
for then you can lead us."

He got a string from his pocket and tied it around the cat's neck, and
after that the creature guided them along the path. They had proceeded
in this way for about an hour when a twinkling blue light appeared
ahead of them.

"Good! there's a house at last," cried Ojo. "When we reach it the good
people will surely welcome us and give us a night's lodging." But
however far they walked the light seemed to get no nearer, so by and by
the cat stopped short, saying:

"I think the light is traveling, too, and we shall never be able to
catch up with it. But here is a house by the roadside, so why go
farther?"

"Where is the house, Bungle?"

"Just here beside us, Scraps."

Ojo was now able to see a small house near the pathway. It was dark and
silent, but the boy was tired and wanted to rest, so he went up to the
door and knocked.

"Who is there?" cried a voice from within.

"I am Ojo the Unlucky, and with me are Miss Scraps Patchwork and the
Glass Cat," he replied.

"What do you want?" asked the Voice.

"A place to sleep," said Ojo.

"Come in, then; but don't make any noise, and you must go directly to
bed," returned the Voice.

Ojo unlatched the door and entered. It was very dark inside and he
could see nothing at all. But the cat exclaimed: "Why, there's no one
here!"

"There must be," said the boy. "Some one spoke to me."

"I can see everything in the room," replied the cat, "and no one is
present but ourselves. But here are three beds, all made up, so we may
as well go to sleep."

"What is sleep?" inquired the Patchwork Girl.

"It's what you do when you go to bed," said Ojo.

"But why do you go to bed?" persisted the Patchwork Girl.

"Here, here! You are making altogether too much noise," cried the Voice
they had heard before. "Keep quiet, strangers, and go to bed."

The cat, which could see in the dark, looked sharply around for the
owner of the Voice, but could discover no one, although the Voice had
seemed close beside them. She arched her back a little and seemed
afraid. Then she whispered to Ojo: "Come!" and led him to a bed.

With his hands the boy felt of the bed and found it was big and soft,
with feather pillows and plenty of blankets. So he took off his shoes
and hat and crept into the bed. Then the cat led Scraps to another bed
and the Patchwork Girl was puzzled to know what to do with it.

"Lie down and keep quiet," whispered the cat, warningly.

"Can't I sing?" asked Scraps.

"No."

"Can't I whistle?" asked Scraps.

"No."

"Can't I dance till morning, if I want to?" asked Scraps.

"You must keep quiet," said the cat, in a soft voice.

"I don't want to," replied the Patchwork Girl, speaking as loudly as
usual. "What right have you to order me around? If I want to talk, or
yell, or whistle--"

Before she could say anything more an unseen hand seized her firmly and
threw her out of the door, which closed behind her with a sharp slam.
She found herself bumping and rolling in the road and when she got up
and tried to open the door of the house again she found it locked.

"What has happened to Scraps?" asked Ojo.

"Never mind. Let's go to sleep, or something will happen to us,"
answered the Glass Cat.

So Ojo snuggled down in his bed and fell asleep, and he was so tired
that he never wakened until broad daylight.




Chapter Seven

The Troublesome Phonograph


When the boy opened his eyes next morning he looked carefully around
the room. These small Munchkin houses seldom had more than one room in
them. That in which Ojo now found himself had three beds, set all in a
row on one side of it. The Glass Cat lay asleep on one bed, Ojo was in
the second, and the third was neatly made up and smoothed for the day.
On the other side of the room was a round table on which breakfast was
already placed, smoking hot. Only one chair was drawn up to the table,
where a place was set for one person. No one seemed to be in the room
except the boy and Bungle.

Ojo got up and put on his shoes. Finding a toilet stand at the head of
his bed he washed his face and hands and brushed his hair. Then he went
to the table and said:

"I wonder if this is my breakfast?"

"Eat it!" commanded a Voice at his side, so near that Ojo jumped. But
no person could he see.

He was hungry, and the breakfast looked good; so he sat down and ate
all he wanted. Then, rising, he took his hat and wakened the Glass Cat.

"Come on, Bungle," said he; "we must go."

He cast another glance about the room and, speaking to the air, he
said: "Whoever lives here has been kind to me, and I'm much obliged."

There was no answer, so he took his basket and went out the door, the
cat following him. In the middle of the path sat the Patchwork Girl,
playing with pebbles she had picked up.

"Oh, there you are!" she exclaimed cheerfully. "I thought you were
never coming out. It has been daylight a long time."

"What did you do all night?" asked the boy.

"Sat here and watched the stars and the moon," she replied. "They're
interesting. I never saw them before, you know."

"Of course not," said Ojo.

"You were crazy to act so badly and get thrown outdoors," remarked
Bungle, as they renewed their journey.

"That's all right," said Scraps. "If I hadn't been thrown out I
wouldn't have seen the stars, nor the big gray wolf."

"What wolf?" inquired Ojo.

"The one that came to the door of the house three times during the
night."

"I don't see why that should be," said the boy, thoughtfully; "there
was plenty to eat in that house, for I had a fine breakfast, and I
slept in a nice bed."

"Don't you feel tired?" asked the Patchwork Girl, noticing that the boy
yawned.

"Why, yes; I'm as tired as I was last night; and yet I slept very well."

"And aren't you hungry?"

"It's strange," replied Ojo. "I had a good breakfast, and yet I think
I'll now eat some of my crackers and cheese."

Scraps danced up and down the path. Then she sang:

    "Kizzle-kazzle-kore;
    The wolf is at the door,
    There's nothing to eat but a bone without meat,
    And a bill from the grocery store."


"What does that mean?" asked Ojo.

"Don't ask me," replied Scraps. "I say what comes into my head, but of
course I know nothing of a grocery store or bones without meat or--very
much else."

"No," said the cat; "she's stark, staring, raving crazy, and her brains
can't be pink, for they don't work properly."

"Bother the brains!" cried Scraps. "Who cares for 'em, anyhow? Have you
noticed how beautiful my patches are in this sunlight?"

Just then they heard a sound as of footsteps pattering along the path
behind them and all three turned to see what was coming. To their
astonishment they beheld a small round table running as fast as its
four spindle legs could carry it, and to the top was screwed fast a
phonograph with a big gold horn.

"Hold on!" shouted the phonograph. "Wait for me!"

"Goodness me; it's that music thing which the Crooked Magician
scattered the Powder of Life over," said Ojo.

"So it is," returned Bungle, in a grumpy tone of voice; and then, as
the phonograph overtook them, the Glass Cat added sternly: "What are
you doing here, anyhow?"

"I've run away," said the music thing. "After you left, old Dr. Pipt
and I had a dreadful quarrel and he threatened to smash me to pieces if
I didn't keep quiet. Of course I wouldn't do that, because a
talking-machine is supposed to talk and make a noise--and sometimes
music. So I slipped out of the house while the Magician was stirring
his four kettles and I've been running after you all night. Now that
I've found such pleasant company, I can talk and play tunes all I want
to."

Ojo was greatly annoyed by this unwelcome addition to their party. At
first he did not know what to say to the newcomer, but a little thought
decided him not to make friends.

"We are traveling on important business," he declared, "and you'll
excuse me if I say we can't be bothered."

"How very impolite!" exclaimed the phonograph.

"I'm sorry; but it's true," said the boy. "You'll have to go somewhere
else."

"This is very unkind treatment, I must say," whined the phonograph, in
an injured tone. "Everyone seems to hate me, and yet I was intended to
amuse people."

"It isn't you we hate, especially," observed the Glass Cat; "it's your
dreadful music. When I lived in the same room with you I was much
annoyed by your squeaky horn. It growls and grumbles and clicks and
scratches so it spoils the music, and your machinery rumbles so that
the racket drowns every tune you attempt."

"That isn't my fault; it's the fault of my records. I must admit that I
haven't a clear record," answered the machine.

"Just the same, you'll have to go away," said Ojo.

"Wait a minute," cried Scraps. "This music thing interests me. I
remember to have heard music when I first came to life, and I would
like to hear it again. What is your name, my poor abused phonograph?"

"Victor Columbia Edison," it answered.

"Well, I shall call you 'Vic' for short," said the Patchwork Girl. "Go
ahead and play something."

"It'll drive you crazy," warned the cat.

"I'm crazy now, according to your statement. Loosen up and reel out the
music, Vic."

"The only record I have with me," explained the phonograph, "is one the
Magician attached just before we had our quarrel. It's a highly
classical composition."

"A what?" inquired Scraps.

"It is classical music, and is considered the best and most puzzling
ever manufactured. You're supposed to like it, whether you do or not,
and if you don't, the proper thing is to look as if you did.
Understand?"

"Not in the least," said Scraps.

"Then, listen!"

At once the machine began to play and in a few minutes Ojo put his
hands to his ears to shut out the sounds and the cat snarled and Scraps
began to laugh.

"Cut it out, Vic," she said. "That's enough."

But the phonograph continued playing the dreary tune, so Ojo seized the
crank, jerked it free and threw it into the road. However, the moment
the crank struck the ground it bounded back to the machine again and
began winding it up. And still the music played.

"Let's run!" cried Scraps, and they all started and ran down the path
as fast as they could go. But the phonograph was right behind them and
could run and play at the same time. It called out, reproachfully:

"What's the matter? Don't you love classical music?"

"No, Vic," said Scraps, halting. "We will passical the classical and
preserve what joy we have left. I haven't any nerves, thank goodness,
but your music makes my cotton shrink."

"Then turn over my record. There's a rag-time tune on the other side,"
said the machine.

"What's rag-time?"

"The opposite of classical."

"All right," said Scraps, and turned over the record.

The phonograph now began to play a jerky jumble of sounds which proved
so bewildering that after a moment Scraps stuffed her patchwork apron
into the gold horn and cried: "Stop--stop! That's the other extreme.
It's extremely bad!"

Muffled as it was, the phonograph played on.

"If you don't shut off that music I'll smash your record," threatened
Ojo.

The music stopped, at that, and the machine turned its horn from one to
another and said with great indignation: "What's the matter now? Is it
possible you can't appreciate rag-time?"

"Scraps ought to, being rags herself," said the cat; "but I simply
can't stand it; it makes my whiskers curl."

"It is, indeed, dreadful!" exclaimed Ojo, with a shudder.

"It's enough to drive a crazy lady mad," murmured the Patchwork Girl.
"I'll tell you what, Vic," she added as she smoothed out her apron and
put it on again, "for some reason or other you've missed your guess.
You're not a concert; you're a nuisance."

"Music hath charms to soothe the savage breast," asserted the
phonograph sadly.

"Then we're not savages. I advise you to go home and beg the Magician's
pardon."

"Never! He'd smash me."

"That's what we shall do, if you stay here," Ojo declared.

"Run along, Vic, and bother some one else," advised Scraps. "Find some
one who is real wicked, and stay with him till he repents. In that way
you can do some good in the world."

The music thing turned silently away and trotted down a side path,
toward a distant Munchkin village.

"Is that the way we go?" asked Bungle anxiously.

"No," said Ojo; "I think we shall keep straight ahead, for this path is
the widest and best. When we come to some house we will inquire the way
to the Emerald City."




Chapter Eight

The Foolish Owl and the Wise Donkey


On they went, and half an hour's steady walking brought them to a house
somewhat better than the two they had already passed. It stood close to
the roadside and over the door was a sign that read: "Miss Foolish Owl
and Mr. Wise Donkey: Public Advisers."

When Ojo read this sign aloud Scraps said laughingly: "Well, here is a
place to get all the advice we want, maybe more than we need. Let's go
in."

The boy knocked at the door.

"Come in!" called a deep bass voice.

So they opened the door and entered the house, where a little
light-brown donkey, dressed in a blue apron and a blue cap, was engaged
in dusting the furniture with a blue cloth. On a shelf over the window
sat a great blue owl with a blue sunbonnet on her head, blinking her
big round eyes at the visitors.

"Good morning," said the donkey, in his deep voice, which seemed bigger
than he was. "Did you come to us for advice?"

"Why, we came, anyhow," replied Scraps, "and now we are here we may as
well have some advice. It's free, isn't it?"

"Certainly," said the donkey. "Advice doesn't cost anything--unless you
follow it. Permit me to say, by the way, that you are the queerest lot
of travelers that ever came to my shop. Judging you merely by
appearances, I think you'd better talk to the Foolish Owl yonder."

They turned to look at the bird, which fluttered its wings and stared
back at them with its big eyes.

"Hoot-ti-toot-ti-toot!" cried the owl.

    "Fiddle-cum-foo,
    Howdy-do?
    Riddle-cum, tiddle-cum,
    Too-ra-la-loo!"


"That beats your poetry, Scraps," said Ojo.

"It's just nonsense!" declared the Glass Cat.

"But it's good advice for the foolish," said the donkey, admiringly.
"Listen to my partner, and you can't go wrong."

Said the owl in a grumbling voice:

    "Patchwork Girl has come to life;
    No one's sweetheart, no one's wife;
    Lacking sense and loving fun,
    She'll be snubbed by everyone."


"Quite a compliment! Quite a compliment, I declare," exclaimed the
donkey, turning to look at Scraps. "You are certainly a wonder, my
dear, and I fancy you'd make a splendid pincushion. If you belonged to
me, I'd wear smoked glasses when I looked at you."

"Why?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

"Because you are so gay and gaudy."

"It is my beauty that dazzles you," she asserted. "You Munchkin people
all strut around in your stupid blue color, while I--"

"You are wrong in calling me a Munchkin," interrupted the donkey, "for
I was born in the Land of Mo and came to visit the Land of Oz on the
day it was shut off from all the rest of the world. So here I am
obliged to stay, and I confess it is a very pleasant country to live
in."

"Hoot-ti-toot!" cried the owl;

    "Ojo's searching for a charm,
    'Cause Unc Nunkie's come to harm.
    Charms are scarce; they're hard to get;
    Ojo's got a job, you bet!"


"Is the owl so very foolish?" asked the boy.

"Extremely so," replied the donkey. "Notice what vulgar expressions she
uses. But I admire the owl for the reason that she is positively
foolish. Owls are supposed to be so very wise, generally, that a
foolish one is unusual, and you perhaps know that anything or anyone
unusual is sure to be interesting to the wise."

The owl flapped its wings again, muttering these words:

    "It's hard to be a glassy cat--
    No cat can be more hard than that;
    She's so transparent, every act
    Is clear to us, and that's a fact."


"Have you noticed my pink brains?" inquired Bungle, proudly. "You can
see 'em work."

"Not in the daytime," said the donkey. "She can't see very well by day,
poor thing. But her advice is excellent. I advise you all to follow it."

"The owl hasn't given us any advice, as yet," the boy declared.

"No? Then what do you call all those sweet poems?"

"Just foolishness," replied Ojo. "Scraps does the same thing."

"Foolishness! Of course! To be sure! The Foolish Owl must be foolish or
she wouldn't be the Foolish Owl. You are very complimentary to my
partner, indeed," asserted the donkey, rubbing his front hoofs together
as if highly pleased.

"The sign says that you are wise," remarked Scraps to the donkey. "I
wish you would prove it."

"With great pleasure," returned the beast. "Put me to the test, my dear
Patches, and I'll prove my wisdom in the wink of an eye."

"What is the best way to get to the Emerald City?" asked Ojo.

"Walk," said the donkey.

"I know; but what road shall I take?" was the boy's next question.

"The road of yellow bricks, of course. It leads directly to the Emerald
City."

"And how shall we find the road of yellow bricks?"

"By keeping along the path you have been following. You'll come to the
yellow bricks pretty soon, and you'll know them when you see them
because they're the only yellow things in the blue country."

"Thank you," said the boy. "At last you have told me something."

"Is that the extent of your wisdom?" asked Scraps.

"No," replied the donkey; "I know many other things, but they wouldn't
interest you. So I'll give you a last word of advice: move on, for the
sooner you do that the sooner you'll get to the Emerald City of Oz."

"Hoot-ti-toot-ti-toot-ti-too!" screeched the owl;

    "Off you go! fast or slow,
    Where you're going you don't know.
    Patches, Bungle, Munchkin lad,
    Facing fortunes good and bad,
    Meeting dangers grave and sad,
    Sometimes worried, sometimes glad--
    Where you're going you don't know,
    Nor do I, but off you go!"


"Sounds like a hint, to me," said the Patchwork Girl.

"Then let's take it and go," replied Ojo.

They said good-bye to the Wise Donkey and the Foolish Owl and at once
resumed their journey.




Chapter Nine

They Meet the Woozy


"There seem to be very few houses around here, after all," remarked
Ojo, after they had walked for a time in silence.

"Never mind," said Scraps; "we are not looking for houses, but rather
the road of yellow bricks. Won't it be funny to run across something
yellow in this dismal blue country?"

"There are worse colors than yellow in this country," asserted the
Glass Cat, in a spiteful tone.

"Oh; do you mean the pink pebbles you call your brains, and your red
heart and green eyes?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

"No; I mean you, if you must know it," growled the cat.

"You're jealous!" laughed Scraps. "You'd give your whiskers for a
lovely variegated complexion like mine."

"I wouldn't!" retorted the cat. "I've the clearest complexion in the
world, and I don't employ a beauty-doctor, either."

"I see you don't," said Scraps.

"Please don't quarrel," begged Ojo. "This is an important journey, and
quarreling makes me discouraged. To be brave, one must be cheerful, so
I hope you will be as good-tempered as possible."

They had traveled some distance when suddenly they faced a high fence
which barred any further progress straight ahead. It ran directly
across the road and enclosed a small forest of tall trees, set close
together. When the group of adventurers peered through the bars of the
fence they thought this forest looked more gloomy and forbidding than
any they had ever seen before.

They soon discovered that the path they had been following now made a
bend and passed around the enclosure, but what made Ojo stop and look
thoughtful was a sign painted on the fence which read:

    "BEWARE OF THE WOOZY!"


"That means," he said, "that there's a Woozy inside that fence, and the
Woozy must be a dangerous animal or they wouldn't tell people to beware
of it."

"Let's keep out, then," replied Scraps. "That path is outside the
fence, and Mr. Woozy may have all his little forest to himself, for all
we care."

"But one of our errands is to find a Woozy," Ojo explained. "The
Magician wants me to get three hairs from the end of a Woozy's tail."

"Let's go on and find some other Woozy," suggested the cat. "This one
is ugly and dangerous, or they wouldn't cage him up. Maybe we shall
find another that is tame and gentle."

"Perhaps there isn't any other, at all," answered Ojo. "The sign
doesn't say: 'Beware a Woozy'; it says: 'Beware the Woozy,' which may
mean there's only one in all the Land of Oz."

"Then," said Scraps, "suppose we go in and find him? Very likely if we
ask him politely to let us pull three hairs out of the tip of his tail
he won't hurt us."

"It would hurt him, I'm sure, and that would make him cross," said the
cat.

"You needn't worry, Bungle," remarked the Patchwork Girl; "for if there
is danger you can climb a tree. Ojo and I are not afraid; are we, Ojo?"

"I am, a little," the boy admitted; "but this danger must be faced, if
we intend to save poor Unc Nunkie. How shall we get over the fence?"

"Climb," answered Scraps, and at once she began climbing up the rows of
bars. Ojo followed and found it more easy than he had expected. When
they got to the top of the fence they began to get down on the other
side and soon were in the forest. The Glass Cat, being small, crept
between the lower bars and joined them.

Here there was no path of any sort, so they entered the woods, the boy
leading the way, and wandered through the trees until they were nearly
in the center of the forest. They now came upon a clear space in which
stood a rocky cave.

So far they had met no living creature, but when Ojo saw the cave he
knew it must be the den of the Woozy.

It is hard to face any savage beast without a sinking of the heart, but
still more terrifying is it to face an unknown beast, which you have
never seen even a picture of. So there is little wonder that the pulses
of the Munchkin boy beat fast as he and his companions stood facing the
cave. The opening was perfectly square, and about big enough to admit a
goat.

"I guess the Woozy is asleep," said Scraps. "Shall I throw in a stone,
to waken him?"

"No; please don't," answered Ojo, his voice trembling a little. "I'm in
no hurry."

But he had not long to wait, for the Woozy heard the sound of voices
and came trotting out of his cave. As this is the only Woozy that has
ever lived, either in the Land of Oz or out of it, I must describe it
to you.

The creature was all squares and flat surfaces and edges. Its head was
an exact square, like one of the building-blocks a child plays with;
therefore it had no ears, but heard sounds through two openings in the
upper corners. Its nose, being in the center of a square surface, was
flat, while the mouth was formed by the opening of the lower edge of
the block. The body of the Woozy was much larger than its head, but was
likewise block-shaped--being twice as long as it was wide and high. The
tail was square and stubby and perfectly straight, and the four legs
were made in the same way, each being four-sided. The animal was
covered with a thick, smooth skin and had no hair at all except at the
extreme end of its tail, where there grew exactly three stiff, stubby
hairs. The beast was dark blue in color and his face was not fierce nor
ferocious in expression, but rather good-humored and droll.

Seeing the strangers, the Woozy folded his hind legs as if they had
been hinged and sat down to look his visitors over.

"Well, well," he exclaimed; "what a queer lot you are! At first I
thought some of those miserable Munchkin farmers had come to annoy me,
but I am relieved to find you in their stead. It is plain to me that
you are a remarkable group--as remarkable in your way as I am in
mine--and so you are welcome to my domain. Nice place, isn't it? But
lonesome--dreadfully lonesome."

"Why did they shut you up here?" asked Scraps, who was regarding the
queer, square creature with much curiosity.

"Because I eat up all the honey-bees which the Munchkin farmers who
live around here keep to make them honey."

"Are you fond of eating honey-bees?" inquired the boy.

"Very. They are really delicious. But the farmers did not like to lose
their bees and so they tried to destroy me. Of course they couldn't do
that."

"Why not?"

"My skin is so thick and tough that nothing can get through it to hurt
me. So, finding they could not destroy me, they drove me into this
forest and built a fence around me. Unkind, wasn't it?"

"But what do you eat now?" asked Ojo.

"Nothing at all. I've tried the leaves from the trees and the mosses
and creeping vines, but they don't seem to suit my taste. So, there
being no honey-bees here, I've eaten nothing for years.

"You must be awfully hungry," said the boy. "I've got some bread and
cheese in my basket. Would you like that kind of food?"

"Give me a nibble and I will try it; then I can tell you better whether
it is grateful to my appetite," returned the Woozy.

So the boy opened his basket and broke a piece off the loaf of bread.
He tossed it toward the Woozy, who cleverly caught it in his mouth and
ate it in a twinkling.

"That's rather good," declared the animal. "Any more?"

"Try some cheese," said Ojo, and threw down a piece.

The Woozy ate that, too, and smacked its long, thin lips.

"That's mighty good!" it exclaimed. "Any more?"

"Plenty," replied Ojo. So he sat down on a Stump and fed the Woozy
bread and cheese for a long time; for, no matter how much the boy broke
off, the loaf and the slice remained just as big.

"That'll do," said the Woozy, at last; "I'm quite full. I hope the
strange food won't give me indigestion."

"I hope not," said Ojo. "It's what I eat."

"Well, I must say I'm much obliged, and I'm glad you came," announced
the beast. "Is there anything I can do in return for your kindness?"

"Yes," said Ojo earnestly, "you have it in your power to do me a great
favor, if you will."

"What is it?" asked the Woozy. "Name the favor and I will grant it."

"I--I want three hairs from the tip of your tail," said Ojo, with some
hesitation.

"Three hairs! Why, that's all I have--on my tail or anywhere else,"
exclaimed the beast.

"I know; but I want them very much."

"They are my sole ornaments, my prettiest feature," said the Woozy,
uneasily. "If I give up those three hairs I--I'm just a blockhead."

"Yet I must have them," insisted the boy, firmly, and he then told the
Woozy all about the accident to Unc Nunkie and Margolotte, and how the
three hairs were to be a part of the magic charm that would restore
them to life. The beast listened with attention and when Ojo had
finished the recital it said, with a sigh:

"I always keep my word, for I pride myself on being square. So you may
have the three hairs, and welcome. I think, under such circumstances,
it would be selfish in me to refuse you."

"Thank you! Thank you very much," cried the boy, joyfully. "May I pull
out the hairs now?"

"Any time you like," answered the Woozy.

So Ojo went up to the queer creature and taking hold of one of the
hairs began to pull. He pulled harder. He pulled with all his might;
but the hair remained fast.

"What's the trouble?" asked the Woozy, which Ojo had dragged here and
there all around the clearing in his endeavor to pull out the hair.

"It won't come," said the boy, panting.

"I was afraid of that," declared the beast. "You'll have to pull
harder."

"I'll help you," exclaimed Scraps, coming to the boy's side. "You pull
the hair, and I'll pull you, and together we ought to get it out
easily."

"Wait a jiffy," called the Woozy, and then it went to a tree and hugged
it with its front paws, so that its body couldn't be dragged around by
the pull. "All ready, now. Go ahead!"

Ojo grasped the hair with both hands and pulled with all his strength,
while Scraps seized the boy around his waist and added her strength to
his. But the hair wouldn't budge. Instead, it slipped out of Ojo's
hands and he and Scraps both rolled upon the ground in a heap and never
stopped until they bumped against the rocky cave.

"Give it up," advised the Glass Cat, as the boy arose and assisted the
Patchwork Girl to her feet. "A dozen strong men couldn't pull out those
hairs. I believe they're clinched on the under side of the Woozy's
thick skin."

"Then what shall I do?" asked the boy, despairingly. "If on our return
I fail to take these three hairs to the Crooked Magician, the other
things I have come to seek will be of no use at all, and we cannot
restore Unc Nunkie and Margolotte to life."

"They're goners, I guess," said the Patchwork Girl.

"Never mind," added the cat. "I can't see that old Unc and Margolotte
are worth all this trouble, anyhow."

But Ojo did not feel that way. He was so disheartened that he sat down
upon a stump and began to cry.

The Woozy looked at the boy thoughtfully.

"Why don't you take me with you?" asked the beast. "Then, when at last
you get to the Magician's house, he can surely find some way to pull
out those three hairs."

Ojo was overjoyed at this suggestion.

"That's it!" he cried, wiping away the tears and springing to his feet
with a smile. "If I take the three hairs to the Magician, it won't
matter if they are still in your body."

"It can't matter in the least," agreed the Woozy.

"Come on, then," said the boy, picking up his basket; "let us start at
once. I have several other things to find, you know."

But the Glass Cat gave a little laugh and inquired in her scornful way:

"How do you intend to get the beast out of this forest?"

That puzzled them all for a time.

"Let us go to the fence, and then we may find a way," suggested Scraps.
So they walked through the forest to the fence, reaching it at a point
exactly opposite that where they had entered the enclosure.

"How did you get in?" asked the Woozy.

"We climbed over," answered Ojo.

"I can't do that," said the beast. "I'm a very swift runner, for I can
overtake a honey-bee as it flies; and I can jump very high, which is
the reason they made such a tall fence to keep me in. But I can't climb
at all, and I'm too big to squeeze between the bars of the fence."

Ojo tried to think what to do.

"Can you dig?" he asked.

"No," answered the Woozy, "for I have no claws. My feet are quite flat
on the bottom of them. Nor can I gnaw away the boards, as I have no
teeth."

"You're not such a terrible creature, after all," remarked Scraps.

"You haven't heard me growl, or you wouldn't say that," declared the
Woozy. "When I growl, the sound echoes like thunder all through the
valleys and woodlands, and children tremble with fear, and women cover
their heads with their aprons, and big men run and hide. I suppose
there is nothing in the world so terrible to listen to as the growl of
a Woozy."

"Please don't growl, then," begged Ojo, earnestly.

"There is no danger of my growling, for I am not angry. Only when angry
do I utter my fearful, ear-splitting, soul-shuddering growl. Also, when
I am angry, my eyes flash fire, whether I growl or not."

"Real fire?" asked Ojo.

"Of course, real fire. Do you suppose they'd flash imitation fire?"
inquired the Woozy, in an injured tone.

"In that case, I've solved the riddle," cried Scraps, dancing with
glee. "Those fence-boards are made of wood, and if the Woozy stands
close to the fence and lets his eyes flash fire, they might set fire to
the fence and burn it up. Then he could walk away with us easily, being
free."

"Ah, I have never thought of that plan, or I would have been free long
ago," said the Woozy. "But I cannot flash fire from my eyes unless I am
very angry."

"Can't you get angry 'bout something, please?" asked Ojo.

"I'll try. You just say 'Krizzle-Kroo' to me."

"Will that make you angry?" inquired the boy.

"Terribly angry."

"What does it mean?" asked Scraps.

"I don't know; that's what makes me so angry," replied the Woozy.

He then stood close to the fence, with his head near one of the boards,
and Scraps called out "Krizzle-Kroo!" Then Ojo said "Krizzle-Kroo!" and
the Glass Cat said "Krizzle-Kroo!" The Woozy began to tremble with
anger and small sparks darted from his eyes. Seeing this, they all
cried "Krizzle-Kroo!" together, and that made the beast's eyes flash
fire so fiercely that the fence-board caught the sparks and began to
smoke. Then it burst into flame, and the Woozy stepped back and said
triumphantly:

"Aha! That did the business, all right. It was a happy thought for you
to yell all together, for that made me as angry as I have ever been.
Fine sparks, weren't they?"

"Reg'lar fireworks," replied Scraps, admiringly.

In a few moments the board had burned to a distance of several feet,
leaving an opening big enough for them all to pass through. Ojo broke
some branches from a tree and with them whipped the fire until it was
extinguished.

"We don't want to burn the whole fence down," said he, "for the flames
would attract the attention of the Munchkin farmers, who would then
come and capture the Woozy again. I guess they'll be rather surprised
when they find he's escaped."

"So they will," declared the Woozy, chuckling gleefully. "When they
find I'm gone the farmers will be badly scared, for they'll expect me
to eat up their honey-bees, as I did before."

"That reminds me," said the boy, "that you must promise not to eat
honey-bees while you are in our company."

"None at all?"

"Not a bee. You would get us all into trouble, and we can't afford to
have any more trouble than is necessary. I'll feed you all the bread
and cheese you want, and that must satisfy you."

"All right; I'll promise," said the Woozy, cheerfully. "And when I
promise anything you can depend on it, 'cause I'm square."

"I don't see what difference that makes," observed the Patchwork Girl,
as they found the path and continued their journey. "The shape doesn't
make a thing honest, does it?"

"Of course it does," returned the Woozy, very decidedly. "No one could
trust that Crooked Magician, for instance, just because he is crooked;
but a square Woozy couldn't do anything crooked if he wanted to."

"I am neither square nor crooked," said Scraps, looking down at her
plump body.

"No; you're round, so you're liable to do anything," asserted the
Woozy. "Do not blame me, Miss Gorgeous, if I regard you with suspicion.
Many a satin ribbon has a cotton back."

Scraps didn't understand this, but she had an uneasy misgiving that she
had a cotton back herself. It would settle down, at times, and make her
squat and dumpy, and then she had to roll herself in the road until her
body stretched out again.




Chapter Ten

Shaggy Man to the Rescue


They had not gone very far before Bungle, who had run on ahead, came
bounding back to say that the road of yellow bricks was just before
them. At once they hurried forward to see what this famous road looked
like.

It was a broad road, but not straight, for it wandered over hill and
dale and picked out the easiest places to go. All its length and
breadth was paved with smooth bricks of a bright yellow color, so it
was smooth and level except in a few places where the bricks had
crumbled or been removed, leaving holes that might cause the unwary to
stumble.

"I wonder," said Ojo, looking up and down the road, "which way to go."

"Where are you bound for?" asked the Woozy.

"The Emerald City," he replied.

"Then go west," said the Woozy. "I know this road pretty well, for I've
chased many a honey-bee over it."

"Have you ever been to the Emerald City?" asked Scraps.

"No. I am very shy by nature, as you may have noticed, so I haven't
mingled much in society."

"Are you afraid of men?" inquired the Patchwork Girl.

"Me? With my heart-rending growl--my horrible, shudderful growl? I
should say not. I am not afraid of anything," declared the Woozy.

"I wish I could say the same," sighed Ojo. "I don't think we need be
afraid when we get to the Emerald City, for Unc Nunkie has told me that
Ozma, our girl Ruler, is very lovely and kind, and tries to help
everyone who is in trouble. But they say there are many dangers lurking
on the road to the great Fairy City, and so we must be very careful."

"I hope nothing will break me," said the Glass Cat, in a nervous voice.
"I'm a little brittle, you know, and can't stand many hard knocks."

"If anything should fade the colors of my lovely patches it would break
my heart," said the Patchwork Girl.

"I'm not sure you have a heart," Ojo reminded her.

"Then it would break my cotton," persisted Scraps. "Do you think they
are all fast colors, Ojo?" she asked anxiously.

"They seem fast enough when you run," he replied; and then, looking
ahead of them, he exclaimed: "Oh, what lovely trees!"

They were certainly pretty to look upon and the travelers hurried
forward to observe them more closely.

"Why, they are not trees at all," said Scraps; "they are just monstrous
plants."

That is what they really were: masses of great broad leaves which rose
from the ground far into the air, until they towered twice as high as
the top of the Patchwork Girl's head, who was a little taller than Ojo.
The plants formed rows on both sides of the road and from each plant
rose a dozen or more of the big broad leaves, which swayed continually
from side to side, although no wind was blowing. But the most curious
thing about the swaying leaves was their color. They seemed to have a
general groundwork of blue, but here and there other colors glinted at
times through the blue--gorgeous yellows, turning to pink, purple,
orange and scarlet, mingled with more sober browns and grays--each
appearing as a blotch or stripe anywhere on a leaf and then
disappearing, to be replaced by some other color of a different shape.
The changeful coloring of the great leaves was very beautiful, but it
was bewildering, as well, and the novelty of the scene drew our
travelers close to the line of plants, where they stood watching them
with rapt interest.

Suddenly a leaf bent lower than usual and touched the Patchwork Girl.
Swiftly it enveloped her in its embrace, covering her completely in its
thick folds, and then it swayed back upon its stem.

"Why, she's gone!" gasped Ojo, in amazement, and listening carefully he
thought he could hear the muffled screams of Scraps coming from the
center of the folded leaf. But, before he could think what he ought to
do to save her, another leaf bent down and captured the Glass Cat,
rolling around the little creature until she was completely hidden, and
then straightening up again upon its stem.

"Look out," cried the Woozy. "Run! Run fast, or you are lost."

Ojo turned and saw the Woozy running swiftly up the road. But the last
leaf of the row of plants seized the beast even as he ran and instantly
he disappeared from sight.

The boy had no chance to escape. Half a dozen of the great leaves were
bending toward him from different directions and as he stood hesitating
one of them clutched him in its embrace. In a flash he was in the dark.
Then he felt himself gently lifted until he was swaying in the air,
with the folds of the leaf hugging him on all sides.

At first he struggled hard to escape, crying out in anger: "Let me go!
Let me go!" But neither struggles nor protests had any effect whatever.
The leaf held him firmly and he was a prisoner.

Then Ojo quieted himself and tried to think. Despair fell upon him when
he remembered that all his little party had been captured, even as he
was, and there was none to save them.

"I might have expected it," he sobbed, miserably. "I'm Ojo the Unlucky,
and something dreadful was sure to happen to me."

He pushed against the leaf that held him and found it to be soft, but
thick and firm. It was like a great bandage all around him and he found
it difficult to move his body or limbs in order to change their
position.

The minutes passed and became hours. Ojo wondered how long one could
live in such a condition and if the leaf would gradually sap his
strength and even his life, in order to feed itself. The little
Munchkin boy had never heard of any person dying in the Land of Oz, but
he knew one could suffer a great deal of pain. His greatest fear at
this time was that he would always remain imprisoned in the beautiful
leaf and never see the light of day again.

No sound came to him through the leaf; all around was intense silence.
Ojo wondered if Scraps had stopped screaming, or if the folds of the
leaf prevented his hearing her. By and by he thought he heard a
whistle, as of some one whistling a tune. Yes; it really must be some
one whistling, he decided, for he could follow the strains of a pretty
Munchkin melody that Unc Nunkie used to sing to him. The sounds were
low and sweet and, although they reached Ojo's ears very faintly, they
were clear and harmonious.

Could the leaf whistle, Ojo wondered? Nearer and nearer came the sounds
and then they seemed to be just the other side of the leaf that was
hugging him.

Suddenly the whole leaf toppled and fell, carrying the boy with it, and
while he sprawled at full length the folds slowly relaxed and set him
free. He scrambled quickly to his feet and found that a strange man was
standing before him--a man so curious in appearance that the boy stared
with round eyes.

He was a big man, with shaggy whiskers, shaggy eyebrows, shaggy
hair--but kindly blue eyes that were gentle as those of a cow. On his
head was a green velvet hat with a jeweled band, which was all shaggy
around the brim. Rich but shaggy laces were at his throat; a coat with
shaggy edges was decorated with diamond buttons; the velvet breeches
had jeweled buckles at the knees and shags all around the bottoms. On
his breast hung a medallion bearing a picture of Princess Dorothy of
Oz, and in his hand, as he stood looking at Ojo, was a sharp knife
shaped like a dagger.

"Oh!" exclaimed Ojo, greatly astonished at the sight of this stranger;
and then he added: "Who has saved me, sir?"

"Can't you see?" replied the other, with a smile; "I'm the Shaggy Man."

"Yes; I can see that," said the boy, nodding. "Was it you who rescued
me from the leaf?"

"None other, you may be sure. But take care, or I shall have to rescue
you again."

Ojo gave a jump, for he saw several broad leaves leaning toward him;
but the Shaggy Man began to whistle again, and at the sound the leaves
all straightened up on their stems and kept still.

The man now took Ojo's arm and led him up the road, past the last of
the great plants, and not till he was safely beyond their reach did he
cease his whistling.

"You see, the music charms 'em," said he. "Singing or whistling--it
doesn't matter which--makes 'em behave, and nothing else will. I always
whistle as I go by 'em and so they always let me alone. To-day as I
went by, whistling, I saw a leaf curled and knew there must be
something inside it. I cut down the leaf with my knife and--out you
popped. Lucky I passed by, wasn't it?"

"You were very kind," said Ojo, "and I thank you. Will you please
rescue my companions, also?"

"What companions?" asked the Shaggy Man.

"The leaves grabbed them all," said the boy. "There's a Patchwork Girl
and--"

"A what?"

"A girl made of patchwork, you know. She's alive and her name is
Scraps. And there's a Glass Cat--"

"Glass?" asked the Shaggy Man.

"All glass."

"And alive?"

"Yes," said Ojo; "she has pink brains. And there's a Woozy--"

"What's a Woozy?" inquired the Shaggy Man.

"Why, I--I--can't describe it," answered the boy, greatly perplexed.
"But it's a queer animal with three hairs on the tip of its tail that
won't come out and--"

"What won't come out?" asked the Shaggy Man; "the tail?"

"The hairs won't come out. But you'll see the Woozy, if you'll please
rescue it, and then you'll know just what it is."

"Of course," said the Shaggy Man, nodding his shaggy head. And then he
walked back among the plants, still whistling, and found the three
leaves which were curled around Ojo's traveling companions. The first
leaf he cut down released Scraps, and on seeing her the Shaggy Man
threw back his shaggy head, opened wide his mouth and laughed so
shaggily and yet so merrily that Scraps liked him at once. Then he took
off his hat and made her a low bow, saying:

"My dear, you're a wonder. I must introduce you to my friend the
Scarecrow."

When he cut down the second leaf he rescued the Glass Cat, and Bungle
was so frightened that she scampered away like a streak and soon had
joined Ojo, when she sat beside him panting and trembling. The last
plant of all the row had captured the Woozy, and a big bunch in the
center of the curled leaf showed plainly where he was. With his sharp
knife the Shaggy Man sliced off the stem of the leaf and as it fell and
unfolded out trotted the Woozy and escaped beyond the reach of any more
of the dangerous plants.




Chapter Eleven

A Good Friend


Soon the entire party was gathered on the road of yellow bricks, quite
beyond the reach of the beautiful but treacherous plants. The Shaggy
Man, staring first at one and then at the other, seemed greatly pleased
and interested.

"I've seen queer things since I came to the Land of Oz," said he, "but
never anything queerer than this band of adventurers. Let us sit down a
while, and have a talk and get acquainted."

"Haven't you always lived in the Land of Oz?" asked the Munchkin boy.

"No; I used to live in the big, outside world. But I came here once
with Dorothy, and Ozma let me stay."

"How do you like Oz?" asked Scraps. "Isn't the country and the climate
grand?"

"It's the finest country in all the world, even if it is a fairyland,
and I'm happy every minute I live in it," said the Shaggy Man. "But
tell me something about yourselves."

So Ojo related the story of his visit to the house of the Crooked
Magician, and how he met there the Glass Cat, and how the Patchwork
Girl was brought to life and of the terrible accident to Unc Nunkie and
Margolotte. Then he told how he had set out to find the five different
things which the Magician needed to make a charm that would restore the
marble figures to life, one requirement being three hairs from a
Woozy's tail.

"We found the Woozy," explained the boy, "and he agreed to give us the
three hairs; but we couldn't pull them out. So we had to bring the
Woozy along with us."

"I see," returned the Shaggy Man, who had listened with interest to the
story. "But perhaps I, who am big and strong, can pull those three
hairs from the Woozy's tail."

"Try it, if you like," said the Woozy.

So the Shaggy Man tried it, but pull as hard as he could he failed to
get the hairs out of the Woozy's tail. So he sat down again and wiped
his shaggy face with a shaggy silk handkerchief and said:

"It doesn't matter. If you can keep the Woozy until you get the rest of
the things you need, you can take the beast and his three hairs to the
Crooked Magician and let him find a way to extract 'em. What are the
other things you are to find?"

"One," said Ojo, "is a six-leaved clover."

"You ought to find that in the fields around the Emerald City," said
the Shaggy Man. "There is a Law against picking six-leaved clovers, but
I think I can get Ozma to let you have one."

"Thank you," replied Ojo. "The next thing is the left wing of a yellow
butterfly."

"For that you must go to the Winkie Country," the Shaggy Man declared.
"I've never noticed any butterflies there, but that is the yellow
country of Oz and it's ruled by a good friend of mine, the Tin Woodman."

"Oh, I've heard of him!" exclaimed Ojo. "He must be a wonderful man."

"So he is, and his heart is wonderfully kind. I'm sure the Tin Woodman
will do all in his power to help you to save your Unc Nunkie and poor
Margolotte."

"The next thing I must find," said the Munchkin boy, "is a gill of
water from a dark well."

"Indeed! Well, that is more difficult," said the Shaggy Man, scratching
his left ear in a puzzled way. "I've never heard of a dark well; have
you?"

"No," said Ojo.

"Do you know where one may be found?" inquired the Shaggy Man.

"I can't imagine," said Ojo.

"Then we must ask the Scarecrow."

"The Scarecrow! But surely, sir, a scarecrow can't know anything."

"Most scarecrows don't, I admit," answered the Shaggy Man. "But this
Scarecrow of whom I speak is very intelligent. He claims to possess the
best brains in all Oz."

"Better than mine?" asked Scraps.

"Better than mine?" echoed the Glass Cat. "Mine are pink, and you can
see 'em work."

"Well, you can't see the Scarecrow's brains work, but they do a lot of
clever thinking," asserted the Shaggy Man. "If anyone knows where a
dark well is, it's my friend the Scarecrow."

"Where does he live?" inquired Ojo.

"He has a splendid castle in the Winkie Country, near to the palace of
his friend the Tin Woodman, and he is often to be found in the Emerald
City, where he visits Dorothy at the royal palace."

"Then we will ask him about the dark well," said Ojo.

"But what else does this Crooked Magician want?" asked the Shaggy Man.

"A drop of oil from a live man's body."

"Oh; but there isn't such a thing."

"That is what I thought," replied Ojo; "but the Crooked Magician said
it wouldn't be called for by the recipe if it couldn't be found, and
therefore I must search until I find it."

"I wish you good luck," said the Shaggy Man, shaking his head
doubtfully; "but I imagine you'll have a hard job getting a drop of oil
from a live man's body. There's blood in a body, but no oil."

"There's cotton in mine," said Scraps, dancing a little jig.

"I don't doubt it," returned the Shaggy Man admiringly. "You're a
regular comforter and as sweet as patchwork can be. All you lack is
dignity."

"I hate dignity," cried Scraps, kicking a pebble high in the air and
then trying to catch it as it fell. "Half the fools and all the wise
folks are dignified, and I'm neither the one nor the other."

"She's just crazy," explained the Glass Cat.

The Shaggy Man laughed.

"She's delightful, in her way," he said. "I'm sure Dorothy will be
pleased with her, and the Scarecrow will dote on her. Did you say you
were traveling toward the Emerald City?"

"Yes," replied Ojo. "I thought that the best place to go, at first,
because the six-leaved clover may be found there."

"I'll go with you," said the Shaggy Man, "and show you the way."

"Thank you," exclaimed Ojo. "I hope it won't put you out any."

"No," said the other, "I wasn't going anywhere in particular. I've been
a rover all my life, and although Ozma has given me a suite of
beautiful rooms in her palace I still get the wandering fever once in a
while and start out to roam the country over. I've been away from the
Emerald City several weeks, this time, and now that I've met you and
your friends I'm sure it will interest me to accompany you to the great
city of Oz and introduce you to my friends."

"That will be very nice," said the boy, gratefully.

"I hope your friends are not dignified," observed Scraps.

"Some are, and some are not," he answered; "but I never criticise my
friends. If they are really true friends, they may be anything they
like, for all of me."

"There's some sense in that," said Scraps, nodding her queer head in
approval. "Come on, and let's get to the Emerald City as soon as
possible." With this she ran up the path, skipping and dancing, and
then turned to await them.

"It is quite a distance from here to the Emerald City," remarked the
Shaggy Man, "so we shall not get there to-day, nor to-morrow. Therefore
let us take the jaunt in an easy manner. I'm an old traveler and have
found that I never gain anything by being in a hurry. 'Take it easy' is
my motto. If you can't take it easy, take it as easy as you can."

After walking some distance over the road of yellow bricks Ojo said he
was hungry and would stop to eat some bread and cheese. He offered a
portion of the food to the Shaggy Man, who thanked him but refused it.

"When I start out on my travels," said he, "I carry along enough square
meals to last me several weeks. Think I'll indulge in one now, as long
as we're stopping anyway."

Saying this, he took a bottle from his pocket and shook from it a
tablet about the size of one of Ojo's finger-nails.

"That," announced the Shaggy Man, "is a square meal, in condensed form.
Invention of the great Professor Woggle-Bug, of the Royal College of
Athletics. It contains soup, fish, roast meat, salad, apple-dumplings,
ice cream and chocolate-drops, all boiled down to this small size, so
it can be conveniently carried and swallowed when you are hungry and
need a square meal."

"I'm square," said the Woozy. "Give me one, please."

So the Shaggy Man gave the Woozy a tablet from his bottle and the beast
ate it in a twinkling.

"You have now had a six course dinner," declared the Shaggy Man.

"Pshaw!" said the Woozy, ungratefully, "I want to taste something.
There's no fun in that sort of eating."

"One should only eat to sustain life," replied the Shaggy Man, "and
that tablet is equal to a peck of other food."

"I don't care for it. I want something I can chew and taste," grumbled
the Woozy.

"You are quite wrong, my poor beast," said the Shaggy Man in a tone of
pity. "Think how tired your jaws would get chewing a square meal like
this, if it were not condensed to the size of a small tablet--which you
can swallow in a jiffy."

"Chewing isn't tiresome; it's fun," maintained the Woozy. "I always
chew the honey-bees when I catch them. Give me some bread and cheese,
Ojo."

"No, no! You've already eaten a big dinner!" protested the Shaggy Man.

"May be," answered the Woozy; "but I guess I'll fool myself by munching
some bread and cheese. I may not be hungry, having eaten all those
things you gave me, but I consider this eating business a matter of
taste, and I like to realize what's going into me."

Ojo gave the beast what he wanted, but the Shaggy Man shook his shaggy
head reproachfully and said there was no animal so obstinate or hard to
convince as a Woozy.

At this moment a patter of footsteps was heard, and looking up they saw
the live phonograph standing before them. It seemed to have passed
through many adventures since Ojo and his comrades last saw the
machine, for the varnish of its wooden case was all marred and dented
and scratched in a way that gave it an aged and disreputable appearance.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Ojo, staring hard. "What has happened to you?"

"Nothing much," replied the phonograph in a sad and depressed voice.
"I've had enough things thrown at me, since I left you, to stock a
department store and furnish half a dozen bargain-counters."

"Are you so broken up that you can't play?" asked Scraps.

"No; I still am able to grind out delicious music. Just now I've a
record on tap that is really superb," said the phonograph, growing more
cheerful.

"That is too bad," remarked Ojo. "We've no objection to you as a
machine, you know; but as a music-maker we hate you."

"Then why was I ever invented?" demanded the machine, in a tone of
indignant protest.

They looked at one another inquiringly, but no one could answer such a
puzzling question. Finally the Shaggy Man said:

"I'd like to hear the phonograph play."

Ojo sighed. "We've been very happy since we met you, sir," he said.

"I know. But a little misery, at times, makes one appreciate happiness
more. Tell me, Phony, what is this record like, which you say you have
on tap?"

"It's a popular song, sir. In all civilized lands the common people
have gone wild over it."

"Makes civilized folks wild folks, eh? Then it's dangerous."

"Wild with joy, I mean," explained the phonograph. "Listen. This song
will prove a rare treat to you, I know. It made the author rich--for an
author. It is called 'My Lulu.'"

Then the phonograph began to play. A strain of odd, jerky sounds was
followed by these words, sung by a man through his nose with great
vigor of expression:

    "Ah wants mah Lulu, mah coal-black Lulu;
    Ah wants mah loo-loo, loo-loo, loo-loo, Lu!
    Ah loves mah Lulu, mah coal-black Lulu,
    There ain't nobody else loves loo-loo, Lu!"


"Here--shut that off!" cried the Shaggy Man, springing to his feet.
"What do you mean by such impertinence?"

"It's the latest popular song," declared the phonograph, speaking in a
sulky tone of voice.

"A popular song?"

"Yes. One that the feeble-minded can remember the words of and those
ignorant of music can whistle or sing. That makes a popular song
popular, and the time is coming when it will take the place of all
other songs."

"That time won't come to us, just yet," said the Shaggy Man, sternly:
"I'm something of a singer myself, and I don't intend to be throttled
by any Lulus like your coal-black one. I shall take you all apart, Mr.
Phony, and scatter your pieces far and wide over the country, as a
matter of kindness to the people you might meet if allowed to run
around loose. Having performed this painful duty I shall--"

But before he could say more the phonograph turned and dashed up the
road as fast as its four table-legs could carry it, and soon it had
entirely disappeared from their view.

The Shaggy Man sat down again and seemed well pleased. "Some one else
will save me the trouble of scattering that phonograph," said he; "for
it is not possible that such a music-maker can last long in the Land of
Oz. When you are rested, friends, let us go on our way."

During the afternoon the travelers found themselves in a lonely and
uninhabited part of the country. Even the fields were no longer
cultivated and the country began to resemble a wilderness. The road of
yellow bricks seemed to have been neglected and became uneven and more
difficult to walk upon. Scrubby under-brush grew on either side of the
way, while huge rocks were scattered around in abundance.

But this did not deter Ojo and his friends from trudging on, and they
beguiled the journey with jokes and cheerful conversation. Toward
evening they reached a crystal spring which gushed from a tall rock by
the roadside and near this spring stood a deserted cabin. Said the
Shaggy Man, halting here:

"We may as well pass the night here, where there is shelter for our
heads and good water to drink. Road beyond here is pretty bad; worst we
shall have to travel; so let's wait until morning before we tackle it."

They agreed to this and Ojo found some brushwood in the cabin and made
a fire on the hearth. The fire delighted Scraps, who danced before it
until Ojo warned her she might set fire to herself and burn up. After
that the Patchwork Girl kept at a respectful distance from the darting
flames, but the Woozy lay down before the fire like a big dog and
seemed to enjoy its warmth.

For supper the Shaggy Man ate one of his tablets, but Ojo stuck to his
bread and cheese as the most satisfying food. He also gave a portion to
the Woozy.

When darkness came on and they sat in a circle on the cabin floor,
facing the firelight--there being no furniture of any sort in the
place--Ojo said to the Shaggy Man:

"Won't you tell us a story?"

"I'm not good at stories," was the reply; "but I sing like a bird."

"Raven, or crow?" asked the Glass Cat.

"Like a song bird. I'll prove it. I'll sing a song I composed myself.
Don't tell anyone I'm a poet; they might want me to write a book. Don't
tell 'em I can sing, or they'd want me to make records for that awful
phonograph. Haven't time to be a public benefactor, so I'll just sing
you this little song for your own amusement."

They were glad enough to be entertained, and listened with interest
while the Shaggy Man chanted the following verses to a tune that was
not unpleasant:

    "I'll sing a song of Ozland, where wondrous creatures dwell
    And fruits and flowers and shady bowers abound in every dell,
    Where magic is a science and where no one shows surprise
    If some amazing thing takes place before his very eyes.

    Our Ruler's a bewitching girl whom fairies love to please;
    She's always kept her magic sceptre to enforce decrees
    To make her people happy, for her heart is kind and true
    And to aid the needy and distressed is what she longs to do.

    And then there's Princess Dorothy, as sweet as any rose,
    A lass from Kansas, where they don't grow fairies, I suppose;
    And there's the brainy Scarecrow, with a body stuffed with straw,
    Who utters words of wisdom rare that fill us all with awe.

    I'll not forget Nick Chopper, the Woodman made of Tin,
    Whose tender heart thinks killing time is quite a dreadful sin,
    Nor old Professor Woggle-Bug, who's highly magnified
    And looks so big to everyone that he is filled with pride.

    Jack Pumpkinhead's a dear old chum who might be called a chump,
    But won renown by riding round upon a magic Gump;
    The Sawhorse is a splendid steed and though he's made of wood
    He does as many thrilling stunts as any meat horse could.

    And now I'll introduce a beast that ev'ryone adores--
    The Cowardly Lion shakes with fear 'most ev'ry time he roars,
    And yet he does the bravest things that any lion might,
    Because he knows that cowardice is not considered right.

    There's Tik-Tok--he's a clockwork man and quite a funny sight--
    He talks and walks mechanically, when he's wound up tight;
    And we've a Hungry Tiger who would babies love to eat
    But never does because we feed him other kinds of meat.

    It's hard to name all of the freaks this noble Land's acquired;
    'Twould make my song so very long that you would soon be tired;
    But give attention while I mention one wise Yellow Hen
    And Nine fine Tiny Piglets living in a golden pen.

    Just search the whole world over--sail the seas from coast to coast--
    No other nation in creation queerer folk can boast;
    And now our rare museum will include a Cat of Glass,
    A Woozy, and--last but not least--a crazy Patchwork Lass."


Ojo was so pleased with this song that he applauded the singer by
clapping his hands, and Scraps followed suit by clapping her padded
fingers together, although they made no noise. The cat pounded on the
floor with her glass paws--gently, so as not to break them--and the
Woozy, which had been asleep, woke up to ask what the row was about.

"I seldom sing in public, for fear they might want me to start an opera
company," remarked the Shaggy Man, who was pleased to know his effort
was appreciated. "Voice, just now, is a little out of training; rusty,
perhaps."

"Tell me," said the Patchwork Girl earnestly, "do all those queer
people you mention really live in the Land of Oz?"

"Every one of 'em. I even forgot one thing: Dorothy's Pink Kitten."

"For goodness sake!" exclaimed Bungle, sitting up and looking
interested. "A Pink Kitten? How absurd! Is it glass?"

"No; just ordinary kitten."

"Then it can't amount to much. I have pink brains, and you can see 'em
work."

"Dorothy's kitten is all pink--brains and all--except blue eyes. Name's
Eureka. Great favorite at the royal palace," said the Shaggy Man,
yawning.

The Glass Cat seemed annoyed.

"Do you think a pink kitten--common meat--is as pretty as I am?" she
asked.

"Can't say. Tastes differ, you know," replied the Shaggy Man, yawning
again. "But here's a pointer that may be of service to you: make
friends with Eureka and you'll be solid at the palace."

"I'm solid now; solid glass."

"You don't understand," rejoined the Shaggy Man, sleepily. "Anyhow,
make friends with the Pink Kitten and you'll be all right. If the Pink
Kitten despises you, look out for breakers."

"Would anyone at the royal palace break a Glass Cat?"

"Might. You never can tell. Advise you to purr soft and look humble--if
you can. And now I'm going to bed."

Bungle considered the Shaggy Man's advice so carefully that her pink
brains were busy long after the others of the party were fast asleep.




Chapter Twelve

The Giant Porcupine


Next morning they started out bright and early to follow the road of
yellow bricks toward the Emerald City. The little Munchkin boy was
beginning to feel tired from the long walk, and he had a great many
things to think of and consider besides the events of the journey. At
the wonderful Emerald City, which he would presently reach, were so
many strange and curious people that he was half afraid of meeting them
and wondered if they would prove friendly and kind. Above all else, he
could not drive from his mind the important errand on which he had
come, and he was determined to devote every energy to finding the
things that were necessary to prepare the magic recipe. He believed
that until dear Unc Nunkie was restored to life he could feel no joy in
anything, and often he wished that Unc could be with him, to see all
the astonishing things Ojo was seeing. But alas Unc Nunkie was now a
marble statue in the house of the Crooked Magician and Ojo must not
falter in his efforts to save him.

The country through which they were passing was still rocky and
deserted, with here and there a bush or a tree to break the dreary
landscape. Ojo noticed one tree, especially, because it had such long,
silky leaves and was so beautiful in shape. As he approached it he
studied the tree earnestly, wondering if any fruit grew on it or if it
bore pretty flowers.

Suddenly he became aware that he had been looking at that tree a long
time--at least for five minutes--and it had remained in the same
position, although the boy had continued to walk steadily on. So he
stopped short, and when he stopped, the tree and all the landscape, as
well as his companions, moved on before him and left him far behind.

Ojo uttered such a cry of astonishment that it aroused the Shaggy Man,
who also halted. The others then stopped, too, and walked back to the
boy.

"What's wrong?" asked the Shaggy Man.

"Why, we're not moving forward a bit, no matter how fast we walk,"
declared Ojo. "Now that we have stopped, we are moving backward! Can't
you see? Just notice that rock."

Scraps looked down at her feet and said: "The yellow bricks are not
moving."

"But the whole road is," answered Ojo.

"True; quite true," agreed the Shaggy Man. "I know all about the tricks
of this road, but I have been thinking of something else and didn't
realize where we were."

"It will carry us back to where we started from," predicted Ojo,
beginning to be nervous.

"No," replied the Shaggy Man; "it won't do that, for I know a trick to
beat this tricky road. I've traveled this way before, you know. Turn
around, all of you, and walk backward."

"What good will that do?" asked the cat.

"You'll find out, if you obey me," said the Shaggy Man.

So they all turned their backs to the direction in which they wished to
go and began walking backward. In an instant Ojo noticed they were
gaining ground and as they proceeded in this curious way they soon
passed the tree which had first attracted his attention to their
difficulty.

"How long must we keep this up, Shags?" asked Scraps, who was
constantly tripping and tumbling down, only to get up again with a
laugh at her mishap.

"Just a little way farther," replied the Shaggy Man.

A few minutes later he called to them to turn about quickly and step
forward, and as they obeyed the order they found themselves treading
solid ground.

"That task is well over," observed the Shaggy Man. "It's a little
tiresome to walk backward, but that is the only way to pass this part
of the road, which has a trick of sliding back and carrying with it
anyone who is walking upon it."

With new courage and energy they now trudged forward and after a time
came to a place where the road cut through a low hill, leaving high
banks on either side of it. They were traveling along this cut, talking
together, when the Shaggy Man seized Scraps with one arm and Ojo with
another and shouted: "Stop!"

"What's wrong now?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

"See there!" answered the Shaggy Man, pointing with his finger.

Directly in the center of the road lay a motionless object that
bristled all over with sharp quills, which resembled arrows. The body
was as big as a ten-bushel-basket, but the projecting quills made it
appear to be four times bigger.

"Well, what of it?" asked Scraps.

"That is Chiss, who causes a lot of trouble along this road," was the
reply.

"Chiss! What is Chiss?

"I think it is merely an overgrown porcupine, but here in Oz they
consider Chiss an evil spirit. He's different from a reg'lar porcupine,
because he can throw his quills in any direction, which an American
porcupine cannot do. That's what makes old Chiss so dangerous. If we
get too near, he'll fire those quills at us and hurt us badly."

"Then we will be foolish to get too near," said Scraps.

"I'm not afraid," declared the Woozy. "The Chiss is cowardly, I'm sure,
and if it ever heard my awful, terrible, frightful growl, it would be
scared stiff."

"Oh; can you growl?" asked the Shaggy Man.

"That is the only ferocious thing about me," asserted the Woozy with
evident pride. "My growl makes an earthquake blush and the thunder
ashamed of itself. If I growled at that creature you call Chiss, it
would immediately think the world had cracked in two and bumped against
the sun and moon, and that would cause the monster to run as far and as
fast as its legs could carry it."

"In that case," said the Shaggy Man, "you are now able to do us all a
great favor. Please growl."

"But you forget," returned the Woozy; "my tremendous growl would also
frighten you, and if you happen to have heart disease you might expire."

"True; but we must take that risk," decided the Shaggy Man, bravely.
"Being warned of what is to occur we must try to bear the terrific
noise of your growl; but Chiss won't expect it, and it will scare him
away."

The Woozy hesitated.

"I'm fond of you all, and I hate to shock you," it said.

"Never mind," said Ojo.

"You may be made deaf."

"If so, we will forgive you."

"Very well, then," said the Woozy in a determined voice, and advanced a
few steps toward the giant porcupine. Pausing to look back, it asked:
"All ready?"

"All ready!" they answered.

"Then cover up your ears and brace yourselves firmly. Now, then--look
out!"

The Woozy turned toward Chiss, opened wide its mouth and said:

"Quee-ee-ee-eek."

"Go ahead and growl," said Scraps.

"Why, I--I did growl!" retorted the Woozy, who seemed much astonished.

"What, that little squeak?" she cried.

"It is the most awful growl that ever was heard, on land or sea, in
caverns or in the sky," protested the Woozy. "I wonder you stood the
shock so well. Didn't you feel the ground tremble? I suppose Chiss is
now quite dead with fright."

The Shaggy Man laughed merrily.

"Poor Wooz!" said he; "your growl wouldn't scare a fly."

The Woozy seemed to be humiliated and surprised. It hung its head a
moment, as if in shame or sorrow, but then it said with renewed
confidence: "Anyhow, my eyes can flash fire; and good fire, too; good
enough to set fire to a fence!"

"That is true," declared Scraps; "I saw it done myself. But your
ferocious growl isn't as loud as the tick of a beetle--or one of Ojo's
snores when he's fast asleep."

"Perhaps," said the Woozy, humbly, "I have been mistaken about my
growl. It has always sounded very fearful to me, but that may have been
because it was so close to my ears."

"Never mind," Ojo said soothingly; "it is a great talent to be able to
flash fire from your eyes. No one else can do that."

As they stood hesitating what to do Chiss stirred and suddenly a shower
of quills came flying toward them, almost filling the air, they were so
many. Scraps realized in an instant that they had gone too near to
Chiss for safety, so she sprang in front of Ojo and shielded him from
the darts, which stuck their points into her own body until she
resembled one of those targets they shoot arrows at in archery games.
The Shaggy Man dropped flat on his face to avoid the shower, but one
quill struck him in the leg and went far in. As for the Glass Cat, the
quills rattled off her body without making even a scratch, and the skin
of the Woozy was so thick and tough that he was not hurt at all.

When the attack was over they all ran to the Shaggy Man, who was
moaning and groaning, and Scraps promptly pulled the quill out of his
leg. Then up he jumped and ran over to Chiss, putting his foot on the
monster's neck and holding it a prisoner. The body of the great
porcupine was now as smooth as leather, except for the holes where the
quills had been, for it had shot every single quill in that one wicked
shower.

"Let me go!" it shouted angrily. "How dare you put your foot on Chiss?"

"I'm going to do worse than that, old boy," replied the Shaggy Man.
"You have annoyed travelers on this road long enough, and now I shall
put an end to you."

"You can't!" returned Chiss. "Nothing can kill me, as you know
perfectly well."

"Perhaps that is true," said the Shaggy Man in a tone of
disappointment. "Seems to me I've been told before that you can't be
killed. But if I let you go, what will you do?"

"Pick up my quills again," said Chiss in a sulky voice.

"And then shoot them at more travelers? No; that won't do. You must
promise me to stop throwing quills at people."

"I won't promise anything of the sort," declared Chiss.

"Why not?"

"Because it is my nature to throw quills, and every animal must do what
Nature intends it to do. It isn't fair for you to blame me. If it were
wrong for me to throw quills, then I wouldn't be made with quills to
throw. The proper thing for you to do is to keep out of my way."

"Why, there's some sense in that argument," admitted the Shaggy Man,
thoughtfully; "but people who are strangers, and don't know you are
here, won't be able to keep out of your way."

"Tell you what," said Scraps, who was trying to pull the quills out of
her own body, "let's gather up all the quills and take them away with
us; then old Chiss won't have any left to throw at people."

"Ah, that's a clever idea. You and Ojo must gather up the quills while
I hold Chiss a prisoner; for, if I let him go, he will get some of his
quills and be able to throw them again."

So Scraps and Ojo picked up all the quills and tied them in a bundle so
they might easily be carried. After this the Shaggy Man released Chiss
and let him go, knowing that he was harmless to injure anyone.

"It's the meanest trick I ever heard of," muttered the porcupine
gloomily. "How would you like it, Shaggy Man, if I took all your shags
away from you?"

"If I threw my shags and hurt people, you would be welcome to capture
them," was the reply.

Then they walked on and left Chiss standing in the road sullen and
disconsolate. The Shaggy Man limped as he walked, for his wound still
hurt him, and Scraps was much annoyed because the quills had left a
number of small holes in her patches.

When they came to a flat stone by the roadside the Shaggy Man sat down
to rest, and then Ojo opened his basket and took out the bundle of
charms the Crooked Magician had given him.

"I am Ojo the Unlucky," he said, "or we would never have met that
dreadful porcupine. But I will see if I can find anything among these
charms which will cure your leg."

Soon he discovered that one of the charms was labelled: "For flesh
wounds," and this the boy separated from the others. It was only a bit
of dried root, taken from some unknown shrub, but the boy rubbed it
upon the wound made by the quill and in a few moments the place was
healed entirely and the Shaggy Man's leg was as good as ever.

"Rub it on the holes in my patches," suggested Scraps, and Ojo tried
it, but without any effect.

"The charm you need is a needle and thread," said the Shaggy Man. "But
do not worry, my dear; those holes do not look badly, at all."

"They'll let in the air, and I don't want people to think I'm airy, or
that I've been stuck up," said the Patchwork Girl.

"You were certainly stuck up until we pulled out those quills,"
observed Ojo, with a laugh.

So now they went on again and coming presently to a pond of muddy water
they tied a heavy stone to the bundle of quills and sunk it to the
bottom of the pond, to avoid carrying it farther.




Chapter Thirteen

Scraps and the Scarecrow


From here on the country improved and the desert places began to give
way to fertile spots; still no houses were yet to be seen near the
road. There were some hills, with valleys between them, and on reaching
the top of one of these hills the travelers found before them a high
wall, running to the right and the left as far as their eyes could
reach. Immediately in front of them, where the wall crossed the
roadway, stood a gate having stout iron bars that extended from top to
bottom. They found, on coming nearer, that this gate was locked with a
great padlock, rusty through lack of use.

"Well," said Scraps, "I guess we'll stop here."

"It's a good guess," replied Ojo. "Our way is barred by this great wall
and gate. It looks as if no one had passed through in many years."

"Looks are deceiving," declared the Shaggy Man, laughing at their
disappointed faces, "and this barrier is the most deceiving thing in
all Oz."

"It prevents our going any farther, anyhow," said Scraps. "There is no
one to mind the gate and let people through, and we've no key to the
padlock."

"True," replied Ojo, going a little nearer to peep through the bars of
the gate. "What shall we do, Shaggy Man? If we had wings we might fly
over the wall, but we cannot climb it and unless we get to the Emerald
City I won't be able to find the things to restore Unc Nunkie to life."

"All very true," answered the Shaggy Man, quietly; "but I know this
gate, having passed through it many times."

"How?" they all eagerly inquired.

"I'll show you how," said he. He stood Ojo in the middle of the road
and placed Scraps just behind him, with her padded hands on his
shoulders. After the Patchwork Girl came the Woozy, who held a part of
her skirt in his mouth. Then, last of all, was the Glass Cat, holding
fast to the Woozy's tail with her glass jaws.

"Now," said the Shaggy Man, "you must all shut your eyes tight, and
keep them shut until I tell you to open them."

"I can't," objected Scraps. "My eyes are buttons, and they won't shut."

So the Shaggy Man tied his red handkerchief over the Patchwork Girl's
eyes and examined all the others to make sure they had their eyes fast
shut and could see nothing.

"What's the game, anyhow--blind-man's-buff?" asked Scraps.

"Keep quiet!" commanded the Shaggy Man, sternly. "All ready? Then
follow me."

He took Ojo's hand and led him forward over the road of yellow bricks,
toward the gate. Holding fast to one another they all followed in a
row, expecting every minute to bump against the iron bars. The Shaggy
Man also had his eyes closed, but marched straight ahead, nevertheless,
and after he had taken one hundred steps, by actual count, he stopped
and said:

"Now you may open your eyes."

They did so, and to their astonishment found the wall and the gateway
far behind them, while in front the former Blue Country of the
Munchkins had given way to green fields, with pretty farm-houses
scattered among them.

"That wall," explained the Shaggy Man, "is what is called an optical
illusion. It is quite real while you have your eyes open, but if you
are not looking at it the barrier doesn't exist at all. It's the same
way with many other evils in life; they seem to exist, and yet it's all
seeming and not true. You will notice that the wall--or what we thought
was a wall--separates the Munchkin Country from the green country that
surrounds the Emerald City, which lies exactly in the center of Oz.
There are two roads of yellow bricks through the Munchkin Country, but
the one we followed is the best of the two. Dorothy once traveled the
other way, and met with more dangers than we did. But all our troubles
are over for the present, as another day's journey will bring us to the
great Emerald City."

They were delighted to know this, and proceeded with new courage. In a
couple of hours they stopped at a farmhouse, where the people were very
hospitable and invited them to dinner. The farm folk regarded Scraps
with much curiosity but no great astonishment, for they were accustomed
to seeing extraordinary people in the Land of Oz.

The woman of this house got her needle and thread and sewed up the
holes made by the porcupine quills in the Patchwork Girl's body, after
which Scraps was assured she looked as beautiful as ever.

"You ought to have a hat to wear," remarked the woman, "for that would
keep the sun from fading the colors of your face. I have some patches
and scraps put away, and if you will wait two or three days I'll make
you a lovely hat that will match the rest of you."

"Never mind the hat," said Scraps, shaking her yarn braids; "it's a
kind offer, but we can't stop. I can't see that my colors have faded a
particle, as yet; can you?"

"Not much," replied the woman. "You are still very gorgeous, in spite
of your long journey."

The children of the house wanted to keep the Glass Cat to play with, so
Bungle was offered a good home if she would remain; but the cat was too
much interested in Ojo's adventures and refused to stop.

"Children are rough playmates," she remarked to the Shaggy Man, "and
although this home is more pleasant than that of the Crooked Magician I
fear I would soon be smashed to pieces by the boys and girls."

After they had rested themselves they renewed their journey, finding
the road now smooth and pleasant to walk upon and the country growing
more beautiful the nearer they drew to the Emerald City.

By and by Ojo began to walk on the green grass, looking carefully
around him.

"What are you trying to find?" asked Scraps.

"A six-leaved clover," said he.

"Don't do that!" exclaimed the Shaggy Man, earnestly. "It's against the
Law to pick a six-leaved clover. You must wait until you get Ozma's
consent."

"She wouldn't know it," declared the boy.

"Ozma knows many things," said the Shaggy Man. "In her room is a Magic
Picture that shows any scene in the Land of Oz where strangers or
travelers happen to be. She may be watching the picture of us even now,
and noticing everything that we do."

"Does she always watch the Magic Picture?" asked Ojo.

"Not always, for she has many other things to do; but, as I said, she
may be watching us this very minute."

"I don't care," said Ojo, in an obstinate tone of voice; "Ozma's only a
girl."

The Shaggy Man looked at him in surprise.

"You ought to care for Ozma," said he, "if you expect to save your
uncle. For, if you displease our powerful Ruler, your journey will
surely prove a failure; whereas, if you make a friend of Ozma, she will
gladly assist you. As for her being a girl, that is another reason why
you should obey her laws, if you are courteous and polite. Everyone in
Oz loves Ozma and hates her enemies, for she is as just as she is
powerful."

Ojo sulked a while, but finally returned to the road and kept away from
the green clover. The boy was moody and bad tempered for an hour or two
afterward, because he could really see no harm in picking a six-leaved
clover, if he found one, and in spite of what the Shaggy Man had said
he considered Ozma's law to be unjust.

They presently came to a beautiful grove of tall and stately trees,
through which the road wound in sharp curves--first one way and then
another. As they were walking through this grove they heard some one in
the distance singing, and the sounds grew nearer and nearer until they
could distinguish the words, although the bend in the road still hid
the singer. The song was something like this:

    "Here's to the hale old bale of straw
    That's cut from the waving grain,
    The sweetest sight man ever saw
    In forest, dell or plain.
    It fills me with a crunkling joy
    A straw-stack to behold,
    For then I pad this lucky boy
    With strands of yellow gold."


"Ah!" exclaimed the Shaggy Man; "here comes my friend the Scarecrow."

"What, a live Scarecrow?" asked Ojo.

"Yes; the one I told you of. He's a splendid fellow, and very
intelligent. You'll like him, I'm sure."

Just then the famous Scarecrow of Oz came around the bend in the road,
riding astride a wooden Sawhorse which was so small that its rider's
legs nearly touched the ground.

The Scarecrow wore the blue dress of the Munchkins, in which country he
was made, and on his head was set a peaked hat with a flat brim trimmed
with tinkling bells. A rope was tied around his waist to hold him in
shape, for he was stuffed with straw in every part of him except the
top of his head, where at one time the Wizard of Oz had placed sawdust,
mixed with needles and pins, to sharpen his wits. The head itself was
merely a bag of cloth, fastened to the body at the neck, and on the
front of this bag was painted the face--ears, eyes, nose and mouth.

The Scarecrow's face was very interesting, for it bore a comical and
yet winning expression, although one eye was a bit larger than the
other and ears were not mates. The Munchkin farmer who had made the
Scarecrow had neglected to sew him together with close stitches and
therefore some of the straw with which he was stuffed was inclined to
stick out between the seams. His hands consisted of padded white
gloves, with the fingers long and rather limp, and on his feet he wore
Munchkin boots of blue leather with broad turns at the tops of them.

The Sawhorse was almost as curious as its rider. It had been rudely
made, in the beginning, to saw logs upon, so that its body was a short
length of a log, and its legs were stout branches fitted into four
holes made in the body. The tail was formed by a small branch that had
been left on the log, while the head was a gnarled bump on one end of
the body. Two knots of wood formed the eyes, and the mouth was a gash
chopped in the log. When the Sawhorse first came to life it had no ears
at all, and so could not hear; but the boy who then owned him had
whittled two ears out of bark and stuck them in the head, after which
the Sawhorse heard very distinctly.

This queer wooden horse was a great favorite with Princess Ozma, who
had caused the bottoms of its legs to be shod with plates of gold, so
the wood would not wear away. Its saddle was made of cloth-of-gold
richly encrusted with precious gems. It had never worn a bridle.

As the Scarecrow came in sight of the party of travelers, he reined in
his wooden steed and dismounted, greeting the Shaggy Man with a smiling
nod. Then he turned to stare at the Patchwork Girl in wonder, while she
in turn stared at him.

"Shags," he whispered, drawing the Shaggy Man aside, "pat me into
shape, there's a good fellow!"

While his friend punched and patted the Scarecrow's body, to smooth out
the humps, Scraps turned to Ojo and whispered: "Roll me out, please;
I've sagged down dreadfully from walking so much and men like to see a
stately figure."

She then fell upon the ground and the boy rolled her back and forth
like a rolling-pin, until the cotton had filled all the spaces in her
patchwork covering and the body had lengthened to its fullest extent.
Scraps and the Scarecrow both finished their hasty toilets at the same
time, and again they faced each other.

"Allow me, Miss Patchwork," said the Shaggy Man, "to present my friend,
the Right Royal Scarecrow of Oz. Scarecrow, this is Miss Scraps
Patches; Scraps, this is the Scarecrow. Scarecrow--Scraps;
Scraps--Scarecrow."

They both bowed with much dignity.

"Forgive me for staring so rudely," said the Scarecrow, "but you are
the most beautiful sight my eyes have ever beheld."

"That is a high compliment from one who is himself so beautiful,"
murmured Scraps, casting down her suspender-button eyes by lowering her
head. "But, tell me, good sir, are you not a trifle lumpy?"

"Yes, of course; that's my straw, you know. It bunches up, sometimes,
in spite of all my efforts to keep it even. Doesn't your straw ever
bunch?"

"Oh, I'm stuffed with cotton," said Scraps. "It never bunches, but it's
inclined to pack down and make me sag."

"But cotton is a high-grade stuffing. I may say it is even more
stylish, not to say aristocratic, than straw," said the Scarecrow
politely. "Still, it is but proper that one so entrancingly lovely
should have the best stuffing there is going. I--er--I'm so glad I've
met you, Miss Scraps! Introduce us again, Shaggy."

"Once is enough," replied the Shaggy Man, laughing at his friend's
enthusiasm.

"Then tell me where you found her, and--Dear me, what a queer cat! What
are you made of--gelatine?"

"Pure glass," answered the cat, proud to have attracted the Scarecrow's
attention. "I am much more beautiful than the Patchwork Girl. I'm
transparent, and Scraps isn't; I've pink brains--you can see 'em work;
and I've a ruby heart, finely polished, while Scraps hasn't any heart
at all."

"No more have I," said the Scarecrow, shaking hands with Scraps, as if
to congratulate her on the fact. "I've a friend, the Tin Woodman, who
has a heart, but I find I get along pretty well without one. And
so--Well, well! here's a little Munchkin boy, too. Shake hands, my
little man. How are you?"

Ojo placed his hand in the flabby stuffed glove that served the
Scarecrow for a hand, and the Scarecrow pressed it so cordially that
the straw in his glove crackled.

Meantime, the Woozy had approached the Sawhorse and begun to sniff at
it. The Sawhorse resented this familiarity and with a sudden kick
pounded the Woozy squarely on its head with one gold-shod foot.

"Take that, you monster!" it cried angrily.

The Woozy never even winked.

"To be sure," he said; "I'll take anything I have to. But don't make me
angry, you wooden beast, or my eyes will flash fire and burn you up."

The Sawhorse rolled its knot eyes wickedly and kicked again, but the
Woozy trotted away and said to the Scarecrow:

"What a sweet disposition that creature has! I advise you to chop it up
for kindling-wood and use me to ride upon. My back is flat and you
can't fall off."

"I think the trouble is that you haven't been properly introduced,"
said the Scarecrow, regarding the Woozy with much wonder, for he had
never seen such a queer animal before.

"The Sawhorse is the favorite steed of Princess Ozma, the Ruler of the
Land of Oz, and he lives in a stable decorated with pearls and
emeralds, at the rear of the royal palace. He is swift as the wind,
untiring, and is kind to his friends. All the people of Oz respect the
Sawhorse highly, and when I visit Ozma she sometimes allows me to ride
him--as I am doing to-day. Now you know what an important personage the
Sawhorse is, and if some one--perhaps yourself--will tell me your name,
your rank and station, and your history, it will give me pleasure to
relate them to the Sawhorse. This will lead to mutual respect and
friendship."

The Woozy was somewhat abashed by this speech and did not know how to
reply. But Ojo said:

"This square beast is called the Woozy, and he isn't of much importance
except that he has three hairs growing on the tip of his tail."

The Scarecrow looked and saw that this was true.

"But," said he, in a puzzled way, "what makes those three hairs
important? The Shaggy Man has thousands of hairs, but no one has ever
accused him of being important."

So Ojo related the sad story of Unc Nunkie's transformation into a
marble statue, and told how he had set out to find the things the
Crooked Magician wanted, in order to make a charm that would restore
his uncle to life. One of the requirements was three hairs from a
Woozy's tail, but not being able to pull out the hairs they had been
obliged to take the Woozy with them.

The Scarecrow looked grave as he listened and he shook his head several
times, as if in disapproval.

"We must see Ozma about this matter," he said. "That Crooked Magician
is breaking the Law by practicing magic without a license, and I'm not
sure Ozma will allow him to restore your uncle to life."

"Already I have warned the boy of that," declared the Shaggy Man.

At this Ojo began to cry. "I want my Unc Nunkie!" he exclaimed. "I know
how he can be restored to life, and I'm going to do it--Ozma or no
Ozma! What right has this girl Ruler to keep my Unc Nunkie a statue
forever?"

"Don't worry about that just now," advised the Scarecrow. "Go on to the
Emerald City, and when you reach it have the Shaggy Man take you to see
Dorothy. Tell her your story and I'm sure she will help you. Dorothy is
Ozma's best friend, and if you can win her to your side your uncle is
pretty safe to live again." Then he turned to the Woozy and said: "I'm
afraid you are not important enough to be introduced to the Sawhorse,
after all."

"I'm a better beast than he is," retorted the Woozy, indignantly. "My
eyes can flash fire, and his can't."

"Is this true?" inquired the Scarecrow, turning to the Munchkin boy.

"Yes," said Ojo, and told how the Woozy had set fire to the fence.

"Have you any other accomplishments?" asked the Scarecrow.

"I have a most terrible growl--that is, sometimes," said the Woozy, as
Scraps laughed merrily and the Shaggy Man smiled. But the Patchwork
Girl's laugh made the Scarecrow forget all about the Woozy. He said to
her:

"What an admirable young lady you are, and what jolly good company! We
must be better acquainted, for never before have I met a girl with such
exquisite coloring or such natural, artless manners."

"No wonder they call you the Wise Scarecrow," replied Scraps.

"When you arrive at the Emerald City I will see you again," continued
the Scarecrow. "Just now I am going to call upon an old friend--an
ordinary young lady named Jinjur--who has promised to repaint my left
ear for me. You may have noticed that the paint on my left ear has
peeled off and faded, which affects my hearing on that side. Jinjur
always fixes me up when I get weather-worn."

"When do you expect to return to the Emerald City?" asked the Shaggy
Man.

"I'll be there this evening, for I'm anxious to have a long talk with
Miss Scraps. How is it, Sawhorse; are you equal to a swift run?"

"Anything that suits you suits me," returned the wooden horse.

So the Scarecrow mounted to the jeweled saddle and waved his hat, when
the Sawhorse darted away so swiftly that they were out of sight in an
instant.




Chapter Fourteen

Ojo Breaks the Law


"What a queer man," remarked the Munchkin boy, when the party had
resumed its journey.

"And so nice and polite," added Scraps, bobbing her head. "I think he
is the handsomest man I've seen since I came to life."

"Handsome is as handsome does," quoted the Shaggy Man; "but we must
admit that no living scarecrow is handsomer. The chief merit of my
friend is that he is a great thinker, and in Oz it is considered good
policy to follow his advice."

"I didn't notice any brains in his head," observed the Glass Cat.

"You can't see 'em work, but they're there, all right," declared the
Shaggy Man. "I hadn't much confidence in his brains myself, when first
I came to Oz, for a humbug Wizard gave them to him; but I was soon
convinced that the Scarecrow is really wise; and, unless his brains
make him so, such wisdom is unaccountable."

"Is the Wizard of Oz a humbug?" asked Ojo.

"Not now. He was once, but he has reformed and now assists Glinda the
Good, who is the Royal Sorceress of Oz and the only one licensed to
practice magic or sorcery. Glinda has taught our old Wizard a good many
clever things, so he is no longer a humbug."

They walked a little while in silence and then Ojo said:

"If Ozma forbids the Crooked Magician to restore Unc Nunkie to life,
what shall I do?"

The Shaggy Man shook his head.

"In that case you can't do anything," he said. "But don't be
discouraged yet. We will go to Princess Dorothy and tell her your
troubles, and then we will let her talk to Ozma. Dorothy has the
kindest little heart in the world, and she has been through so many
troubles herself that she is sure to sympathize with you."

"Is Dorothy the little girl who came here from Kansas?" asked the boy.

"Yes. In Kansas she was Dorothy Gale. I used to know her there, and she
brought me to the Land of Oz. But now Ozma has made her a Princess, and
Dorothy's Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are here, too." Here the Shaggy Man
uttered a long sigh, and then he continued: "It's a queer country, this
Land of Oz; but I like it, nevertheless."

"What is queer about it?" asked Scraps.

"You, for instance," said he.

"Did you see no girls as beautiful as I am in your own country?" she
inquired.

"None with the same gorgeous, variegated beauty," he confessed. "In
America a girl stuffed with cotton wouldn't be alive, nor would anyone
think of making a girl out of a patchwork quilt."

"What a queer country America must be!" she exclaimed in great
surprise. "The Scarecrow, whom you say is wise, told me I am the most
beautiful creature he has ever seen."

"I know; and perhaps you are--from a scarecrow point of view," replied
the Shaggy Man; but why he smiled as he said it Scraps could not
imagine.

As they drew nearer to the Emerald City the travelers were filled with
admiration for the splendid scenery they beheld. Handsome houses stood
on both sides of the road and each had a green lawn before it as well
as a pretty flower garden.

"In another hour," said the Shaggy Man, "we shall come in sight of the
walls of the Royal City."

He was walking ahead, with Scraps, and behind them came the Woozy and
the Glass Cat. Ojo had lagged behind, for in spite of the warnings he
had received the boy's eyes were fastened on the clover that bordered
the road of yellow bricks and he was eager to discover if such a thing
as a six-leaved clover really existed.

Suddenly he stopped short and bent over to examine the ground more
closely. Yes; here at last was a clover with six spreading leaves. He
counted them carefully, to make sure. In an instant his heart leaped
with joy, for this was one of the important things he had come for--one
of the things that would restore dear Unc Nunkie to life.

He glanced ahead and saw that none of his companions was looking back.
Neither were any other people about, for it was midway between two
houses. The temptation was too strong to be resisted.

"I might search for weeks and weeks, and never find another six-leaved
clover," he told himself, and quickly plucking the stem from the plant
he placed the prized clover in his basket, covering it with the other
things he carried there. Then, trying to look as if nothing had
happened, he hurried forward and overtook his comrades.

The Emerald City, which is the most splendid as well as the most
beautiful city in any fairyland, is surrounded by a high, thick wall of
green marble, polished smooth and set with glistening emeralds. There
are four gates, one facing the Munchkin Country, one facing the Country
of the Winkies, one facing the Country of the Quadlings and one facing
the Country of the Gillikins. The Emerald City lies directly in the
center of these four important countries of Oz. The gates had bars of
pure gold, and on either side of each gateway were built high towers,
from which floated gay banners. Other towers were set at distances
along the walls, which were broad enough for four people to walk
abreast upon.

This enclosure, all green and gold and glittering with precious gems,
was indeed a wonderful sight to greet our travelers, who first observed
it from the top of a little hill; but beyond the wall was the vast city
it surrounded, and hundreds of jeweled spires, domes and minarets,
flaunting flags and banners, reared their crests far above the towers
of the gateways. In the center of the city our friends could see the
tops of many magnificent trees, some nearly as tall as the spires of
the buildings, and the Shaggy Man told them that these trees were in
the royal gardens of Princess Ozma.

They stood a long time on the hilltop, feasting their eyes on the
splendor of the Emerald City.

"Whee!" exclaimed Scraps, clasping her padded hands in ecstacy,
"that'll do for me to live in, all right. No more of the Munchkin
Country for these patches--and no more of the Crooked Magician!"

"Why, you belong to Dr. Pipt," replied Ojo, looking at her in
amazement. "You were made for a servant, Scraps, so you are personal
property and not your own mistress."

"Bother Dr. Pipt! If he wants me, let him come here and get me. I'll
not go back to his den of my own accord; that's certain. Only one place
in the Land of Oz is fit to live in, and that's the Emerald City. It's
lovely! It's almost as beautiful as I am, Ojo."

"In this country," remarked the Shaggy Man, "people live wherever our
Ruler tells them to. It wouldn't do to have everyone live in the
Emerald City, you know, for some must plow the land and raise grains
and fruits and vegetables, while others chop wood in the forests, or
fish in the rivers, or herd the sheep and the cattle."

"Poor things!" said Scraps.

"I'm not sure they are not happier than the city people," replied the
Shaggy Man. "There's a freedom and independence in country life that
not even the Emerald City can give one. I know that lots of the city
people would like to get back to the land. The Scarecrow lives in the
country, and so do the Tin Woodman and Jack Pumpkinhead; yet all three
would be welcome to live in Ozma's palace if they cared to. Too much
splendor becomes tiresome, you know. But, if we're to reach the Emerald
City before sundown, we must hurry, for it is yet a long way off."

The entrancing sight of the city had put new energy into them all and
they hurried forward with lighter steps than before. There was much to
interest them along the roadway, for the houses were now set more
closely together and they met a good many people who were coming or
going from one place or another. All these seemed happy-faced, pleasant
people, who nodded graciously to the strangers as they passed, and
exchanged words of greeting.

At last they reached the great gateway, just as the sun was setting and
adding its red glow to the glitter of the emeralds on the green walls
and spires. Somewhere inside the city a band could be heard playing
sweet music; a soft, subdued hum, as of many voices, reached their
ears; from the neighboring yards came the low mooing of cows waiting to
be milked.

They were almost at the gate when the golden bars slid back and a tall
soldier stepped out and faced them. Ojo thought he had never seen so
tall a man before. The soldier wore a handsome green and gold uniform,
with a tall hat in which was a waving plume, and he had a belt thickly
encrusted with jewels. But the most peculiar thing about him was his
long green beard, which fell far below his waist and perhaps made him
seem taller than he really was.

"Halt!" said the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, not in a stern voice
but rather in a friendly tone.

They halted before he spoke and stood looking at him.

"Good evening, Colonel," said the Shaggy Man. "What's the news since I
left? Anything important?"

"Billina has hatched out thirteen new chickens," replied the Soldier
with the Green Whiskers, "and they're the cutest little fluffy yellow
balls you ever saw. The Yellow Hen is mighty proud of those children, I
can tell you."

"She has a right to be," agreed the Shaggy Man. "Let me see; that's
about seven thousand chicks she has hatched out; isn't it, General?"

"That, at least," was the reply. "You will have to visit Billina and
congratulate her."

"It will give me pleasure to do that," said the Shaggy Man. "But you
will observe that I have brought some strangers home with me. I am
going to take them to see Dorothy."

"One moment, please," said the soldier, barring their way as they
started to enter the gate. "I am on duty, and I have orders to execute.
Is anyone in your party named Ojo the Unlucky?"

"Why, that's me!" cried Ojo, astonished at hearing his name on the lips
of a stranger.

The Soldier with the Green Whiskers nodded. "I thought so," said he,
"and I am sorry to announce that it is my painful duty to arrest you."

"Arrest me!" exclaimed the boy. "What for?"

"I haven't looked to see," answered the soldier. Then he drew a paper
from his breast pocket and glanced at it. "Oh, yes; you are to be
arrested for willfully breaking one of the Laws of Oz."

"Breaking a law!" said Scraps. "Nonsense, Soldier; you're joking."

"Not this time," returned the soldier, with a sigh. "My dear
child--what are you, a rummage sale or a guess-me-quick?--in me you
behold the Body-Guard of our gracious Ruler, Princess Ozma, as well as
the Royal Army of Oz and the Police Force of the Emerald City."

"And only one man!" exclaimed the Patchwork Girl.

"Only one, and plenty enough. In my official positions I've had nothing
to do for a good many years--so long that I began to fear I was
absolutely useless--until to-day. An hour ago I was called to the
presence of her Highness, Ozma of Oz, and told to arrest a boy named
Ojo the Unlucky, who was journeying from the Munchkin Country to the
Emerald City and would arrive in a short time. This command so
astonished me that I nearly fainted, for it is the first time anyone
has merited arrest since I can remember. You are rightly named Ojo the
Unlucky, my poor boy, since you have broken a Law of Oz.

"But you are wrong," said Scraps. "Ozma is wrong--you are all
wrong--for Ojo has broken no Law."

"Then he will soon be free again," replied the Soldier with the Green
Whiskers. "Anyone accused of crime is given a fair trial by our Ruler
and has every chance to prove his innocence. But just now Ozma's orders
must be obeyed."

With this he took from his pocket a pair of handcuffs made of gold and
set with rubies and diamonds, and these he snapped over Ojo's wrists.




Chapter Fifteen

Ozma's Prisoner


The boy was so bewildered by this calamity that he made no resistance
at all. He knew very well he was guilty, but it surprised him that Ozma
also knew it. He wondered how she had found out so soon that he had
picked the six-leaved clover. He handed his basket to Scraps and said:

"Keep that, until I get out of prison. If I never get out, take it to
the Crooked Magician, to whom it belongs."

The Shaggy Man had been gazing earnestly in the boy's face, uncertain
whether to defend him or not; but something he read in Ojo's expression
made him draw back and refuse to interfere to save him. The Shaggy Man
was greatly surprised and grieved, but he knew that Ozma never made
mistakes and so Ojo must really have broken the Law of Oz.

The Soldier with the Green Whiskers now led them all through the gate
and into a little room built in the wall. Here sat a jolly little man,
richly dressed in green and having around his neck a heavy gold chain
to which a number of great golden keys were attached. This was the
Guardian of the Gate and at the moment they entered his room he was
playing a tune upon a mouth-organ.

"Listen!" he said, holding up his hand for silence. "I've just composed
a tune called 'The Speckled Alligator.' It's in patch-time, which is
much superior to rag-time, and I've composed it in honor of the
Patchwork Girl, who has just arrived."

"How did you know I had arrived?" asked Scraps, much interested.

"It's my business to know who's coming, for I'm the Guardian of the
Gate. Keep quiet while I play you 'The Speckled Alligator.'"

It wasn't a very bad tune, nor a very good one, but all listened
respectfully while he shut his eyes and swayed his head from side to
side and blew the notes from the little instrument. When it was all
over the Soldier with the Green Whiskers said:

"Guardian, I have here a prisoner."

"Good gracious! A prisoner?" cried the little man, jumping up from his
chair. "Which one? Not the Shaggy Man?"

"No; this boy."

"Ah; I hope his fault is as small as himself," said the Guardian of the
Gate. "But what can he have done, and what made him do it?"

"Can't say," replied the soldier. "All I know is that he has broken the
Law."

"But no one ever does that!"

"Then he must be innocent, and soon will be released. I hope you are
right, Guardian. Just now I am ordered to take him to prison. Get me a
prisoner's robe from your Official Wardrobe."

The Guardian unlocked a closet and took from it a white robe, which the
soldier threw over Ojo. It covered him from head to foot, but had two
holes just in front of his eyes, so he could see where to go. In this
attire the boy presented a very quaint appearance.

As the Guardian unlocked a gate leading from his room into the streets
of the Emerald City, the Shaggy Man said to Scraps:

"I think I shall take you directly to Dorothy, as the Scarecrow
advised, and the Glass Cat and the Woozy may come with us. Ojo must go
to prison with the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, but he will be well
treated and you need not worry about him."

"What will they do with him?" asked Scraps.

"That I cannot tell. Since I came to the Land of Oz no one has ever
been arrested or imprisoned--until Ojo broke the Law."

"Seems to me that girl Ruler of yours is making a big fuss over
nothing," remarked Scraps, tossing her yarn hair out of her eyes with a
jerk of her patched head. "I don't know what Ojo has done, but it
couldn't be anything very bad, for you and I were with him all the
time."

The Shaggy Man made no reply to this speech and presently the Patchwork
Girl forgot all about Ojo in her admiration of the wonderful city she
had entered.

They soon separated from the Munchkin boy, who was led by the Soldier
with the Green Whiskers down a side street toward the prison. Ojo felt
very miserable and greatly ashamed of himself, but he was beginning to
grow angry because he was treated in such a disgraceful manner. Instead
of entering the splendid Emerald City as a respectable traveler who was
entitled to a welcome and to hospitality, he was being brought in as a
criminal, handcuffed and in a robe that told all he met of his deep
disgrace.

Ojo was by nature gentle and affectionate and if he had disobeyed the
Law of Oz it was to restore his dear Unc Nunkie to life. His fault was
more thoughtless than wicked, but that did not alter the fact that he
had committed a fault. At first he had felt sorrow and remorse, but the
more he thought about the unjust treatment he had received--unjust
merely because he considered it so--the more he resented his arrest,
blaming Ozma for making foolish laws and then punishing folks who broke
them. Only a six-leaved clover! A tiny green plant growing neglected
and trampled under foot. What harm could there be in picking it? Ojo
began to think Ozma must be a very bad and oppressive Ruler for such a
lovely fairyland as Oz. The Shaggy Man said the people loved her; but
how could they?

The little Munchkin boy was so busy thinking these things--which many
guilty prisoners have thought before him--that he scarcely noticed all
the splendor of the city streets through which they passed. Whenever
they met any of the happy, smiling people, the boy turned his head away
in shame, although none knew who was beneath the robe.

By and by they reached a house built just beside the great city wall,
but in a quiet, retired place. It was a pretty house, neatly painted
and with many windows. Before it was a garden filled with blooming
flowers. The Soldier with the Green Whiskers led Ojo up the gravel path
to the front door, on which he knocked.

A woman opened the door and, seeing Ojo in his white robe, exclaimed:

"Goodness me! A prisoner at last. But what a small one, Soldier."

"The size doesn't matter, Tollydiggle, my dear. The fact remains that
he is a prisoner," said the soldier. "And, this being the prison, and
you the jailer, it is my duty to place the prisoner in your charge."

"True. Come in, then, and I'll give you a receipt for him."

They entered the house and passed through a hall to a large circular
room, where the woman pulled the robe off from Ojo and looked at him
with kindly interest. The boy, on his part, was gazing around him in
amazement, for never had he dreamed of such a magnificent apartment as
this in which he stood. The roof of the dome was of colored glass,
worked into beautiful designs. The walls were paneled with plates of
gold decorated with gems of great size and many colors, and upon the
tiled floor were soft rugs delightful to walk upon. The furniture was
framed in gold and upholstered in satin brocade and it consisted of
easy chairs, divans and stools in great variety. Also there were
several tables with mirror tops and cabinets filled with rare and
curious things. In one place a case filled with books stood against the
wall, and elsewhere Ojo saw a cupboard containing all sorts of games.

"May I stay here a little while before I go to prison?" asked the boy,
pleadingly.

"Why, this is your prison," replied Tollydiggle, "and in me behold your
jailor. Take off those handcuffs, Soldier, for it is impossible for
anyone to escape from this house."

"I know that very well," replied the soldier and at once unlocked the
handcuffs and released the prisoner.

The woman touched a button on the wall and lighted a big chandelier
that hung suspended from the ceiling, for it was growing dark outside.
Then she seated herself at a desk and asked:

"What name?"

"Ojo the Unlucky," answered the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.

"Unlucky? Ah, that accounts for it," said she. "What crime?"

"Breaking a Law of Oz."

"All right. There's your receipt, Soldier; and now I'm responsible for
the prisoner. I'm glad of it, for this is the first time I've ever had
anything to do, in my official capacity," remarked the jailer, in a
pleased tone.

"It's the same with me, Tollydiggle," laughed the soldier. "But my task
is finished and I must go and report to Ozma that I've done my duty
like a faithful Police Force, a loyal Army and an honest Body-Guard--as
I hope I am."

Saying this, he nodded farewell to Tollydiggle and Ojo and went away.

"Now, then," said the woman briskly, "I must get you some supper, for
you are doubtless hungry. What would you prefer: planked whitefish,
omelet with jelly or mutton-chops with gravy?"

Ojo thought about it. Then he said: "I'll take the chops, if you
please."

"Very well; amuse yourself while I'm gone; I won't be long," and then
she went out by a door and left the prisoner alone.

Ojo was much astonished, for not only was this unlike any prison he had
ever heard of, but he was being treated more as a guest than a
criminal. There were many windows and they had no locks. There were
three doors to the room and none were bolted. He cautiously opened one
of the doors and found it led into a hallway. But he had no intention
of trying to escape. If his jailor was willing to trust him in this way
he would not betray her trust, and moreover a hot supper was being
prepared for him and his prison was very pleasant and comfortable. So
he took a book from the case and sat down in a big chair to look at the
pictures.

This amused him until the woman came in with a large tray and spread a
cloth on one of the tables. Then she arranged his supper, which proved
the most varied and delicious meal Ojo had ever eaten in his life.

Tollydiggle sat near him while he ate, sewing on some fancy work she
held in her lap. When he had finished she cleared the table and then
read to him a story from one of the books.

"Is this really a prison?" he asked, when she had finished reading.

"Indeed it is," she replied. "It is the only prison in the Land of Oz."

"And am I a prisoner?"

"Bless the child! Of course."

"Then why is the prison so fine, and why are you so kind to me?" he
earnestly asked.

Tollydiggle seemed surprised by the question, but she presently
answered:

"We consider a prisoner unfortunate. He is unfortunate in two
ways--because he has done something wrong and because he is deprived of
his liberty. Therefore we should treat him kindly, because of his
misfortune, for otherwise he would become hard and bitter and would not
be sorry he had done wrong. Ozma thinks that one who has committed a
fault did so because he was not strong and brave; therefore she puts
him in prison to make him strong and brave. When that is accomplished
he is no longer a prisoner, but a good and loyal citizen and everyone
is glad that he is now strong enough to resist doing wrong. You see, it
is kindness that makes one strong and brave; and so we are kind to our
prisoners."

Ojo thought this over very carefully. "I had an idea," said he, "that
prisoners were always treated harshly, to punish them."

"That would be dreadful!" cried Tollydiggle. "Isn't one punished enough
in knowing he has done wrong? Don't you wish, Ojo, with all your heart,
that you had not been disobedient and broken a Law of Oz?"

"I--I hate to be different from other people," he admitted.

"Yes; one likes to be respected as highly as his neighbors are," said
the woman. "When you are tried and found guilty, you will be obliged to
make amends, in some way. I don't know just what Ozma will do to you,
because this is the first time one of us has broken a Law; but you may
be sure she will be just and merciful. Here in the Emerald City people
are too happy and contented ever to do wrong; but perhaps you came from
some faraway corner of our land, and having no love for Ozma carelessly
broke one of her Laws."

"Yes," said Ojo, "I've lived all my life in the heart of a lonely
forest, where I saw no one but dear Unc Nunkie."

"I thought so," said Tollydiggle. "But now we have talked enough, so
let us play a game until bedtime."




Chapter Sixteen

Princess Dorothy


Dorothy Gale was sitting in one of her rooms in the royal palace, while
curled up at her feet was a little black dog with a shaggy coat and
very bright eyes. She wore a plain white frock, without any jewels or
other ornaments except an emerald-green hair-ribbon, for Dorothy was a
simple little girl and had not been in the least spoiled by the
magnificence surrounding her. Once the child had lived on the Kansas
prairies, but she seemed marked for adventure, for she had made several
trips to the Land of Oz before she came to live there for good. Her
very best friend was the beautiful Ozma of Oz, who loved Dorothy so
well that she kept her in her own palace, so as to be near her. The
girl's Uncle Henry and Aunt Em--the only relatives she had in the
world--had also been brought here by Ozma and given a pleasant home.
Dorothy knew almost everybody in Oz, and it was she who had discovered
the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman and the Cowardly Lion, as well as
Tik-Tok the Clockwork Man. Her life was very pleasant now, and although
she had been made a Princess of Oz by her friend Ozma she did not care
much to be a Princess and remained as sweet as when she had been plain
Dorothy Gale of Kansas.

Dorothy was reading in a book this evening when Jellia Jamb, the
favorite servant-maid of the palace, came to say that the Shaggy Man
wanted to see her.

"All right," said Dorothy; "tell him to come right up."

"But he has some queer creatures with him--some of the queerest I've
ever laid eyes on," reported Jellia.

"Never mind; let 'em all come up," replied Dorothy.

But when the door opened to admit not only the Shaggy Man, but Scraps,
the Woozy and the Glass Cat, Dorothy jumped up and looked at her
strange visitors in amazement. The Patchwork Girl was the most curious
of all and Dorothy was uncertain at first whether Scraps was really
alive or only a dream or a nightmare. Toto, her dog, slowly uncurled
himself and going to the Patchwork Girl sniffed at her inquiringly; but
soon he lay down again, as if to say he had no interest in such an
irregular creation.

"You're a new one to me," Dorothy said reflectively, addressing the
Patchwork Girl. "I can't imagine where you've come from."

"Who, me?" asked Scraps, looking around the pretty room instead of at
the girl. "Oh, I came from a bed-quilt, I guess. That's what they say,
anyhow. Some call it a crazy-quilt and some a patchwork quilt. But my
name is Scraps--and now you know all about me."

"Not quite all," returned Dorothy with a smile. "I wish you'd tell me
how you came to be alive."

"That's an easy job," said Scraps, sitting upon a big upholstered chair
and making the springs bounce her up and down. "Margolotte wanted a
slave, so she made me out of an old bed-quilt she didn't use. Cotton
stuffing, suspender-button eyes, red velvet tongue, pearl beads for
teeth. The Crooked Magician made a Powder of Life, sprinkled me with it
and--here I am. Perhaps you've noticed my different colors. A very
refined and educated gentleman named the Scarecrow, whom I met, told me
I am the most beautiful creature in all Oz, and I believe it."

"Oh! Have you met our Scarecrow, then?" asked Dorothy, a little puzzled
to understand the brief history related.

"Yes; isn't he jolly?"

"The Scarecrow has many good qualities," replied Dorothy. "But I'm
sorry to hear all this 'bout the Crooked Magician. Ozma'll be mad as
hops when she hears he's been doing magic again. She told him not to."

"He only practices magic for the benefit of his own family," explained
Bungle, who was keeping at a respectful distance from the little black
dog.

"Dear me," said Dorothy; "I hadn't noticed you before. Are you glass,
or what?"

"I'm glass, and transparent, too, which is more than can be said of
some folks," answered the cat. "Also I have some lovely pink brains;
you can see 'em work."

"Oh; is that so? Come over here and let me see."

The Glass Cat hesitated, eyeing the dog.

"Send that beast away and I will," she said.

"Beast! Why, that's my dog Toto, an' he's the kindest dog in all the
world. Toto knows a good many things, too; 'most as much as I do, I
guess."

"Why doesn't he say anything?" asked Bungle.

"He can't talk, not being a fairy dog," explained Dorothy. "He's just a
common United States dog; but that's a good deal; and I understand him,
and he understands me, just as well as if he could talk."

Toto, at this, got up and rubbed his head softly against Dorothy's
hand, which she held out to him, and he looked up into her face as if
he had understood every word she had said.

"This cat, Toto," she said to him, "is made of glass, so you mustn't
bother it, or chase it, any more than you do my Pink Kitten. It's
prob'ly brittle and might break if it bumped against anything."

"Woof!" said Toto, and that meant he understood.

The Glass Cat was so proud of her pink brains that she ventured to come
close to Dorothy, in order that the girl might "see 'em work." This was
really interesting, but when Dorothy patted the cat she found the glass
cold and hard and unresponsive, so she decided at once that Bungle
would never do for a pet.

"What do you know about the Crooked Magician who lives on the
mountain?" asked Dorothy.

"He made me," replied the cat; "so I know all about him. The Patchwork
Girl is new--three or four days old--but I've lived with Dr. Pipt for
years; and, though I don't much care for him, I will say that he has
always refused to work magic for any of the people who come to his
house. He thinks there's no harm in doing magic things for his own
family, and he made me out of glass because the meat cats drink too
much milk. He also made Scraps come to life so she could do the
housework for his wife Margolotte."

"Then why did you both leave him?" asked Dorothy.

"I think you'd better let me explain that," interrupted the Shaggy Man,
and then he told Dorothy all of Ojo's story and how Unc Nunkie and
Margolotte had accidentally been turned to marble by the Liquid of
Petrifaction. Then he related how the boy had started out in search of
the things needed to make the magic charm, which would restore the
unfortunates to life, and how he had found the Woozy and taken him
along because he could not pull the three hairs out of its tail.
Dorothy listened to all this with much interest, and thought that so
far Ojo had acted very well. But when the Shaggy Man told her of the
Munchkin boy's arrest by the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, because
he was accused of wilfully breaking a Law of Oz, the little girl was
greatly shocked.

"What do you s'pose he's done?" she asked.

"I fear he has picked a six-leaved clover," answered the Shaggy Man,
sadly. "I did not see him do it, and I warned him that to do so was
against the Law; but perhaps that is what he did, nevertheless."

"I'm sorry 'bout that," said Dorothy gravely, "for now there will be no
one to help his poor uncle and Margolotte 'cept this Patchwork Girl,
the Woozy and the Glass Cat."

"Don't mention it," said Scraps. "That's no affair of mine. Margolotte
and Unc Nunkie are perfect strangers to me, for the moment I came to
life they came to marble."

"I see," remarked Dorothy with a sigh of regret; "the woman forgot to
give you a heart."

"I'm glad she did," retorted the Patchwork Girl. "A heart must be a
great annoyance to one. It makes a person feel sad or sorry or devoted
or sympathetic--all of which sensations interfere with one's happiness."

"I have a heart," murmured the Glass Cat. "It's made of a ruby; but I
don't imagine I shall let it bother me about helping Unc Nunkie and
Margolotte."

"That's a pretty hard heart of yours," said Dorothy. "And the Woozy, of
course--"

"Why, as for me," observed the Woozy, who was reclining on the floor
with his legs doubled under him, so that he looked much like a square
box, "I have never seen those unfortunate people you are speaking of,
and yet I am sorry for them, having at times been unfortunate myself.
When I was shut up in that forest I longed for some one to help me, and
by and by Ojo came and did help me. So I'm willing to help his uncle.
I'm only a stupid beast, Dorothy, but I can't help that, and if you'll
tell me what to do to help Ojo and his uncle, I'll gladly do it."

Dorothy walked over and patted the Woozy on his square head.

"You're not pretty," she said, "but I like you. What are you able to
do; anything 'special?"

"I can make my eyes flash fire--real fire--when I'm angry. When anyone
says: 'Krizzle-Kroo' to me I get angry, and then my eyes flash fire."

"I don't see as fireworks could help Ojo's uncle," remarked Dorothy.
"Can you do anything else?"

"I--I thought I had a very terrifying growl," said the Woozy, with
hesitation; "but perhaps I was mistaken."

"Yes," said the Shaggy Man, "you were certainly wrong about that." Then
he turned to Dorothy and added: "What will become of the Munchkin boy?"

"I don't know," she said, shaking her head thoughtfully. "Ozma will see
him 'bout it, of course, and then she'll punish him. But how, I don't
know, 'cause no one ever has been punished in Oz since I knew anything
about the place. Too bad, Shaggy Man, isn't it?"

While they were talking Scraps had been roaming around the room and
looking at all the pretty things it contained. She had carried Ojo's
basket in her hand, until now, when she decided to see what was inside
it. She found the bread and cheese, which she had no use for, and the
bundle of charms, which were curious but quite a mystery to her. Then,
turning these over, she came upon the six-leaved clover which the boy
had plucked.

Scraps was quick-witted, and although she had no heart she recognized
the fact that Ojo was her first friend. She knew at once that because
the boy had taken the clover he had been imprisoned, and she understood
that Ojo had given her the basket so they would not find the clover in
his possession and have proof of his crime. So, turning her head to see
that no one noticed her, she took the clover from the basket and
dropped it into a golden vase that stood on Dorothy's table. Then she
came forward and said to Dorothy:

"I wouldn't care to help Ojo's uncle, but I will help Ojo. He did not
break the Law--no one can prove he did--and that green-whiskered
soldier had no right to arrest him."

"Ozma ordered the boy's arrest," said Dorothy, "and of course she knew
what she was doing. But if you can prove Ojo is innocent they will set
him free at once."

"They'll have to prove him guilty, won't they?'' asked Scraps.

"I s'pose so."

"Well, they can't do that," declared the Patchwork Girl.

As it was nearly time for Dorothy to dine with Ozma, which she did
every evening, she rang for a servant and ordered the Woozy taken to a
nice room and given plenty of such food as he liked best.

"That's honey-bees," said the Woozy.

"You can't eat honey-bees, but you'll be given something just as nice,"
Dorothy told him. Then she had the Glass Cat taken to another room for
the night and the Patchwork Girl she kept in one of her own rooms, for
she was much interested in the strange creature and wanted to talk with
her again and try to understand her better.




Chapter Seventeen

Ozma and Her Friends


The Shaggy Man had a room of his own in the royal palace, so there he
went to change his shaggy suit of clothes for another just as shaggy
but not so dusty from travel. He selected a costume of pea-green and
pink satin and velvet, with embroidered shags on all the edges and
iridescent pearls for ornaments. Then he bathed in an alabaster pool
and brushed his shaggy hair and whiskers the wrong way to make them
still more shaggy. This accomplished, and arrayed in his splendid
shaggy garments, he went to Ozma's banquet hall and found the
Scarecrow, the Wizard and Dorothy already assembled there. The
Scarecrow had made a quick trip and returned to the Emerald City with
his left ear freshly painted.

A moment later, while they all stood in waiting, a servant threw open a
door, the orchestra struck up a tune and Ozma of Oz entered.

Much has been told and written concerning the beauty of person and
character of this sweet girl Ruler of the Land of Oz--the richest, the
happiest and most delightful fairyland of which we have any knowledge.
Yet with all her queenly qualities Ozma was a real girl and enjoyed the
things in life that other real girls enjoy. When she sat on her
splendid emerald throne in the great Throne Room of her palace and made
laws and settled disputes and tried to keep all her subjects happy and
contented, she was as dignified and demure as any queen might be; but
when she had thrown aside her jeweled robe of state and her sceptre,
and had retired to her private apartments, the girl--joyous,
light-hearted and free--replaced the sedate Ruler.

In the banquet hall to-night were gathered only old and trusted
friends, so here Ozma was herself--a mere girl. She greeted Dorothy
with a kiss, the Shaggy Man with a smile, the little old Wizard with a
friendly handshake and then she pressed the Scarecrow's stuffed arm and
cried merrily:

"What a lovely left ear! Why, it's a hundred times better than the old
one."

"I'm glad you like it," replied the Scarecrow, well pleased. "Jinjur
did a neat job, didn't she? And my hearing is now perfect. Isn't it
wonderful what a little paint will do, if it's properly applied?"

"It really is wonderful," she agreed, as they all took their seats;
"but the Sawhorse must have made his legs twinkle to have carried you
so far in one day. I didn't expect you back before to-morrow, at the
earliest."

"Well," said the Scarecrow, "I met a charming girl on the road and
wanted to see more of her, so I hurried back."

Ozma laughed.

"I know," she returned; "it's the Patchwork Girl. She is certainly
bewildering, if not strictly beautiful."

"Have you seen her, then?" the straw man eagerly asked.

"Only in my Magic Picture, which shows me all scenes of interest in the
Land of Oz."

"I fear the picture didn't do her justice," said the Scarecrow.

"It seemed to me that nothing could be more gorgeous," declared Ozma.
"Whoever made that patchwork quilt, from which Scraps was formed, must
have selected the gayest and brightest bits of cloth that ever were
woven."

"I am glad you like her," said the Scarecrow in a satisfied tone.
Although the straw man did not eat, not being made so he could, he
often dined with Ozma and her companions, merely for the pleasure of
talking with them. He sat at the table and had a napkin and plate, but
the servants knew better than to offer him food. After a little while
he asked: "Where is the Patchwork Girl now?"

"In my room," replied Dorothy. "I've taken a fancy to her; she's so
queer and--and--uncommon."

"She's half crazy, I think," added the Shaggy Man.

"But she is so beautiful!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, as if that fact
disarmed all criticism. They all laughed at his enthusiasm, but the
Scarecrow was quite serious. Seeing that he was interested in Scraps
they forbore to say anything against her. The little band of friends
Ozma had gathered around her was so quaintly assorted that much care
must be exercised to avoid hurting their feelings or making any one of
them unhappy. It was this considerate kindness that held them close
friends and enabled them to enjoy one another's society.

Another thing they avoided was conversing on unpleasant subjects, and
for that reason Ojo and his troubles were not mentioned during the
dinner. The Shaggy Man, however, related his adventures with the
monstrous plants which had seized and enfolded the travelers, and told
how he had robbed Chiss, the giant porcupine, of the quills which it
was accustomed to throw at people. Both Dorothy and Ozma were pleased
with this exploit and thought it served Chiss right.

Then they talked of the Woozy, which was the most remarkable animal any
of them had ever before seen--except, perhaps, the live Sawhorse. Ozma
had never known that her dominions contained such a thing as a Woozy,
there being but one in existence and this being confined in his forest
for many years. Dorothy said she believed the Woozy was a good beast,
honest and faithful; but she added that she did not care much for the
Glass Cat.

"Still," said the Shaggy Man, "the Glass Cat is very pretty and if she
were not so conceited over her pink brains no one would object to her
as a companion."

The Wizard had been eating silently until now, when he looked up and
remarked:

"That Powder of Life which is made by the Crooked Magician is really a
wonderful thing. But Dr. Pipt does not know its true value and he uses
it in the most foolish ways."

"I must see about that," said Ozma, gravely. Then she smiled again and
continued in a lighter tone: "It was Dr. Pipt's famous Powder of Life
that enabled me to become the Ruler of Oz."

"I've never heard that story," said the Shaggy Man, looking at Ozma
questioningly.

"Well, when I was a baby girl I was stolen by an old Witch named Mombi
and transformed into a boy," began the girl Ruler. "I did not know who
I was and when I grew big enough to work, the Witch made me wait upon
her and carry wood for the fire and hoe in the garden. One day she came
back from a journey bringing some of the Powder of Life, which Dr. Pipt
had given her. I had made a pumpkin-headed man and set it up in her
path to frighten her, for I was fond of fun and hated the Witch. But
she knew what the figure was and to test her Powder of Life she
sprinkled some of it on the man I had made. It came to life and is now
our dear friend Jack Pumpkinhead. That night I ran away with Jack to
escape punishment, and I took old Mombi's Powder of Life with me.
During our journey we came upon a wooden Sawhorse standing by the road
and I used the magic powder to bring it to life. The Sawhorse has been
with me ever since. When I got to the Emerald City the good Sorceress,
Glinda, knew who I was and restored me to my proper person, when I
became the rightful Ruler of this land. So you see had not old Mombi
brought home the Powder of Life I might never have run away from her
and become Ozma of Oz, nor would we have had Jack Pumpkinhead and the
Sawhorse to comfort and amuse us."

That story interested the Shaggy Man very much, as well as the others,
who had often heard it before. The dinner being now concluded, they all
went to Ozma's drawing-room, where they passed a pleasant evening
before it came time to retire.




Chapter Eighteen

Ojo is Forgiven


The next morning the Soldier with the Green Whiskers went to the prison
and took Ojo away to the royal palace, where he was summoned to appear
before the girl Ruler for judgment. Again the soldier put upon the boy
the jeweled handcuffs and white prisoner's robe with the peaked top and
holes for the eyes. Ojo was so ashamed, both of his disgrace and the
fault he had committed, that he was glad to be covered up in this way,
so that people could not see him or know who he was. He followed the
Soldier with the Green Whiskers very willingly, anxious that his fate
might be decided as soon as possible.

The inhabitants of the Emerald City were polite people and never jeered
at the unfortunate; but it was so long since they had seen a prisoner
that they cast many curious looks toward the boy and many of them
hurried away to the royal palace to be present during the trial.

When Ojo was escorted into the great Throne Room of the palace he found
hundreds of people assembled there. In the magnificent emerald throne,
which sparkled with countless jewels, sat Ozma of Oz in her Robe of
State, which was embroidered with emeralds and pearls. On her right,
but a little lower, was Dorothy, and on her left the Scarecrow. Still
lower, but nearly in front of Ozma, sat the wonderful Wizard of Oz and
on a small table beside him was the golden vase from Dorothy's room,
into which Scraps had dropped the stolen clover.

At Ozma's feet crouched two enormous beasts, each the largest and most
powerful of its kind. Although these beasts were quite free, no one
present was alarmed by them; for the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger
were well known and respected in the Emerald City and they always
guarded the Ruler when she held high court in the Throne Room. There
was still another beast present, but this one Dorothy held in her arms,
for it was her constant companion, the little dog Toto. Toto knew the
Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger and often played and romped with
them, for they were good friends.

Seated on ivory chairs before Ozma, with a clear space between them and
the throne, were many of the nobility of the Emerald City, lords and
ladies in beautiful costumes, and officials of the kingdom in the royal
uniforms of Oz. Behind these courtiers were others of less importance,
filling the great hall to the very doors.

At the same moment that the Soldier with the Green Whiskers arrived
with Ojo, the Shaggy Man entered from a side door, escorting the
Patchwork Girl, the Woozy and the Glass Cat. All these came to the
vacant space before the throne and stood facing the Ruler.

"Hullo, Ojo," said Scraps; "how are you?"

"All right," he replied; but the scene awed the boy and his voice
trembled a little with fear. Nothing could awe the Patchwork Girl, and
although the Woozy was somewhat uneasy in these splendid surroundings
the Glass Cat was delighted with the sumptuousness of the court and the
impressiveness of the occasion--pretty big words but quite expressive.

At a sign from Ozma the soldier removed Ojo's white robe and the boy
stood face to face with the girl who was to decide his punishment. He
saw at a glance how lovely and sweet she was, and his heart gave a
bound of joy, for he hoped she would be merciful.

Ozma sat looking at the prisoner a long time. Then she said gently:

"One of the Laws of Oz forbids anyone to pick a six-leaved clover. You
are accused of having broken this Law, even after you had been warned
not to do so."

Ojo hung his head and while he hesitated how to reply the Patchwork
Girl stepped forward and spoke for him.

"All this fuss is about nothing at all," she said, facing Ozma
unabashed. "You can't prove he picked the six-leaved clover, so you've
no right to accuse him of it. Search him, if you like, but you won't
find the clover; look in his basket and you'll find it's not there. He
hasn't got it, so I demand that you set this poor Munchkin boy free."

The people of Oz listened to this defiance in amazement and wondered at
the queer Patchwork Girl who dared talk so boldly to their Ruler. But
Ozma sat silent and motionless and it was the little Wizard who
answered Scraps.

"So the clover hasn't been picked, eh?" he said. "I think it has. I
think the boy hid it in his basket, and then gave the basket to you. I
also think you dropped the clover into this vase, which stood in
Princess Dorothy's room, hoping to get rid of it so it would not prove
the boy guilty. You're a stranger here, Miss Patches, and so you don't
know that nothing can be hidden from our powerful Ruler's Magic
Picture--nor from the watchful eyes of the humble Wizard of Oz. Look,
all of you!" With these words he waved his hands toward the vase on the
table, which Scraps now noticed for the first time.

From the mouth of the vase a plant sprouted, slowly growing before
their eyes until it became a beautiful bush, and on the topmost branch
appeared the six-leaved clover which Ojo had unfortunately picked.

The Patchwork Girl looked at the clover and said: "Oh, so you've found
it. Very well; prove he picked it, if you can."

Ozma turned to Ojo.

"Did you pick the six-leaved clover?" she asked.

"Yes," he replied. "I knew it was against the Law, but I wanted to save
Unc Nunkie and I was afraid if I asked your consent to pick it you
would refuse me."

"What caused you to think that?" asked the Ruler.

"Why, it seemed to me a foolish law, unjust and unreasonable. Even now
I can see no harm in picking a six-leaved clover. And I--I had not seen
the Emerald City, then, nor you, and I thought a girl who would make
such a silly Law would not be likely to help anyone in trouble."

Ozma regarded him musingly, her chin resting upon her hand; but she was
not angry. On the contrary she smiled a little at her thoughts and then
grew sober again.

"I suppose a good many laws seem foolish to those people who do not
understand them," she said; "but no law is ever made without some
purpose, and that purpose is usually to protect all the people and
guard their welfare. As you are a stranger, I will explain this Law
which to you seems so foolish. Years ago there were many Witches and
Magicians in the Land of Oz, and one of the things they often used in
making their magic charms and transformations was a six-leaved clover.
These Witches and Magicians caused so much trouble among my people,
often using their powers for evil rather than good, that I decided to
forbid anyone to practice magic or sorcery except Glinda the Good and
her assistant, the Wizard of Oz, both of whom I can trust to use their
arts only to benefit my people and to make them happier. Since I issued
that Law the Land of Oz has been far more peaceful and quiet; but I
learned that some of the Witches and Magicians were still practicing
magic on the sly and using the six-leaved clovers to make their potions
and charms. Therefore I made another Law forbidding anyone from
plucking a six-leaved clover or from gathering other plants and herbs
which the Witches boil in their kettles to work magic with. That has
almost put an end to wicked sorcery in our land, so you see the Law was
not a foolish one, but wise and just; and, in any event, it is wrong to
disobey a Law."

Ojo knew she was right and felt greatly mortified to realize he had
acted and spoken so ridiculously. But he raised his head and looked
Ozma in the face, saying:

"I am sorry I have acted wrongly and broken your Law. I did it to save
Unc Nunkie, and thought I would not be found out. But I am guilty of
this act and whatever punishment you think I deserve I will suffer
willingly."

Ozma smiled more brightly, then, and nodded graciously.

"You are forgiven," she said. "For, although you have committed a
serious fault, you are now penitent and I think you have been punished
enough. Soldier, release Ojo the Lucky and--"

"I beg your pardon; I'm Ojo the Unlucky," said the boy.

"At this moment you are lucky," said she. "Release him, Soldier, and
let him go free."

The people were glad to hear Ozma's decree and murmured their approval.
As the royal audience was now over, they began to leave the Throne Room
and soon there were none remaining except Ojo and his friends and Ozma
and her favorites.

The girl Ruler now asked Ojo to sit down and tell her all his story,
which he did, beginning at the time he had left his home in the forest
and ending with his arrival at the Emerald City and his arrest. Ozma
listened attentively and was thoughtful for some moments after the boy
had finished speaking. Then she said:

"The Crooked Magician was wrong to make the Glass Cat and the Patchwork
Girl, for it was against the Law. And if he had not unlawfully kept the
bottle of Liquid of Petrifaction standing on his shelf, the accident to
his wife Margolotte and to Unc Nunkie could not have occurred. I can
understand, however, that Ojo, who loves his uncle, will be unhappy
unless he can save him. Also I feel it is wrong to leave those two
victims standing as marble statues, when they ought to be alive. So I
propose we allow Dr. Pipt to make the magic charm which will save them,
and that we assist Ojo to find the things he is seeking. What do you
think, Wizard?"

"That is perhaps the best thing to do," replied the Wizard. "But after
the Crooked Magician has restored those poor people to life you must
take away his magic powers."

"I will," promised Ozma.

"Now tell me, please, what magic things must you find?" continued the
Wizard, addressing Ojo.

"The three hairs from the Woozy's tail I have," said the boy. "That is,
I have the Woozy, and the hairs are in his tail. The six-leaved clover
I--I--"

"You may take it and keep it," said Ozma. "That will not be breaking
the Law, for it is already picked, and the crime of picking it is
forgiven."

"Thank you!" cried Ojo gratefully. Then he continued: "The next thing I
must find is a gill of water from a dark well."

The Wizard shook his head. "That," said he, "will be a hard task, but
if you travel far enough you may discover it."

"I am willing to travel for years, if it will save Unc Nunkie,"
declared Ojo, earnestly.

"Then you'd better begin your journey at once," advised the Wizard.

Dorothy had been listening with interest to this conversation. Now she
turned to Ozma and asked: "May I go with Ojo, to help him?"

"Would you like to?" returned Ozma.

"Yes. I know Oz pretty well, but Ojo doesn't know it at all. I'm sorry
for his uncle and poor Margolotte and I'd like to help save them. May I
go?"

"If you wish to," replied Ozma.

"If Dorothy goes, then I must go to take care of her," said the
Scarecrow, decidedly. "A dark well can only be discovered in some
out-of-the-way place, and there may be dangers there."

"You have my permission to accompany Dorothy," said Ozma. "And while
you are gone I will take care of the Patchwork Girl."

"I'll take care of myself," announced Scraps, "for I'm going with the
Scarecrow and Dorothy. I promised Ojo to help him find the things he
wants and I'll stick to my promise."

"Very well," replied Ozma. "But I see no need for Ojo to take the Glass
Cat and the Woozy."

"I prefer to remain here," said the cat. "I've nearly been nicked half
a dozen times, already, and if they're going into dangers it's best for
me to keep away from them."

"Let Jellia Jamb keep her till Ojo returns," suggested Dorothy. "We
won't need to take the Woozy, either, but he ought to be saved because
of the three hairs in his tail."

"Better take me along," said the Woozy. "My eyes can flash fire, you
know, and I can growl--a little."

"I'm sure you'll be safer here," Ozma decided, and the Woozy made no
further objection to the plan.

After consulting together they decided that Ojo and his party should
leave the very next day to search for the gill of water from a dark
well, so they now separated to make preparations for the journey.

Ozma gave the Munchkin boy a room in the palace for that night and the
afternoon he passed with Dorothy--getting acquainted, as she said--and
receiving advice from the Shaggy Man as to where they must go. The
Shaggy Man had wandered in many parts of Oz, and so had Dorothy, for
that matter, yet neither of them knew where a dark well was to be found.

"If such a thing is anywhere in the settled parts of Oz," said Dorothy,
"we'd prob'ly have heard of it long ago. If it's in the wild parts of
the country, no one there would need a dark well. P'raps there isn't
such a thing."

"Oh, there must be!" returned Ojo, positively; "or else the recipe of
Dr. Pipt wouldn't call for it."

"That's true," agreed Dorothy; "and, if it's anywhere in the Land of
Oz, we're bound to find it."

"Well, we're bound to search for it, anyhow," said the Scarecrow. "As
for finding it, we must trust to luck."

"Don't do that," begged Ojo, earnestly. "I'm called Ojo the Unlucky,
you know."




Chapter Nineteen

Trouble with the Tottenhots


A day's journey from the Emerald City brought the little band of
adventurers to the home of Jack Pumpkinhead, which was a house formed
from the shell of an immense pumpkin. Jack had made it himself and was
very proud of it. There was a door, and several windows, and through
the top was stuck a stovepipe that led from a small stove inside. The
door was reached by a flight of three steps and there was a good floor
on which was arranged some furniture that was quite comfortable.

It is certain that Jack Pumpkinhead might have had a much finer house
to live in had he wanted it, for Ozma loved the stupid fellow, who had
been her earliest companion; but Jack preferred his pumpkin house, as
it matched himself very well, and in this he was not so stupid, after
all.

The body of this remarkable person was made of wood, branches of trees
of various sizes having been used for the purpose. This wooden
framework was covered by a red shirt--with white spots in it--blue
trousers, a yellow vest, a jacket of green-and-gold and stout leather
shoes. The neck was a sharpened stick on which the pumpkin head was
set, and the eyes, ears, nose and mouth were carved on the skin of the
pumpkin, very like a child's jack-o'-lantern.

The house of this interesting creation stood in the center of a vast
pumpkin-field, where the vines grew in profusion and bore pumpkins of
extraordinary size as well as those which were smaller. Some of the
pumpkins now ripening on the vines were almost as large as Jack's
house, and he told Dorothy he intended to add another pumpkin to his
mansion.

The travelers were cordially welcomed to this quaint domicile and
invited to pass the night there, which they had planned to do. The
Patchwork Girl was greatly interested in Jack and examined him
admiringly.

"You are quite handsome," she said; "but not as really beautiful as the
Scarecrow."

Jack turned, at this, to examine the Scarecrow critically, and his old
friend slyly winked one painted eye at him.

"There is no accounting for tastes," remarked the Pumpkinhead, with a
sigh. "An old crow once told me I was very fascinating, but of course
the bird might have been mistaken. Yet I have noticed that the crows
usually avoid the Scarecrow, who is a very honest fellow, in his way,
but stuffed. I am not stuffed, you will observe; my body is good solid
hickory."

"I adore stuffing," said the Patchwork Girl.

"Well, as for that, my head is stuffed with pumpkin-seeds," declared
Jack. "I use them for brains, and when they are fresh I am
intellectual. Just now, I regret to say, my seeds are rattling a bit,
so I must soon get another head."

"Oh; do you change your head?" asked Ojo.

"To be sure. Pumpkins are not permanent, more's the pity, and in time
they spoil. That is why I grow such a great field of pumpkins--that I
may select a new head whenever necessary."

"Who carves the faces on them?" inquired the boy.

"I do that myself. I lift off my old head, place it on a table before
me, and use the face for a pattern to go by. Sometimes the faces I
carve are better than others--more expressive and cheerful, you
know--but I think they average very well."

Before she had started on the journey Dorothy had packed a knapsack
with the things she might need, and this knapsack the Scarecrow carried
strapped to his back. The little girl wore a plain gingham dress and a
checked sunbonnet, as she knew they were best fitted for travel. Ojo
also had brought along his basket, to which Ozma had added a bottle of
"Square Meal Tablets" and some fruit. But Jack Pumpkinhead grew a lot
of things in his garden besides pumpkins, so he cooked for them a fine
vegetable soup and gave Dorothy, Ojo and Toto, the only ones who found
it necessary to eat, a pumpkin pie and some green cheese. For beds they
must use the sweet dried grasses which Jack had strewn along one side
of the room, but that satisfied Dorothy and Ojo very well. Toto, of
course, slept beside his little mistress.

The Scarecrow, Scraps and the Pumpkinhead were tireless and had no need
to sleep, so they sat up and talked together all night; but they stayed
outside the house, under the bright stars, and talked in low tones so
as not to disturb the sleepers. During the conversation the Scarecrow
explained their quest for a dark well, and asked Jack's advice where to
find it.

The Pumpkinhead considered the matter gravely.

"That is going to be a difficult task," said he, "and if I were you I'd
take any ordinary well and enclose it, so as to make it dark."

"I fear that wouldn't do," replied the Scarecrow. "The well must be
naturally dark, and the water must never have seen the light of day,
for otherwise the magic charm might not work at all."

"How much of the water do you need?" asked Jack.

"A gill."

"How much is a gill?"

"Why--a gill is a gill, of course," answered the Scarecrow, who did not
wish to display his ignorance.

"I know!" cried Scraps. "Jack and Jill went up the hill to fetch--"

"No, no; that's wrong," interrupted the Scarecrow. "There are two kinds
of gills, I think; one is a girl, and the other is--"

"A gillyflower," said Jack.

"No; a measure."

"How big a measure?"

"Well, I'll ask Dorothy."

So next morning they asked Dorothy, and she said:

"I don't just know how much a gill is, but I've brought along a gold
flask that holds a pint. That's more than a gill, I'm sure, and the
Crooked Magician may measure it to suit himself. But the thing that's
bothering us most, Jack, is to find the well."

Jack gazed around the landscape, for he was standing in the doorway of
his house.

"This is a flat country, so you won't find any dark wells here," said
he. "You must go into the mountains, where rocks and caverns are."

"And where is that?" asked Ojo.

"In the Quadling Country, which lies south of here," replied the
Scarecrow. "I've known all along that we must go to the mountains."

"So have I," said Dorothy.

"But--goodness me!--the Quadling Country is full of dangers," declared
Jack. "I've never been there myself, but--"

"I have," said the Scarecrow. "I've faced the dreadful Hammerheads,
which have no arms and butt you like a goat; and I've faced the
Fighting Trees, which bend down their branches to pound and whip you,
and had many other adventures there."

"It's a wild country," remarked Dorothy, soberly, "and if we go there
we're sure to have troubles of our own. But I guess we'll have to go,
if we want that gill of water from the dark well."

So they said good-bye to the Pumpkinhead and resumed their travels,
heading now directly toward the South Country, where mountains and
rocks and caverns and forests of great trees abounded. This part of the
Land of Oz, while it belonged to Ozma and owed her allegiance, was so
wild and secluded that many queer peoples hid in its jungles and lived
in their own way, without even a knowledge that they had a Ruler in the
Emerald City. If they were left alone, these creatures never troubled
the inhabitants of the rest of Oz, but those who invaded their domains
encountered many dangers from them.

It was a two days journey from Jack Pumkinhead's house to the edge of
the Quadling Country, for neither Dorothy nor Ojo could walk very fast
and they often stopped by the wayside to rest. The first night they
slept on the broad fields, among the buttercups and daisies, and the
Scarecrow covered the children with a gauze blanket taken from his
knapsack, so they would not be chilled by the night air. Toward evening
of the second day they reached a sandy plain where walking was
difficult; but some distance before them they saw a group of palm
trees, with many curious black dots under them; so they trudged bravely
on to reach that place by dark and spend the night under the shelter of
the trees.

The black dots grew larger as they advanced and although the light was
dim Dorothy thought they looked like big kettles turned upside down.
Just beyond this place a jumble of huge, jagged rocks lay scattered,
rising to the mountains behind them.

Our travelers preferred to attempt to climb these rocks by daylight,
and they realized that for a time this would be their last night on the
plains.

Twilight had fallen by the time they came to the trees, beneath which
were the black, circular objects they had marked from a distance.
Dozens of them were scattered around and Dorothy bent near to one,
which was about as tall as she was, to examine it more closely. As she
did so the top flew open and out popped a dusky creature, rising its
length into the air and then plumping down upon the ground just beside
the little girl. Another and another popped out of the circular,
pot-like dwelling, while from all the other black objects came popping
more creatures--very like jumping-jacks when their boxes are
unhooked--until fully a hundred stood gathered around our little group
of travelers.

By this time Dorothy had discovered they were people, tiny and
curiously formed, but still people. Their skins were dusky and their
hair stood straight up, like wires, and was brilliant scarlet in color.
Their bodies were bare except for skins fastened around their waists
and they wore bracelets on their ankles and wrists, and necklaces, and
great pendant earrings.

Toto crouched beside his mistress and wailed as if he did not like
these strange creatures a bit. Scraps began to mutter something about
"hoppity, poppity, jumpity, dump!" but no one paid any attention to
her. Ojo kept close to the Scarecrow and the Scarecrow kept close to
Dorothy; but the little girl turned to the queer creatures and asked:

"Who are you?"

They answered this question all together, in a sort of chanting chorus,
the words being as follows:

    "We're the jolly Tottenhots;
    We do not like the day,
    But in the night 'tis our delight
    To gambol, skip and play.

    "We hate the sun and from it run,
    The moon is cool and clear,
    So on this spot each Tottenhot
    Waits for it to appear.

    "We're ev'ry one chock full of fun,
    And full of mischief, too;
    But if you're gay and with us play
    We'll do no harm to you.


"Glad to meet you, Tottenhots," said the Scarecrow solemnly. "But you
mustn't expect us to play with you all night, for we've traveled all
day and some of us are tired."

"And we never gamble," added the Patchwork Girl. "It's against the Law."

These remarks were greeted with shouts of laughter by the impish
creatures and one seized the Scarecrow's arm and was astonished to find
the straw man whirl around so easily. So the Tottenhot raised the
Scarecrow high in the air and tossed him over the heads of the crowd.
Some one caught him and tossed him back, and so with shouts of glee
they continued throwing the Scarecrow here and there, as if he had been
a basket-ball.

Presently another imp seized Scraps and began to throw her about, in
the same way. They found her a little heavier than the Scarecrow but
still light enough to be tossed like a sofa-cushion, and they were
enjoying the sport immensely when Dorothy, angry and indignant at the
treatment her friends were receiving, rushed among the Tottenhots and
began slapping and pushing them until she had rescued the Scarecrow and
the Patchwork Girl and held them close on either side of her. Perhaps
she would not have accomplished this victory so easily had not Toto
helped her, barking and snapping at the bare legs of the imps until
they were glad to flee from his attack. As for Ojo, some of the
creatures had attempted to toss him, also, but finding his body too
heavy they threw him to the ground and a row of the imps sat on him and
held him from assisting Dorothy in her battle.

The little brown folks were much surprised at being attacked by the
girl and the dog, and one or two who had been slapped hardest began to
cry. Then suddenly they gave a shout, all together, and disappeared in
a flash into their various houses, the tops of which closed with a
series of pops that sounded like a bunch of firecrackers being exploded.

The adventurers now found themselves alone, and Dorothy asked anxiously:

"Is anybody hurt?"

"Not me," answered the Scarecrow. "They have given my straw a good
shaking up and taken all the lumps out of it. I am now in splendid
condition and am really obliged to the Tottenhots for their kind
treatment."

"I feel much the same way," said Scraps. "My cotton stuffing had sagged
a good deal with the day's walking and they've loosened it up until I
feel as plump as a sausage. But the play was a little rough and I'd had
quite enough of it when you interfered."

"Six of them sat on me," said Ojo, "but as they are so little they
didn't hurt me much."

Just then the roof of the house in front of them opened and a Tottenhot
stuck his head out, very cautiously, and looked at the strangers.

"Can't you take a joke?" he asked, reproachfully; "haven't you any fun
in you at all?"

"If I had such a quality," replied the Scarecrow, "your people would
have knocked it out of me. But I don't bear grudges. I forgive you."

"So do I," added Scraps. "That is, if you behave yourselves after this."

"It was just a little rough-house, that's all," said the Tottenhot.
"But the question is not if we will behave, but if you will behave? We
can't be shut up here all night, because this is our time to play; nor
do we care to come out and be chewed up by a savage beast or slapped by
an angry girl. That slapping hurts like sixty; some of my folks are
crying about it. So here's the proposition: you let us alone and we'll
let you alone."

"You began it," declared Dorothy.

"Well, you ended it, so we won't argue the matter. May we come out
again? Or are you still cruel and slappy?"

"Tell you what we'll do," said Dorothy. "We're all tired and want to
sleep until morning. If you'll let us get into your house, and stay
there until daylight, you can play outside all you want to."

"That's a bargain!" cried the Tottenhot eagerly, and he gave a queer
whistle that brought his people popping out of their houses on all
sides. When the house before them was vacant, Dorothy and Ojo leaned
over the hole and looked in, but could see nothing because it was so
dark. But if the Tottenhots slept there all day the children thought
they could sleep there at night, so Ojo lowered himself down and found
it was not very deep.

"There's a soft cushion all over," said he. "Come on in."

Dorothy handed Toto to the boy and then climbed in herself. After her
came Scraps and the Scarecrow, who did not wish to sleep but preferred
to keep out of the way of the mischievous Tottenhots.

There seemed no furniture in the round den, but soft cushions were
strewn about the floor and these they found made very comfortable beds.
They did not close the hole in the roof but left it open to admit air.
It also admitted the shouts and ceaseless laughter of the impish
Tottenhots as they played outside, but Dorothy and Ojo, being weary
from their journey, were soon fast asleep.

Toto kept an eye open, however, and uttered low, threatening growls
whenever the racket made by the creatures outside became too
boisterous; and the Scarecrow and the Patchwork Girl sat leaning
against the wall and talked in whispers all night long. No one
disturbed the travelers until daylight, when in popped the Tottenhot
who owned the place and invited them to vacate his premises.




Chapter Twenty

The Captive Yoop


As they were preparing to leave, Dorothy asked: "Can you tell us where
there is a dark well?"

"Never heard of such a thing," said the Tottenhot. "We live our lives
in the dark, mostly, and sleep in the daytime; but we've never seen a
dark well, or anything like one."

"Does anyone live on those mountains beyond here?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Lots of people. But you'd better not visit them. We never go there,"
was the reply.

"What are the people like?" Dorothy inquired.

"Can't say. We've been told to keep away from the mountain paths, and
so we obey. This sandy desert is good enough for us, and we're not
disturbed here," declared the Tottenhot.

So they left the man snuggling down to sleep in his dusky dwelling, and
went out into the sunshine, taking the path that led toward the rocky
places. They soon found it hard climbing, for the rocks were uneven and
full of sharp points and edges, and now there was no path at all.
Clambering here and there among the boulders they kept steadily on,
gradually rising higher and higher until finally they came to a great
rift in a part of the mountain, where the rock seemed to have split in
two and left high walls on either side.

"S'pose we go this way," suggested Dorothy; "it's much easier walking
than to climb over the hills."

"How about that sign?" asked Ojo.

"What sign?" she inquired.

The Munchkin boy pointed to some words painted on the wall of rock
beside them, which Dorothy had not noticed. The words read:

    "LOOK OUT FOR YOOP."


The girl eyed this sign a moment and turned to the Scarecrow, asking:

"Who is Yoop; or what is Yoop?"

The straw man shook his head. Then looked at Toto and the dog said
"Woof!"

"Only way to find out is to go on," said Scraps.

This being quite true, they went on. As they proceeded, the walls of
rock on either side grew higher and higher. Presently they came upon
another sign which read:

    "BEWARE THE CAPTIVE YOOP."


"Why, as for that," remarked Dorothy, "if Yoop is a captive there's no
need to beware of him. Whatever Yoop happens to be, I'd much rather
have him a captive than running around loose."

"So had I," agreed the Scarecrow, with a nod of his painted head.

"Still," said Scraps, reflectively:

    "Yoop-te-hoop-te-loop-te-goop!
    Who put noodles in the soup?
    We may beware but we don't care,
    And dare go where we scare the Yoop."


"Dear me! Aren't you feeling a little queer, just now?" Dorothy asked
the Patchwork Girl.

"Not queer, but crazy," said Ojo. "When she says those things I'm sure
her brains get mixed somehow and work the wrong way.

"I don't see why we are told to beware the Yoop unless he is
dangerous," observed the Scarecrow in a puzzled tone.

"Never mind; we'll find out all about him when we get to where he is,"
replied the little girl.

The narrow canyon turned and twisted this way and that, and the rift
was so small that they were able to touch both walls at the same time
by stretching out their arms. Toto had run on ahead, frisking
playfully, when suddenly he uttered a sharp bark of fear and came
running back to them with his tail between his legs, as dogs do when
they are frightened.

"Ah," said the Scarecrow, who was leading the way, "we must be near
Yoop."

Just then, as he rounded a sharp turn, the Straw man stopped so
suddenly that all the others bumped against him.

"What is it?" asked Dorothy, standing on tip-toes to look over his
shoulder. But then she saw what it was and cried "Oh!" in a tone of
astonishment.

In one of the rock walls--that at their left--was hollowed a great
cavern, in front of which was a row of thick iron bars, the tops and
bottoms being firmly fixed in the solid rock. Over this cavern was a
big sign, which Dorothy read with much curiosity, speaking the words
aloud that all might know what they said:

    "MISTER YOOP--HIS CAVE

    The Largest Untamed Giant in Captivity.
    Height, 21 Feet.--(And yet he has but 2 feet.)
    Weight, 1640 Pounds.--(But he waits all the time.)
    Age, 400 Years 'and Up' (as they say in the
      Department Store advertisements).
    Temper, Fierce and Ferocious.--(Except when asleep.)
    Appetite, Ravenous.--(Prefers Meat People and
      Orange Marmalade.)

    STRANGERS APPROACHING THIS CAVE DO SO AT THEIR
      OWN PERIL!

    P.S.--Don't feed the Giant yourself."


"Very well," said Ojo, with a sigh; "let's go back."

"It's a long way back," declared Dorothy.

"So it is," remarked the Scarecrow, "and it means a tedious climb over
those sharp rocks if we can't use this passage. I think it will be best
to run by the Giant's cave as fast as we can go. Mister Yoop seems to
be asleep just now."

But the Giant wasn't asleep. He suddenly appeared at the front of his
cavern, seized the iron bars in his great hairy hands and shook them
until they rattled in their sockets. Yoop was so tall that our friends
had to tip their heads way back to look into his face, and they noticed
he was dressed all in pink velvet, with silver buttons and braid. The
Giant's boots were of pink leather and had tassels on them and his hat
was decorated with an enormous pink ostrich feather, carefully curled.

"Yo-ho!" he said in a deep bass voice; "I smell dinner."

"I think you are mistaken," replied the Scarecrow. "There is no orange
marmalade around here."

"Ah, but I eat other things," asserted Mister Yoop. "That is, I eat
them when I can get them. But this is a lonely place, and no good meat
has passed by my cave for many years; so I'm hungry."

"Haven't you eaten anything in many years?" asked Dorothy.

"Nothing except six ants and a monkey. I thought the monkey would taste
like meat people, but the flavor was different. I hope you will taste
better, for you seem plump and tender."

"Oh, I'm not going to be eaten," said Dorothy.

"Why not?"

"I shall keep out of your way," she answered.

"How heartless!" wailed the Giant, shaking the bars again. "Consider
how many years it is since I've eaten a single plump little girl! They
tell me meat is going up, but if I can manage to catch you I'm sure it
will soon be going down. And I'll catch you if I can."

With this the Giant pushed his big arms, which looked like tree-trunks
(except that tree-trunks don't wear pink velvet) between the iron bars,
and the arms were so long that they touched the opposite wall of the
rock passage. Then he extended them as far as he could reach toward our
travelers and found he could almost touch the Scarecrow--but not quite.

"Come a little nearer, please," begged the Giant.

"I'm a Scarecrow."

"A Scarecrow? Ugh! I don't care a straw for a scarecrow. Who is that
bright-colored delicacy behind you?"

"Me?" asked Scraps. "I'm a Patchwork Girl, and I'm stuffed with cotton."

"Dear me," sighed the Giant in a disappointed tone; "that reduces my
dinner from four to two--and the dog. I'll save the dog for dessert."

Toto growled, keeping a good distance away.

"Back up," said the Scarecrow to those behind him. "Let us go back a
little way and talk this over."

So they turned and went around the bend in the passage, where they were
out of sight of the cave and Mister Yoop could not hear them.

"My idea," began the Scarecrow, when they had halted, "is to make a
dash past the cave, going on a run."

"He'd grab us," said Dorothy.

"Well, he can't grab but one at a time, and I'll go first. As soon as
he grabs me the rest of you can slip past him, out of his reach, and he
will soon let me go because I am not fit to eat."

They decided to try this plan and Dorothy took Toto in her arms, so as
to protect him. She followed just after the Scarecrow. Then came Ojo,
with Scraps the last of the four. Their hearts beat a little faster
than usual as they again approached the Giant's cave, this time moving
swiftly forward.

It turned out about the way the Scarecrow had planned. Mister Yoop was
quite astonished to see them come flying toward him, and thrusting his
arms between the bars he seized the Scarecrow in a firm grip. In the
next instant he realized, from the way the straw crunched between his
fingers, that he had captured the non-eatable man, but during that
instant of delay Dorothy and Ojo had slipped by the Giant and were out
of reach. Uttering a howl of rage the monster threw the Scarecrow after
them with one hand and grabbed Scraps with the other.

The poor Scarecrow went whirling through the air and so cleverly was he
aimed that he struck Ojo's back and sent the boy tumbling head over
heels, and he tripped Dorothy and sent her, also, sprawling upon the
ground. Toto flew out of the little girl's arms and landed some
distance ahead, and all were so dazed that it was a moment before they
could scramble to their feet again. When they did so they turned to
look toward the Giant's cave, and at that moment the ferocious Mister
Yoop threw the Patchwork Girl at them.

Down went all three again, in a heap, with Scraps on top. The Giant
roared so terribly that for a time they were afraid he had broken
loose; but he hadn't. So they sat in the road and looked at one another
in a rather bewildered way, and then began to feel glad.

"We did it!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, with satisfaction. "And now we
are free to go on our way."

"Mister Yoop is very impolite," declared Scraps. "He jarred me
terribly. It's lucky my stitches are so fine and strong, for otherwise
such harsh treatment might rip me up the back."

"Allow me to apologize for the Giant," said the Scarecrow, raising the
Patchwork Girl to her feet and dusting her skirt with his stuffed
hands. "Mister Yoop is a perfect stranger to me, but I fear, from the
rude manner in which he has acted, that he is no gentleman."

Dorothy and Ojo laughed at this statement and Toto barked as if he
understood the joke, after which they all felt better and resumed the
journey in high spirits.

"Of course," said the little girl, when they had walked a way along the
passage, "it was lucky for us the Giant was caged; for, if he had
happened to be loose, he--he--"

"Perhaps, in that case, he wouldn't be hungry any more," said Ojo
gravely.




Chapter Twenty-One

Hip Hopper the Champion


They must have had good courage to climb all those rocks, for after
getting out of the canyon they encountered more rock hills to be
surmounted. Toto could jump from one rock to another quite easily, but
the others had to creep and climb with care, so that after a whole day
of such work Dorothy and Ojo found themselves very tired.

As they gazed upward at the great mass of tumbled rocks that covered
the steep incline, Dorothy gave a little groan and said:

"That's going to be a ter'ble hard climb, Scarecrow. I wish we could
find the dark well without so much trouble."

"Suppose," said Ojo, "you wait here and let me do the climbing, for
it's on my account we're searching for the dark well. Then, if I don't
find anything, I'll come back and join you."

"No," replied the little girl, shaking her head positively, "we'll all
go together, for that way we can help each other. If you went alone,
something might happen to you, Ojo."

So they began the climb and found it indeed difficult, for a way. But
presently, in creeping over the big crags, they found a path at their
feet which wound in and out among the masses of rock and was quite
smooth and easy to walk upon. As the path gradually ascended the
mountain, although in a roundabout way, they decided to follow it.

"This must be the road to the Country of the Hoppers," said the
Scarecrow.

"Who are the Hoppers?" asked Dorothy.

"Some people Jack Pumpkinhead told me about," he replied.

"I didn't hear him," replied the girl.

"No; you were asleep," explained the Scarecrow. "But he told Scraps and
me that the Hoppers and the Horners live on this mountain."

"He said in the mountain," declared Scraps; "but of course he meant on
it."

"Didn't he say what the Hoppers and Horners were like?" inquired
Dorothy.

"No; he only said they were two separate nations, and that the Horners
were the most important."

"Well, if we go to their country we'll find out all about 'em," said
the girl. "But I've never heard Ozma mention those people, so they
can't be very important."

"Is this mountain in the Land of Oz?" asked Scraps.

"Course it is," answered Dorothy. "It's in the South Country of the
Quadlings. When one comes to the edge of Oz, in any direction, there is
nothing more to be seen at all. Once you could see sandy desert all
around Oz; but now it's diff'rent, and no other people can see us, any
more than we can see them."

"If the mountain is under Ozma's rule, why doesn't she know about the
Hoppers and the Horners?" Ojo asked.

"Why, it's a fairyland," explained Dorothy, "and lots of queer people
live in places so tucked away that those in the Emerald City never even
hear of 'em. In the middle of the country it's diff'rent, but when you
get around the edges you're sure to run into strange little corners
that surprise you. I know, for I've traveled in Oz a good deal, and so
has the Scarecrow."

"Yes," admitted the straw man, "I've been considerable of a traveler,
in my time, and I like to explore strange places. I find I learn much
more by traveling than by staying at home."

During this conversation they had been walking up the steep pathway and
now found themselves well up on the mountain. They could see nothing
around them, for the rocks beside their path were higher than their
heads. Nor could they see far in front of them, because the path was so
crooked. But suddenly they stopped, because the path ended and there
was no place to go. Ahead was a big rock lying against the side of the
mountain, and this blocked the way completely.

"There wouldn't be a path, though, if it didn't go somewhere," said the
Scarecrow, wrinkling his forehead in deep thought.

"This is somewhere, isn't it?" asked the Patchwork Girl, laughing at
the bewildered looks of the others.

    "The path is locked, the way is blocked,
    Yet here we've innocently flocked;
    And now we're here it's rather queer
    There's no front door that can be knocked."


"Please don't, Scraps," said Ojo. "You make me nervous."

"Well," said Dorothy, "I'm glad of a little rest, for that's a drea'ful
steep path."

As she spoke she leaned against the edge of the big rock that stood in
their way. To her surprise it slowly swung backward and showed behind
it a dark hole that looked like the mouth of a tunnel.

"Why, here's where the path goes to!" she exclaimed.

"So it is," answered the Scarecrow. "But the question is, do we want to
go where the path does?"

"It's underground; right inside the mountain," said Ojo, peering into
the dark hole. "Perhaps there's a well there; and, if there is, it's
sure to be a dark one."

"Why, that's true enough!" cried Dorothy with eagerness. "Let's go in,
Scarecrow; 'cause, if others have gone, we're pretty safe to go, too."

Toto looked in and barked, but he did not venture to enter until the
Scarecrow had bravely gone first. Scraps followed closely after the
straw man and then Ojo and Dorothy timidly stepped inside the tunnel.
As soon as all of them had passed the big rock, it slowly turned and
filled up the opening again; but now they were no longer in the dark,
for a soft, rosy light enabled them to see around them quite distinctly.

It was only a passage, wide enough for two of them to walk
abreast--with Toto in between them--and it had a high, arched roof.
They could not see where the light which flooded the place so
pleasantly came from, for there were no lamps anywhere visible. The
passage ran straight for a little way and then made a bend to the right
and another sharp turn to the left, after which it went straight again.
But there were no side passages, so they could not lose their way.

After proceeding some distance, Toto, who had gone on ahead, began to
bark loudly. They ran around a bend to see what was the matter and
found a man sitting on the floor of the passage and leaning his back
against the wall. He had probably been asleep before Toto's barks
aroused him, for he was now rubbing his eyes and staring at the little
dog with all his might.

There was something about this man that Toto objected to, and when he
slowly rose to his foot they saw what it was. He had but one leg, set
just below the middle of his round, fat body; but it was a stout leg
and had a broad, flat foot at the bottom of it, on which the man seemed
to stand very well. He had never had but this one leg, which looked
something like a pedestal, and when Toto ran up and made a grab at the
man's ankle he hopped first one way and then another in a very active
manner, looking so frightened that Scraps laughed aloud.

Toto was usually a well behaved dog, but this time he was angry and
snapped at the man's leg again and again. This filled the poor fellow
with fear, and in hopping out of Toto's reach he suddenly lost his
balance and tumbled heel over head upon the floor. When he sat up he
kicked Toto on the nose and made the dog howl angrily, but Dorothy now
ran forward and caught Toto's collar, holding him back.

"Do you surrender?" she asked the man.

"Who? Me?" asked the Hopper.

"Yes; you," said the little girl.

"Am I captured?" he inquired.

"Of course. My dog has captured you," she said.

"Well," replied the man, "if I'm captured I must surrender, for it's
the proper thing to do. I like to do everything proper, for it saves
one a lot of trouble."

"It does, indeed," said Dorothy. "Please tell us who you are."

"I'm Hip Hopper--Hip Hopper, the Champion."

"Champion what?" she asked in surprise.

"Champion wrestler. I'm a very strong man, and that ferocious animal
which you are so kindly holding is the first living thing that has ever
conquered me."

"And you are a Hopper?" she continued.

"Yes. My people live in a great city not far from here. Would you like
to visit it?"

"I'm not sure," she said with hesitation. "Have you any dark wells in
your city?"

"I think not. We have wells, you know, but they're all well lighted,
and a well lighted well cannot well be a dark well. But there may be
such a thing as a very dark well in the Horner Country, which is a
black spot on the face of the earth."

"Where is the Horner Country?" Ojo inquired.

"The other side of the mountain. There's a fence between the Hopper
Country and the Horner Country, and a gate in the fence; but you can't
pass through just now, because we are at war with the Horners."

"That's too bad," said the Scarecrow. "What seems to be the trouble?"

"Why, one of them made a very insulting remark about my people. He said
we were lacking in understanding, because we had only one leg to a
person. I can't see that legs have anything to do with understanding
things. The Horners each have two legs, just as you have. That's one
leg too many, it seems to me."

"No," declared Dorothy, "it's just the right number."

"You don't need them," argued the Hopper, obstinately. "You've only one
head, and one body, and one nose and mouth. Two legs are quite
unnecessary, and they spoil one's shape."

"But how can you walk, with only one leg?" asked Ojo.

"Walk! Who wants to walk?" exclaimed the man. "Walking is a terribly
awkward way to travel. I hop, and so do all my people. It's so much
more graceful and agreeable than walking."

"I don't agree with you," said the Scarecrow. "But tell me, is there
any way to get to the Horner Country without going through the city of
the Hoppers?"

"Yes; there is another path from the rocky lowlands, outside the
mountain, that leads straight to the entrance of the Horner Country.
But it's a long way around, so you'd better come with me. Perhaps they
will allow you to go through the gate; but we expect to conquer them
this afternoon, if we get time, and then you may go and come as you
please."

They thought it best to take the Hopper's advice, and asked him to lead
the way. This he did in a series of hops, and he moved so swiftly in
this strange manner that those with two legs had to run to keep up with
him.




Chapter Twenty-Two

The Joking Horners


It was not long before they left the passage and came to a great cave,
so high that it must have reached nearly to the top of the mountain
within which it lay. It was a magnificent cave, illumined by the soft,
invisible light, so that everything in it could be plainly seen. The
walls were of polished marble, white with veins of delicate colors
running through it, and the roof was arched and fantastic and beautiful.

Built beneath this vast dome was a pretty village--not very large, for
there seemed not more than fifty houses altogether--and the dwellings
were of marble and artistically designed. No grass nor flowers nor
trees grew in this cave, so the yards surrounding the houses carved in
designs both were smooth and bare and had low walls around them to mark
their boundaries.

In the streets and the yards of the houses were many people all having
one leg growing below their bodies and all hopping here and there
whenever they moved. Even the children stood firmly upon their single
legs and never lost their balance.

"All hail, Champion!" cried a man in the first group of Hoppers they
met; "whom have you captured?"

"No one," replied the Champion in a gloomy voice; "these strangers have
captured me."

"Then," said another, "we will rescue you, and capture them, for we are
greater in number."

"No," answered the Champion, "I can't allow it. I've surrendered, and
it isn't polite to capture those you've surrendered to."

"Never mind that," said Dorothy. "We will give you your liberty and set
you free."

"Really?" asked the Champion in joyous tones.

"Yes," said the little girl; "your people may need you to help conquer
the Horners."

At this all the Hoppers looked downcast and sad. Several more had
joined the group by this time and quite a crowd of curious men, women
and children surrounded the strangers.

"This war with our neighbors is a terrible thing," remarked one of the
women. "Some one is almost sure to get hurt."

"Why do you say that, madam?" inquired the Scarecrow.

"Because the horns of our enemies are sharp, and in battle they will
try to stick those horns into our warriors," she replied.

"How many horns do the Horners have?" asked Dorothy.

"Each has one horn in the center of his forehead," was the answer.

"Oh, then they're unicorns," declared the Scarecrow.

"No; they're Horners. We never go to war with them if we can help it,
on account of their dangerous horns; but this insult was so great and
so unprovoked that our brave men decided to fight, in order to be
revenged," said the woman.

"What weapons do you fight with?" the Scarecrow asked.

"We have no weapons," explained the Champion. "Whenever we fight the
Horners, our plan is to push them back, for our arms are longer than
theirs."

"Then you are better armed," said Scraps.

"Yes; but they have those terrible horns, and unless we are careful
they prick us with the points," returned the Champion with a shudder.
"That makes a war with them dangerous, and a dangerous war cannot be a
pleasant one."

"I see very clearly," remarked the Scarecrow, "that you are going to
have trouble in conquering those Horners--unless we help you."

"Oh!" cried the Hoppers in a chorus; "can you help us? Please do! We
will be greatly obliged! It would please us very much!" and by these
exclamations the Scarecrow knew that his speech had met with favor.

"How far is it to the Horner Country?" he asked.

"Why, it's just the other side of the fence," they answered, and the
Champion added:

"Come with me, please, and I'll show you the Horners."

So they followed the Champion and several others through the streets
and just beyond the village came to a very high picket fence, built all
of marble, which seemed to divide the great cave into two equal parts.

But the part inhabited by the Horners was in no way as grand in
appearance as that of the Hoppers. Instead of being marble, the walls
and roof were of dull gray rock and the square houses were plainly made
of the same material. But in extent the city was much larger than that
of the Hoppers and the streets were thronged with numerous people who
busied themselves in various ways.

Looking through the open pickets of the fence our friends watched the
Horners, who did not know they were being watched by strangers, and
found them very unusual in appearance. They were little folks in size
and had bodies round as balls and short legs and arms. Their heads were
round, too, and they had long, pointed ears and a horn set in the
center of the forehead. The horns did not seem very terrible, for they
were not more than six inches long; but they were ivory white and sharp
pointed, and no wonder the Hoppers feared them.

The skins of the Horners were light brown, but they wore snow-white
robes and were bare-footed. Dorothy thought the most striking thing
about them was their hair, which grew in three distinct colors on each
and every head--red, yellow and green. The red was at the bottom and
sometimes hung over their eyes; then came a broad circle of yellow and
the green was at the top and formed a brush-shaped top-knot.

None of the Horners was yet aware of the presence of strangers, who
watched the little brown people for a time and then went to the big
gate in the center of the dividing fence. It was locked on both sides
and over the latch was a sign reading:

    "WAR IS DECLARED"


"Can't we go through?" asked Dorothy.

"Not now," answered the Champion.

"I think," said the Scarecrow, "that if I could talk with those Horners
they would apologize to you, and then there would be no need to fight."

"Can't you talk from this side?" asked the Champion.

"Not so well," replied the Scarecrow. "Do you suppose you could throw
me over that fence? It is high, but I am very light."

"We can try it," said the Hopper. "I am perhaps the strongest man in my
country, so I'll undertake to do the throwing. But I won't promise you
will land on your feet."

"No matter about that," returned the Scarecrow. "Just toss me over and
I'll be satisfied."

So the Champion picked up the Scarecrow and balanced him a moment, to
see how much he weighed, and then with all his strength tossed him high
into the air.

Perhaps if the Scarecrow had been a trifle heavier he would have been
easier to throw and would have gone a greater distance; but, as it was,
instead of going over the fence he landed just on top of it, and one of
the sharp pickets caught him in the middle of his back and held him
fast prisoner. Had he been face downward the Scarecrow might have
managed to free himself, but lying on his back on the picket his hands
waved in the air of the Horner Country while his feet kicked the air of
the Hopper Country; so there he was.

"Are you hurt?" called the Patchwork Girl anxiously.

"Course not," said Dorothy. "But if he wiggles that way he may tear his
clothes. How can we get him down, Mr. Champion?"

The Champion shook his head.

"I don't know," he confessed. "If he could scare Horners as well as he
does crows, it might be a good idea to leave him there."

"This is terrible," said Ojo, almost ready to cry. "I s'pose it's
because I am Ojo the Unlucky that everyone who tries to help me gets
into trouble."

"You are lucky to have anyone to help you," declared Dorothy. "But
don't worry. We'll rescue the Scarecrow somehow."

"I know how," announced Scraps. "Here, Mr. Champion; just throw me up
to the Scarecrow. I'm nearly as light as he is, and when I'm on top the
fence I'll pull our friend off the picket and toss him down to you."

"All right," said the Champion, and he picked up the Patchwork Girl and
threw her in the same manner he had the Scarecrow. He must have used
more strength this time, however, for Scraps sailed far over the top of
the fence and, without being able to grab the Scarecrow at all, tumbled
to the ground in the Horner Country, where her stuffed body knocked
over two men and a woman and made a crowd that had collected there run
like rabbits to get away from her.

Seeing the next moment that she was harmless, the people slowly
returned and gathered around the Patchwork Girl, regarding her with
astonishment. One of them wore a jeweled star in his hair, just above
his horn, and this seemed a person of importance. He spoke for the rest
of his people, who treated him with great respect.

"Who are you, Unknown Being?" he asked.

"Scraps," she said, rising to her feet and patting her cotton wadding
smooth where it had bunched up.

"And where did you come from?" he continued.

"Over the fence. Don't be silly. There's no other place I could have
come from," she replied.

He looked at her thoughtfully.

"You are not a Hopper," said he, "for you have two legs. They're not
very well shaped, but they are two in number. And that strange creature
on top the fence--why doesn't he stop kicking?--must be your brother,
or father, or son, for he also has two legs."

"You must have been to visit the Wise Donkey," said Scraps, laughing so
merrily that the crowd smiled with her, in sympathy. "But that reminds
me, Captain--or King--"

"I am Chief of the Horners, and my name is Jak."

"Of course; Little Jack Horner; I might have known it. But the reason I
volplaned over the fence was so I could have a talk with you about the
Hoppers."

"What about the Hoppers?" asked the Chief, frowning.

"You've insulted them, and you'd better beg their pardon," said Scraps.
"If you don't, they'll probably hop over here and conquer you."

"We're not afraid--as long as the gate is locked," declared the Chief.
"And we didn't insult them at all. One of us made a joke that the
stupid Hoppers couldn't see."

The Chief smiled as he said this and the smile made his face look quite
jolly.

"What was the joke?" asked Scraps.

"A Horner said they have less understanding than we, because they've
only one leg. Ha, ha! You see the point, don't you? If you stand on
your legs, and your legs are under you, then--ha, ha, ha!--then your
legs are your under-standing. Hee, hee, hee! Ho, ho! My, but that's a
fine joke. And the stupid Hoppers couldn't see it! They couldn't see
that with only one leg they must have less under-standing than we who
have two legs. Ha, ha, ha! Hee, hee! Ho, ho!" The Chief wiped the tears
of laughter from his eyes with the bottom hem of his white robe, and
all the other Horners wiped their eyes on their robes, for they had
laughed just as heartily as their Chief at the absurd joke.

"Then," said Scraps, "their understanding of the understanding you
meant led to the misunderstanding."

"Exactly; and so there's no need for us to apologize," returned the
Chief.

"No need for an apology, perhaps, but much need for an explanation,"
said Scraps decidedly. "You don't want war, do you?"

"Not if we can help it," admitted Jak Horner. "The question is, who's
going to explain the joke to the Horners? You know it spoils any joke
to be obliged to explain it, and this is the best joke I ever heard."

"Who made the joke?" asked Scraps.

"Diksey Horner. He is working in the mines, just now, but he'll be home
before long. Suppose we wait and talk with him about it? Maybe he'll be
willing to explain his joke to the Hoppers."

"All right," said Scraps. "I'll wait, if Diksey isn't too long."

"No, he's short; he's shorter than I am. Ha, ha, ha! Say! that's a
better joke than Diksey's. He won't be too long, because he's short.
Hee, hee, ho!"

The other Horners who were standing by roared with laughter and seemed
to like their Chief's joke as much as he did. Scraps thought it was odd
that they could be so easily amused, but decided there could be little
harm in people who laughed so merrily.




Chapter Twenty-Three

Peace Is Declared


"Come with me to my dwelling and I'll introduce you to my daughters,"
said the Chief. "We're bringing them up according to a book of rules
that was written by one of our leading old bachelors, and everyone says
they're a remarkable lot of girls."

So Scraps accompanied him along the street to a house that seemed on
the outside exceptionally grimy and dingy. The streets of this city
were not paved nor had any attempt been made to beautify the houses or
their surroundings, and having noticed this condition Scraps was
astonished when the Chief ushered her into his home.

Here was nothing grimy or faded, indeed. On the contrary, the room was
of dazzling brilliance and beauty, for it was lined throughout with an
exquisite metal that resembled translucent frosted silver. The surface
of this metal was highly ornamented in raised designs representing men,
animals, flowers and trees, and from the metal itself was radiated the
soft light which flooded the room. All the furniture was made of the
same glorious metal, and Scraps asked what it was.

"That's radium," answered the Chief. "We Horners spend all our time
digging radium from the mines under this mountain, and we use it to
decorate our homes and make them pretty and cosy. It is a medicine,
too, and no one can ever be sick who lives near radium."

"Have you plenty of it?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

"More than we can use. All the houses in this city are decorated with
it, just the same as mine is."

"Why don't you use it on your streets, then, and the outside of your
houses, to make them as pretty as they are within?" she inquired.

"Outside? Who cares for the outside of anything?" asked the Chief. "We
Horners don't live on the outside of our homes; we live inside. Many
people are like those stupid Hoppers, who love to make an outside show.
I suppose you strangers thought their city more beautiful than ours,
because you judged from appearances and they have handsome marble
houses and marble streets; but if you entered one of their stiff
dwellings you would find it bare and uncomfortable, as all their show
is on the outside. They have an idea that what is not seen by others is
not important, but with us the rooms we live in are our chief delight
and care, and we pay no attention to outside show."

"Seems to me," said Scraps, musingly, "it would be better to make it
all pretty--inside and out."

"Seems? Why, you're all seams, my girl!" said the Chief; and then he
laughed heartily at his latest joke and a chorus of small voices echoed
the chorus with "tee-hee-hee! ha, ha!"

Scraps turned around and found a row of girls seated in radium chairs
ranged along one wall of the room. There were nineteen of them, by
actual count, and they were of all sizes from a tiny child to one
almost a grown woman. All were neatly dressed in spotless white robes
and had brown skins, horns on their foreheads and three-colored hair.

"These," said the Chief, "are my sweet daughters. My dears, I introduce
to you Miss Scraps Patchwork, a lady who is traveling in foreign parts
to increase her store of wisdom."

The nineteen Horner girls all arose and made a polite curtsey, after
which they resumed their seats and rearranged their robes properly.

"Why do they sit so still, and all in a row?" asked Scraps.

"Because it is ladylike and proper," replied the Chief.

"But some are just children, poor things! Don't they ever run around
and play and laugh, and have a good time?"

"No, indeed," said the Chief. "That would be improper in young ladies,
as well as in those who will sometime become young ladies. My daughters
are being brought up according to the rules and regulations laid down
by a leading bachelor who has given the subject much study and is
himself a man of taste and culture. Politeness is his great hobby, and
he claims that if a child is allowed to do an impolite thing one cannot
expect the grown person to do anything better."

"Is it impolite to romp and shout and be jolly?" asked Scraps.

"Well, sometimes it is, and sometimes it isn't," replied the Horner,
after considering the question. "By curbing such inclinations in my
daughters we keep on the safe side. Once in a while I make a good joke,
as you have heard, and then I permit my daughters to laugh decorously;
but they are never allowed to make a joke themselves."

"That old bachelor who made the rules ought to be skinned alive!"
declared Scraps, and would have said more on the subject had not the
door opened to admit a little Horner man whom the Chief introduced as
Diksey.

"What's up, Chief?" asked Diksey, winking nineteen times at the
nineteen girls, who demurely cast down their eyes because their father
was looking.

The Chief told the man that his joke had not been understood by the
dull Hoppers, who had become so angry that they had declared war. So
the only way to avoid a terrible battle was to explain the joke so they
could understand it.

"All right," replied Diksey, who seemed a good-natured man; "I'll go at
once to the fence and explain. I don't want any war with the Hoppers,
for wars between nations always cause hard feelings."

So the Chief and Diksey and Scraps left the house and went back to the
marble picket fence. The Scarecrow was still stuck on the top of his
picket but had now ceased to struggle. On the other side of the fence
were Dorothy and Ojo, looking between the pickets; and there, also,
were the Champion and many other Hoppers.

Diksey went close to the fence and said:

"My good Hoppers, I wish to explain that what I said about you was a
joke. You have but one leg each, and we have two legs each. Our legs
are under us, whether one or two, and we stand on them. So, when I said
you had less understanding than we, I did not mean that you had less
understanding, you understand, but that you had less standundering, so
to speak. Do you understand that?"

The Hoppers thought it over carefully. Then one said:

"That is clear enough; but where does the joke come in?'"

Dorothy laughed, for she couldn't help it, although all the others were
solemn enough.

"I'll tell you where the joke comes in," she said, and took the Hoppers
away to a distance, where the Horners could not hear them. "You know,"
she then explained, "those neighbors of yours are not very bright, poor
things, and what they think is a joke isn't a joke at all--it's true,
don't you see?"

"True that we have less understanding?" asked the Champion.

"Yes; it's true because you don't understand such a poor joke; if you
did, you'd be no wiser than they are."

"Ah, yes; of course," they answered, looking very wise.

"So I'll tell you what to do," continued Dorothy. "Laugh at their poor
joke and tell 'em it's pretty good for a Horner. Then they won't dare
say you have less understanding, because you understand as much as they
do."

The Hoppers looked at one another questioningly and blinked their eyes
and tried to think what it all meant; but they couldn't figure it out.

"What do you think, Champion?" asked one of them.

"I think it is dangerous to think of this thing any more than we can
help," he replied. "Let us do as this girl says and laugh with the
Horners, so as to make them believe we see the joke. Then there will be
peace again and no need to fight."

They readily agreed to this and returned to the fence laughing as loud
and as hard as they could, although they didn't feel like laughing a
bit. The Horners were much surprised.

"That's a fine joke--for a Horner--and we are much pleased with it,"
said the Champion, speaking between the pickets. "But please don't do
it again."

"I won't," promised Diksey. "If I think of another such joke I'll try
to forget it."

"Good!" cried the Chief Horner. "The war is over and peace is declared."

There was much joyful shouting on both sides of the fence and the gate
was unlocked and thrown wide open, so that Scraps was able to rejoin
her friends.

"What about the Scarecrow?" she asked Dorothy.

"We must get him down, somehow or other," was the reply.

"Perhaps the Horners can find a way," suggested Ojo. So they all went
through the gate and Dorothy asked the Chief Horner how they could get
the Scarecrow off the fence. The Chief didn't know how, but Diksey said:

"A ladder's the thing."

"Have you one?" asked Dorothy.

"To be sure. We use ladders in our mines," said he. Then he ran away to
get the ladder, and while he was gone the Horners gathered around and
welcomed the strangers to their country, for through them a great war
had been avoided.

In a little while Diksey came back with a tall ladder which he placed
against the fence. Ojo at once climbed to the top of the ladder and
Dorothy went about halfway up and Scraps stood at the foot of it. Toto
ran around it and barked. Then Ojo pulled the Scarecrow away from the
picket and passed him down to Dorothy, who in turn lowered him to the
Patchwork Girl.

As soon as he was on his feet and standing on solid ground the
Scarecrow said:

"Much obliged. I feel much better. I'm not stuck on that picket any
more."

The Horners began to laugh, thinking this was a joke, but the Scarecrow
shook himself and patted his straw a little and said to Dorothy: "Is
there much of a hole in my back?"

The little girl examined him carefully.

"There's quite a hole," she said. "But I've got a needle and thread in
the knapsack and I'll sew you up again."

"Do so," he begged earnestly, and again the Hoppers laughed, to the
Scarecrow's great annoyance.

While Dorothy was sewing up the hole in the straw man's back Scraps
examined the other parts of him.

"One of his legs is ripped, too!" she exclaimed.

"Oho!" cried little Diksey; "that's bad. Give him the needle and thread
and let him mend his ways."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the Chief, and the other Horners at once roared
with laughter.

"What's funny?" inquired the Scarecrow sternly.

"Don't you see?" asked Diksey, who had laughed even harder than the
others. "That's a joke. It's by odds the best joke I ever made. You
walk with your legs, and so that's the way you walk, and your legs are
the ways. See? So, when you mend your legs, you mend your ways. Ho, ho,
ho! hee, hee! I'd no idea I could make such a fine joke!"

"Just wonderful!" echoed the Chief. "How do you manage to do it,
Diksey?"

"I don't know," said Diksey modestly. "Perhaps it's the radium, but I
rather think it's my splendid intellect."

"If you don't quit it," the Scarecrow told him, "there'll be a worse
war than the one you've escaped from."

Ojo had been deep in thought, and now he asked the Chief: "Is there a
dark well in any part of your country?"

"A dark well? None that ever I heard of," was the answer.

"Oh, yes," said Diksey, who overheard the boy's question. "There's a
very dark well down in my radium mine."

"Is there any water in it?" Ojo eagerly asked.

"Can't say; I've never looked to see. But we can find out."

So, as soon as the Scarecrow was mended, they decided to go with Diksey
to the mine. When Dorothy had patted the straw man into shape again he
declared he felt as good as new and equal to further adventures.

"Still," said he, "I prefer not to do picket duty again. High life
doesn't seem to agree with my constitution." And then they hurried away
to escape the laughter of the Horners, who thought this was another
joke.




Chapter Twenty-Four

Ojo Finds the Dark Well


They now followed Diksey to the farther end of the great cave, beyond
the Horner city, where there were several round, dark holes leading
into the ground in a slanting direction. Diksey went to one of these
holes and said:

"Here is the mine in which lies the dark well you are seeking. Follow
me and step carefully and I'll lead you to the place."

He went in first and after him came Ojo, and then Dorothy, with the
Scarecrow behind her. The Patchwork Girl entered last of all, for Toto
kept close beside his little mistress.

A few steps beyond the mouth of the opening it was pitch dark. "You
won't lose your way, though," said the Horner, "for there's only one
way to go. The mine's mine and I know every step of the way. How's that
for a joke, eh? The mine's mine." Then he chuckled gleefully as they
followed him silently down the steep slant. The hole was just big
enough to permit them to walk upright, although the Scarecrow, being
much the taller of the party, often had to bend his head to keep from
hitting the top.

The floor of the tunnel was difficult to walk upon because it had been
worn smooth as glass, and pretty soon Scraps, who was some distance
behind the others, slipped and fell head foremost. At once she began to
slide downward, so swiftly that when she came to the Scarecrow she
knocked him off his feet and sent him tumbling against Dorothy, who
tripped up Ojo. The boy fell against the Horner, so that all went
tumbling down the slide in a regular mix-up, unable to see where they
were going because of the darkness.

Fortunately, when they reached the bottom the Scarecrow and Scraps were
in front, and the others bumped against them, so that no one was hurt.
They found themselves in a vast cave which was dimly lighted by the
tiny grains of radium that lay scattered among the loose rocks.

"Now," said Diksey, when they had all regained their feet, "I will show
you where the dark well is. This is a big place, but if we hold fast to
each other we won't get lost."

They took hold of hands and the Horner led them into a dark corner,
where he halted.

"Be careful," said he warningly. "The well is at your feet."

"All right," replied Ojo, and kneeling down he felt in the well with
his hand and found that it contained a quantity of water. "Where's the
gold flask, Dorothy?" he asked, and the little girl handed him the
flask, which she had brought with her.

Ojo knelt again and by feeling carefully in the dark managed to fill
the flask with the unseen water that was in the well. Then he screwed
the top of the flask firmly in place and put the precious water in his
pocket.

"All right!" he said again, in a glad voice; "now we can go back."

They returned to the mouth of the tunnel and began to creep cautiously
up the incline. This time they made Scraps stay behind, for fear she
would slip again; but they all managed to get up in safety and the
Munchkin boy was very happy when he stood in the Horner city and
realized that the water from the dark well, which he and his friends
had traveled so far to secure, was safe in his jacket pocket.




Chapter Twenty-Five

They Bribe the Lazy Quadling


"Now," said Dorothy, as they stood on the mountain path, having left
behind them the cave in which dwelt the Hoppers and the Horners, "I
think we must find a road into the Country of the Winkies, for there is
where Ojo wants to go next."

"Is there such a road?" asked the Scarecrow.

"I don't know," she replied. "I s'pose we can go back the way we came,
to Jack Pumpkinhead's house, and then turn into the Winkie Country; but
that seems like running 'round a haystack, doesn't it?"

"Yes," said the Scarecrow. "What is the next thing Ojo must get?"

"A yellow butterfly," answered the boy.

"That means the Winkie Country, all right, for it's the yellow country
of Oz," remarked Dorothy. "I think, Scarecrow, we ought to take him to
the Tin Woodman, for he's the Emp'ror of the Winkies and will help us
to find what Ojo wants."

"Of course," replied the Scarecrow, brightening at the suggestion. "The
Tin Woodman will do anything we ask him, for he's one of my dearest
friends. I believe we can take a crosscut into his country and so get
to his castle a day sooner than if we travel back the way we came."

"I think so, too," said the girl; "and that means we must keep to the
left."

They were obliged to go down the mountain before they found any path
that led in the direction they wanted to go, but among the tumbled
rocks at the foot of the mountain was a faint trail which they decided
to follow. Two or three hours walk along this trail brought them to a
clear, level country, where there were a few farms and some scattered
houses. But they knew they were still in the Country of the Quadlings,
because everything had a bright red color. Not that the trees and
grasses were red, but the fences and houses were painted that color and
all the wild-flowers that bloomed by the wayside had red blossoms. This
part of the Quadling Country seemed peaceful and prosperous, if rather
lonely, and the road was more distinct and easier to follow.

But just as they were congratulating themselves upon the progress they
had made they came upon a broad river which swept along between high
banks, and here the road ended and there was no bridge of any sort to
allow them to cross.

"This is queer," mused Dorothy, looking at the water reflectively. "Why
should there be any road, if the river stops everyone walking along it?"

"Wow!" said Toto, gazing earnestly into her face.

"That's the best answer you'll get," declared the Scarecrow, with his
comical smile, "for no one knows any more than Toto about this road."

Said Scraps:

    "Ev'ry time I see a river,
    I have chills that make me shiver,
    For I never can forget
    All the water's very wet.
    If my patches get a soak
    It will be a sorry joke;
    So to swim I'll never try
    Till I find the water dry."


"Try to control yourself, Scraps," said Ojo; "you're getting crazy
again. No one intends to swim that river."

"No," decided Dorothy, "we couldn't swim it if we tried. It's too big a
river, and the water moves awful fast."

"There ought to be a ferryman with a boat," said the Scarecrow; "but I
don't see any."

"Couldn't we make a raft?" suggested Ojo.

"There's nothing to make one of," answered Dorothy.

"Wow!" said Toto again, and Dorothy saw he was looking along the bank
of the river.

"Why, he sees a house over there!" cried the little girl. "I wonder we
didn't notice it ourselves. Let's go and ask the people how to get
'cross the river."

A quarter of a mile along the bank stood a small, round house, painted
bright red, and as it was on their side of the river they hurried
toward it. A chubby little man, dressed all in red, came out to greet
them, and with him were two children, also in red costumes. The man's
eyes were big and staring as he examined the Scarecrow and the
Patchwork Girl, and the children shyly hid behind him and peeked
timidly at Toto.

"Do you live here, my good man?" asked the Scarecrow.

"I think I do, Most Mighty Magician," replied the Quadling, bowing low;
"but whether I'm awake or dreaming I can't be positive, so I'm not sure
where I live. If you'll kindly pinch me I'll find out all about it!"

"You're awake," said Dorothy, "and this is no magician, but just the
Scarecrow."

"But he's alive," protested the man, "and he oughtn't to be, you know.
And that other dreadful person--the girl who is all patches--seems to
be alive, too."

"Very much so," declared Scraps, making a face at him. "But that isn't
your affair, you know."

"I've a right to be surprised, haven't I?" asked the man meekly.

"I'm not sure; but anyhow you've no right to say I'm dreadful. The
Scarecrow, who is a gentleman of great wisdom, thinks I'm beautiful,"
retorted Scraps.

"Never mind all that," said Dorothy. "Tell us, good Quadling, how we
can get across the river."

"I don't know," replied the Quadling.

"Don't you ever cross it?" asked the girl.

"Never."

"Don't travelers cross it?"

"Not to my knowledge," said he.

They were much surprised to hear this, and the man added: "It's a
pretty big river, and the current is strong. I know a man who lives on
the opposite bank, for I've seen him there a good many years; but we've
never spoken because neither of us has ever crossed over."

"That's queer," said the Scarecrow. "Don't you own a boat?"

The man shook his head.

"Nor a raft?"

"Where does this river go to?" asked Dorothy.

"That way," answered the man, pointing with one hand, "it goes into the
Country of the Winkies, which is ruled by the Tin Emperor, who must be
a mighty magician because he's all made of tin, and yet he's alive. And
that way," pointing with the other hand, "the river runs between two
mountains where dangerous people dwell."

The Scarecrow looked at the water before them.

"The current flows toward the Winkie Country," said he; "and so, if we
had a boat, or a raft, the river would float us there more quickly and
more easily than we could walk."

"That is true," agreed Dorothy; and then they all looked thoughtful and
wondered what could be done.

"Why can't the man make us a raft?" asked Ojo.

"Will you?" inquired Dorothy, turning to the Quadling.

The chubby man shook his head.

"I'm too lazy," he said. "My wife says I'm the laziest man in all Oz,
and she is a truthful woman. I hate work of any kind, and making a raft
is hard work."

"I'll give you my em'rald ring," promised the girl.

"No; I don't care for emeralds. If it were a ruby, which is the color I
like best, I might work a little while."

"I've got some Square Meal Tablets," said the Scarecrow. "Each one is
the same as a dish of soup, a fried fish, a mutton pot-pie, lobster
salad, charlotte russe and lemon jelly--all made into one little tablet
that you can swallow without trouble."

"Without trouble!" exclaimed the Quadling, much interested; "then those
tablets would be fine for a lazy man. It's such hard work to chew when
you eat."

"I'll give you six of those tablets if you'll help us make a raft,"
promised the Scarecrow. "They're a combination of food which people who
eat are very fond of. I never eat, you know, being straw; but some of
my friends eat regularly. What do you say to my offer, Quadling?"

"I'll do it," decided the man. "I'll help, and you can do most of the
work. But my wife has gone fishing for red eels to-day, so some of you
will have to mind the children."

Scraps promised to do that, and the children were not so shy when the
Patchwork Girl sat down to play with them. They grew to like Toto, too,
and the little dog allowed them to pat him on his head, which gave the
little ones much joy.

There were a number of fallen trees near the house and the Quadling got
his axe and chopped them into logs of equal length. He took his wife's
clothesline to bind these logs together, so that they would form a
raft, and Ojo found some strips of wood and nailed them along the tops
of the logs, to render them more firm. The Scarecrow and Dorothy helped
roll the logs together and carry the strips of wood, but it took so
long to make the raft that evening came just as it was finished, and
with evening the Quadling's wife returned from her fishing.

The woman proved to be cross and bad-tempered, perhaps because she had
only caught one red eel during all the day. When she found that her
husband had used her clothesline, and the logs she had wanted for
firewood, and the boards she had intended to mend the shed with, and a
lot of gold nails, she became very angry. Scraps wanted to shake the
woman, to make her behave, but Dorothy talked to her in a gentle tone
and told the Quadling's wife she was a Princess of Oz and a friend of
Ozma and that when she got back to the Emerald City she would send them
a lot of things to repay them for the raft, including a new
clothesline. This promise pleased the woman and she soon became more
pleasant, saying they could stay the night at her house and begin their
voyage on the river next morning.

This they did, spending a pleasant evening with the Quadling family and
being entertained with such hospitality as the poor people were able to
offer them. The man groaned a good deal and said he had overworked
himself by chopping the logs, but the Scarecrow gave him two more
tablets than he had promised, which seemed to comfort the lazy fellow.




Chapter Twenty-Six

The Trick River


Next morning they pushed the raft into the water and all got aboard.
The Quadling man had to hold the log craft fast while they took their
places, and the flow of the river was so powerful that it nearly tore
the raft from his hands. As soon as they were all seated upon the logs
he let go and away it floated and the adventurers had begun their
voyage toward the Winkie Country.

The little house of the Quadlings was out of sight almost before they
had cried their good-byes, and the Scarecrow said in a pleased voice:
"It won't take us long to get to the Winkie Country, at this rate."

They had floated several miles down the stream and were enjoying the
ride when suddenly the raft slowed up, stopped short, and then began to
float back the way it had come.

"Why, what's wrong?" asked Dorothy, in astonishment; but they were all
just as bewildered as she was and at first no one could answer the
question. Soon, however, they realized the truth: that the current of
the river had reversed and the water was now flowing in the opposite
direction--toward the mountains.

They began to recognize the scenes they had passed, and by and by they
came in sight of the little house of the Quadlings again. The man was
standing on the river bank and he called to them:

"How do you do? Glad to see you again. I forgot to tell you that the
river changes its direction every little while. Sometimes it flows one
way, and sometimes the other."

They had no time to answer him, for the raft was swept past the house
and a long distance on the other side of it.

"We're going just the way we don't want to go," said Dorothy, "and I
guess the best thing we can do is to get to land before we're carried
any farther."

But they could not get to land. They had no oars, nor even a pole to
guide the raft with. The logs which bore them floated in the middle of
the stream and were held fast in that position by the strong current.

So they sat still and waited and, even while they were wondering what
could be done, the raft slowed down, stopped, and began drifting the
other way--in the direction it had first followed. After a time they
repassed the Quadling house and the man was still standing on the bank.
He cried out to them:

"Good day! Glad to see you again. I expect I shall see you a good many
times, as you go by, unless you happen to swim ashore."

By that time they had left him behind and were headed once more
straight toward the Winkie Country.

"This is pretty hard luck," said Ojo in a discouraged voice. "The Trick
River keeps changing, it seems, and here we must float back and forward
forever, unless we manage in some way to get ashore."

"Can you swim?" asked Dorothy.

"No; I'm Ojo the Unlucky."

"Neither can I. Toto can swim a little, but that won't help us to get
to shore."

"I don't know whether I could swim, or not," remarked Scraps; "but if I
tried it I'd surely ruin my lovely patches."

"My straw would get soggy in the water and I would sink," said the
Scarecrow.

So there seemed no way out of their dilemma and being helpless they
simply sat still. Ojo, who was on the front of the raft, looked over
into the water and thought he saw some large fishes swimming about. He
found a loose end of the clothesline which fastened the logs together,
and taking a gold nail from his pocket he bent it nearly double, to
form a hook, and tied it to the end of the line. Having baited the hook
with some bread which he broke from his loaf, he dropped the line into
the water and almost instantly it was seized by a great fish.

They knew it was a great fish, because it pulled so hard on the line
that it dragged the raft forward even faster than the current of the
river had carried it. The fish was frightened, and it was a strong
swimmer. As the other end of the clothesline was bound around the logs
he could not get it away, and as he had greedily swallowed the gold
hook at the first bite he could not get rid of that, either.

When they reached the place where the current had before changed, the
fish was still swimming ahead in its wild attempt to escape. The raft
slowed down, yet it did not stop, because the fish would not let it. It
continued to move in the same direction it had been going. As the
current reversed and rushed backward on its course it failed to drag
the raft with it. Slowly, inch by inch, they floated on, and the fish
tugged and tugged and kept them going.

"I hope he won't give up," said Ojo anxiously. "If the fish can hold
out until the current changes again, we'll be all right."

The fish did not give up, but held the raft bravely on its course, till
at last the water in the river shifted again and floated them the way
they wanted to go. But now the captive fish found its strength failing.
Seeking a refuge, it began to drag the raft toward the shore. As they
did not wish to land in this place the boy cut the rope with his
pocket-knife and set the fish free, just in time to prevent the raft
from grounding.

The next time the river backed up the Scarecrow managed to seize the
branch of a tree that overhung the water and they all assisted him to
hold fast and prevent the raft from being carried backward. While they
waited here, Ojo spied a long broken branch lying upon the bank, so he
leaped ashore and got it. When he had stripped off the side shoots he
believed he could use the branch as a pole, to guide the raft in case
of emergency.

They clung to the tree until they found the water flowing the right
way, when they let go and permitted the raft to resume its voyage. In
spite of these pauses they were really making good progress toward the
Winkie Country and having found a way to conquer the adverse current
their spirits rose considerably. They could see little of the country
through which they were passing, because of the high banks, and they
met with no boats or other craft upon the surface of the river.

Once more the trick river reversed its current, but this time the
Scarecrow was on guard and used the pole to push the raft toward a big
rock which lay in the water. He believed the rock would prevent their
floating backward with the current, and so it did. They clung to this
anchorage until the water resumed its proper direction, when they
allowed the raft to drift on.

Floating around a bend they saw ahead a high bank of water, extending
across the entire river, and toward this they were being irresistibly
carried. There being no way to arrest the progress of the raft they
clung fast to the logs and let the river sweep them on. Swiftly the
raft climbed the bank of water and slid down on the other side,
plunging its edge deep into the water and drenching them all with spray.

As again the raft righted and drifted on, Dorothy and Ojo laughed at
the ducking they had received; but Scraps was much dismayed and the
Scarecrow took out his handkerchief and wiped the water off the
Patchwork Girl's patches as well as he was able to. The sun soon dried
her and the colors of her patches proved good, for they did not run
together nor did they fade.

After passing the wall of water the current did not change or flow
backward any more but continued to sweep them steadily forward. The
banks of the river grew lower, too, permitting them to see more of the
country, and presently they discovered yellow buttercups and dandelions
growing amongst the grass, from which evidence they knew they had
reached the Winkie Country.

"Don't you think we ought to land?" Dorothy asked the Scarecrow.

"Pretty soon," he replied. "The Tin Woodman's castle is in the southern
part of the Winkie Country, and so it can't be a great way from here."

Fearing they might drift too far, Dorothy and Ojo now stood up and
raised the Scarecrow in their arms, as high as they could, thus
allowing him a good view of the country. For a time he saw nothing he
recognized, but finally he cried:

"There it is! There it is!"

"What?" asked Dorothy.

"The Tin Woodman's tin castle. I can see its turrets glittering in the
sun. It's quite a way off, but we'd better land as quickly as we can."

They let him down and began to urge the raft toward the shore by means
of the pole. It obeyed very well, for the current was more sluggish
now, and soon they had reached the bank and landed safely.

The Winkie Country was really beautiful, and across the fields they
could see afar the silvery sheen of the tin castle. With light hearts
they hurried toward it, being fully rested by their long ride on the
river.

By and by they began to cross an immense field of splendid yellow
lilies, the delicate fragrance of which was very delightful.

"How beautiful they are!" cried Dorothy, stopping to admire the
perfection of these exquisite flowers.

"Yes," said the Scarecrow, reflectively, "but we must be careful not to
crush or injure any of these lilies."

"Why not?" asked Ojo.

"The Tin Woodman is very kind-hearted," was the reply, "and he hates to
see any living thing hurt in any way."

"Are flowers alive?" asked Scraps.

"Yes, of course. And these flowers belong to the Tin Woodman. So, in
order not to offend him, we must not tread on a single blossom."

"Once," said Dorothy, "the Tin Woodman stepped on a beetle and killed
the little creature. That made him very unhappy and he cried until his
tears rusted his joints, so he couldn't move 'em."

"What did he do then?" asked Ojo.

"Put oil on them, until the joints worked smooth again."

"Oh!" exclaimed the boy, as if a great discovery had flashed across his
mind. But he did not tell anybody what the discovery was and kept the
idea to himself.

It was a long walk, but a pleasant one, and they did not mind it a bit.
Late in the afternoon they drew near to the wonderful tin castle of the
Emperor of the Winkies, and Ojo and Scraps, who had never seen it
before, were filled with amazement.

Tin abounded in the Winkie Country and the Winkies were said to be the
most skillful tinsmiths in all the world. So the Tin Woodman had
employed them in building his magnificent castle, which was all of tin,
from the ground to the tallest turret, and so brightly polished that it
glittered in the sun's rays more gorgeously than silver. Around the
grounds of the castle ran a tin wall, with tin gates; but the gates
stood wide open because the Emperor had no enemies to disturb him.

When they entered the spacious grounds our travelers found more to
admire. Tin fountains sent sprays of clear water far into the air and
there were many beds of tin flowers, all as perfectly formed as any
natural flowers might be. There were tin trees, too, and here and there
shady bowers of tin, with tin benches and chairs to sit upon. Also, on
the sides of the pathway leading up to the front door of the castle,
were rows of tin statuary, very cleverly executed. Among these Ojo
recognized statues of Dorothy, Toto, the Scarecrow, the Wizard, the
Shaggy Man, Jack Pumpkinhead and Ozma, all standing upon neat pedestals
of tin.

Toto was well acquainted with the residence of the Tin Woodman and,
being assured a joyful welcome, he ran ahead and barked so loudly at
the front door that the Tin Woodman heard him and came out in person to
see if it were really his old friend Toto. Next moment the tin man had
clasped the Scarecrow in a warm embrace and then turned to hug Dorothy.
But now his eye was arrested by the strange sight of the Patchwork
Girl, and he gazed upon her in mingled wonder and admiration.




Chapter Twenty-Seven

The Tin Woodman Objects


The Tin Woodman was one of the most important personages in all Oz.
Though Emperor of the Winkies, he owed allegiance to Ozma, who ruled
all the land, and the girl and the tin man were warm personal friends.
He was something of a dandy and kept his tin body brilliantly polished
and his tin joints well oiled. Also he was very courteous in manner and
so kind and gentle that everyone loved him. The Emperor greeted Ojo and
Scraps with cordial hospitality and ushered the entire party into his
handsome tin parlor, where all the furniture and pictures were made of
tin. The walls were paneled with tin and from the tin ceiling hung tin
chandeliers.

The Tin Woodman wanted to know, first of all, where Dorothy had found
the Patchwork Girl, so between them the visitors told the story of how
Scraps was made, as well as the accident to Margolotte and Unc Nunkie
and how Ojo had set out upon a journey to procure the things needed for
the Crooked Magician's magic charm. Then Dorothy told of their
adventures in the Quadling Country and how at last they succeeded in
getting the water from a dark well.

While the little girl was relating these adventures the Tin Woodman sat
in an easy chair listening with intense interest, while the others sat
grouped around him. Ojo, however, had kept his eyes fixed upon the body
of the tin Emperor, and now he noticed that under the joint of his left
knee a tiny drop of oil was forming. He watched this drop of oil with a
fast-beating heart, and feeling in his pocket brought out a tiny vial
of crystal, which he held secreted in his hand.

Presently the Tin Woodman changed his position, and at once Ojo, to the
astonishment of all, dropped to the floor and held his crystal vial
under the Emperor's knee joint. Just then the drop of oil fell, and the
boy caught it in his bottle and immediately corked it tight. Then, with
a red face and embarrassed manner, he rose to confront the others.

"What in the world were you doing?" asked the Tin Woodman.

"I caught a drop of oil that fell from your knee-joint," confessed Ojo.

"A drop of oil!" exclaimed the Tin Woodman. "Dear me, how careless my
valet must have been in oiling me this morning. I'm afraid I shall have
to scold the fellow, for I can't be dropping oil wherever I go."

"Never mind," said Dorothy. "Ojo seems glad to have the oil, for some
reason."

"Yes," declared the Munchkin boy, "I am glad. For one of the things the
Crooked Magician sent me to get was a drop of oil from a live man's
body. I had no idea, at first, that there was such a thing; but it's
now safe in the little crystal vial."

"You are very welcome to it, indeed," said the Tin Woodman. "Have you
now secured all the things you were in search of?"

"Not quite all," answered Ojo. "There were five things I had to get,
and I have found four of them. I have the three hairs in the tip of a
Woozy's tail, a six-leaved clover, a gill of water from a dark well and
a drop of oil from a live man's body. The last thing is the easiest of
all to get, and I'm sure that my dear Unc Nunkie--and good Margolotte,
as well--will soon be restored to life."

The Munchkin boy said this with much pride and pleasure.

"Good!" exclaimed the Tin Woodman; "I congratulate you. But what is the
fifth and last thing you need, in order to complete the magic charm?"

"The left wing of a yellow butterfly," said Ojo. "In this yellow
country, and with your kind assistance, that ought to be very easy to
find."

The Tin Woodman stared at him in amazement.

"Surely you are joking!" he said.

"No," replied Ojo, much surprised; "I am in earnest."

"But do you think for a moment that I would permit you, or anyone else,
to pull the left wing from a yellow butterfly?" demanded the Tin
Woodman sternly.

"Why not, sir?"

"Why not? You ask me why not? It would be cruel--one of the most cruel
and heartless deeds I ever heard of," asserted the Tin Woodman. "The
butterflies are among the prettiest of all created things, and they are
very sensitive to pain. To tear a wing from one would cause it
exquisite torture and it would soon die in great agony. I would not
permit such a wicked deed under any circumstances!"

Ojo was astounded at hearing this. Dorothy, too, looked grave and
disconcerted, but she knew in her heart that the Tin Woodman was right.
The Scarecrow nodded his head in approval of his friend's speech, so it
was evident that he agreed with the Emperor's decision. Scraps looked
from one to another in perplexity.

"Who cares for a butterfly?" she asked.

"Don't you?" inquired the Tin Woodman.

"Not the snap of a finger, for I have no heart," said the Patchwork
Girl. "But I want to help Ojo, who is my friend, to rescue the uncle
whom he loves, and I'd kill a dozen useless butterflies to enable him
to do that."

The Tin Woodman sighed regretfully.

"You have kind instincts," he said, "and with a heart you would indeed
be a fine creature. I cannot blame you for your heartless remark, as
you cannot understand the feelings of those who possess hearts. I, for
instance, have a very neat and responsive heart which the wonderful
Wizard of Oz once gave me, and so I shall never--never--never permit a
poor yellow butterfly to be tortured by anyone."

"The yellow country of the Winkies," said Ojo sadly, "is the only place
in Oz where a yellow butterfly can be found."

"I'm glad of that," said the Tin Woodman. "As I rule the Winkie
Country, I can protect my butterflies."

"Unless I get the wing--just one left wing--" said Ojo miserably, "I
can't save Unc Nunkie."

"Then he must remain a marble statue forever," declared the Tin
Emperor, firmly.

Ojo wiped his eyes, for he could not hold back the tears.

"I'll tell you what to do," said Scraps. "We'll take a whole yellow
butterfly, alive and well, to the Crooked Magician, and let him pull
the left wing off."

"No, you won't," said the Tin Woodman. "You can't have one of my dear
little butterflies to treat in that way."

"Then what in the world shall we do?" asked Dorothy.

They all became silent and thoughtful. No one spoke for a long time.
Then the Tin Woodman suddenly roused himself and said:

"We must all go back to the Emerald City and ask Ozma's advice. She's a
wise little girl, our Ruler, and she may find a way to help Ojo save
his Unc Nunkie."

So the following morning the party started on the journey to the
Emerald City, which they reached in due time without any important
adventure. It was a sad journey for Ojo, for without the wing of the
yellow butterfly he saw no way to save Unc Nunkie--unless he waited six
years for the Crooked Magician to make a new lot of the Powder of Life.
The boy was utterly discouraged, and as he walked along he groaned
aloud.

"Is anything hurting you?" inquired the Tin Woodman in a kindly tone,
for the Emperor was with the party.

"I'm Ojo the Unlucky," replied the boy. "I might have known I would
fail in anything I tried to do."

"Why are you Ojo the Unlucky?" asked the tin man.

"Because I was born on a Friday."

"Friday is not unlucky," declared the Emperor. "It's just one of seven
days. Do you suppose all the world becomes unlucky one-seventh of the
time?"

"It was the thirteenth day of the month," said Ojo.

"Thirteen! Ah, that is indeed a lucky number," replied the Tin Woodman.
"All my good luck seems to happen on the thirteenth. I suppose most
people never notice the good luck that comes to them with the number
13, and yet if the least bit of bad luck falls on that day, they blame
it to the number, and not to the proper cause."

"Thirteen's my lucky number, too," remarked the Scarecrow.

"And mine," said Scraps. "I've just thirteen patches on my head."

"But," continued Ojo, "I'm left-handed."

"Many of our greatest men are that way," asserted the Emperor. "To be
left-handed is usually to be two-handed; the right-handed people are
usually one-handed."

"And I've a wart under my right arm," said Ojo.

"How lucky!" cried the Tin Woodman. "If it were on the end of your nose
it might be unlucky, but under your arm it is luckily out of the way."

"For all those reasons," said the Munchkin boy, "I have been called Ojo
the Unlucky."

"Then we must turn over a new leaf and call you henceforth Ojo the
Lucky," declared the tin man. "Every reason you have given is absurd.
But I have noticed that those who continually dread ill luck and fear
it will overtake them, have no time to take advantage of any good
fortune that comes their way. Make up your mind to be Ojo the Lucky."

"How can I?" asked the boy, "when all my attempts to save my dear uncle
have failed?"

"Never give up, Ojo," advised Dorothy. "No one ever knows what's going
to happen next."

Ojo did not reply, but he was so dejected that even their arrival at
the Emerald City failed to interest him.

The people joyfully cheered the appearance of the Tin Woodman, the
Scarecrow and Dorothy, who were all three general favorites, and on
entering the royal palace word came to them from Ozma that she would at
once grant them an audience.

Dorothy told the girl Ruler how successful they had been in their quest
until they came to the item of the yellow butterfly, which the Tin
Woodman positively refused to sacrifice to the magic potion.

"He is quite right," said Ozma, who did not seem a bit surprised. "Had
Ojo told me that one of the things he sought was the wing of a yellow
butterfly I would have informed him, before he started out, that he
could never secure it. Then you would have been saved the troubles and
annoyances of your long journey."

"I didn't mind the journey at all," said Dorothy; "it was fun."

"As it has turned out," remarked Ojo, "I can never get the things the
Crooked Magician sent me for; and so, unless I wait the six years for
him to make the Powder of Life, Unc Nunkie cannot be saved."

Ozma smiled.

"Dr. Pipt will make no more Powder of Life, I promise you," said she.
"I have sent for him and had him brought to this palace, where he now
is, and his four kettles have been destroyed and his book of recipes
burned up. I have also had brought here the marble statues of your
uncle and of Margolotte, which are standing in the next room."

They were all greatly astonished at this announcement.

"Oh, let me see Unc Nunkie! Let me see him at once, please!" cried Ojo
eagerly.

"Wait a moment," replied Ozma, "for I have something more to say.
Nothing that happens in the Land of Oz escapes the notice of our wise
Sorceress, Glinda the Good. She knew all about the magic-making of Dr.
Pipt, and how he had brought the Glass Cat and the Patchwork Girl to
life, and the accident to Unc Nunkie and Margolotte, and of Ojo's quest
and his journey with Dorothy. Glinda also knew that Ojo would fail to
find all the things he sought, so she sent for our Wizard and
instructed him what to do. Something is going to happen in this palace,
presently, and that 'something' will, I am sure, please you all. And
now," continued the girl Ruler, rising from her chair, "you may follow
me into the next room."




Chapter Twenty-Eight

The Wonderful Wizard of Oz


When Ojo entered the room he ran quickly to the statue of Unc Nunkie
and kissed the marble face affectionately.

"I did my best, Unc," he said, with a sob, "but it was no use!"

Then he drew back and looked around the room, and the sight of the
assembled company quite amazed him.

Aside from the marble statues of Unc Nunkie and Margolotte, the Glass
Cat was there, curled up on a rug; and the Woozy was there, sitting on
its square hind legs and looking on the scene with solemn interest; and
there was the Shaggy Man, in a suit of shaggy pea-green satin, and at a
table sat the little Wizard, looking quite important and as if he knew
much more than he cared to tell.

Last of all, Dr. Pipt was there, and the Crooked Magician sat humped up
in a chair, seeming very dejected but keeping his eyes fixed on the
lifeless form of his wife Margolotte, whom he fondly loved but whom he
now feared was lost to him forever.

Ozma took a chair which Jellia Jamb wheeled forward for the Ruler, and
back of her stood the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman and Dorothy, as well
as the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger. The Wizard now arose and
made a low bow to Ozma and another less deferent bow to the assembled
company.

"Ladies and gentlemen and beasts," he said, "I beg to announce that our
Gracious Ruler has permitted me to obey the commands of the great
Sorceress, Glinda the Good, whose humble Assistant I am proud to be. We
have discovered that the Crooked Magician has been indulging in his
magical arts contrary to Law, and therefore, by Royal Edict, I hereby
deprive him of all power to work magic in the future. He is no longer a
crooked magician, but a simple Munchkin; he is no longer even crooked,
but a man like other men."

As he pronounced these words the Wizard waved his hand toward Dr. Pipt
and instantly every crooked limb straightened out and became perfect.
The former magician, with a cry of joy, sprang to his feet, looked at
himself in wonder, and then fell back in his chair and watched the
Wizard with fascinated interest.

"The Glass Cat, which Dr. Pipt lawlessly made," continued the Wizard,
"is a pretty cat, but its pink brains made it so conceited that it was
a disagreeable companion to everyone. So the other day I took away the
pink brains and replaced them with transparent ones, and now the Glass
Cat is so modest and well behaved that Ozma has decided to keep her in
the palace as a pet."

"I thank you," said the cat, in a soft voice.

"The Woozy has proved himself a good Woozy and a faithful friend," the
Wizard went on, "so we will send him to the Royal Menagerie, where he
will have good care and plenty to eat all his life."

"Much obliged," said the Woozy. "That beats being fenced up in a lonely
forest and starved."

"As for the Patchwork Girl," resumed the Wizard, "she is so remarkable
in appearance, and so clever and good tempered, that our Gracious Ruler
intends to preserve her carefully, as one of the curiosities of the
curious Land of Oz. Scraps may live in the palace, or wherever she
pleases, and be nobody's servant but her own."

"That's all right," said Scraps.

"We have all been interested in Ojo," the little Wizard continued,
"because his love for his unfortunate uncle has led him bravely to face
all sorts of dangers, in order that he might rescue him. The Munchkin
boy has a loyal and generous heart and has done his best to restore Unc
Nunkie to life. He has failed, but there are others more powerful than
the Crooked Magician, and there are more ways than Dr. Pipt knew of to
destroy the charm of the Liquid of Petrifaction. Glinda the Good has
told me of one way, and you shall now learn how great is the knowledge
and power of our peerless Sorceress."

As he said this the Wizard advanced to the statue of Margolote and made
a magic pass, at the same time muttering a magic word that none could
hear distinctly. At once the woman moved, turned her head wonderingly
this way and that, to note all who stood before her, and seeing Dr.
Pipt, ran forward and threw herself into her husband's outstretched
arms.

Then the Wizard made the magic pass and spoke the magic word before the
statue of Unc Nunkie. The old Munchkin immediately came to life and
with a low bow to the Wizard said: "Thanks."

But now Ojo rushed up and threw his arms joyfully about his uncle, and
the old man hugged his little nephew tenderly and stroked his hair and
wiped away the boy's tears with a handkerchief, for Ojo was crying from
pure happiness.

Ozma came forward to congratulate them.

"I have given to you, my dear Ojo and Unc Nunkie, a nice house just
outside the walls of the Emerald City," she said, "and there you shall
make your future home and be under my protection."

"Didn't I say you were Ojo the Lucky?" asked the Tin Woodman, as
everyone crowded around to shake Ojo's hand.

"Yes; and it is true!" replied Ojo, gratefully.

========================================
