========================================

MASTER AND MAN

By Leo Tolstoy


Translated by Louise and Aylmer Maude





I

It happened in the 'seventies in winter, on the day after St. Nicholas's
Day. There was a fete in the parish and the innkeeper, Vasili Andreevich
Brekhunov, a Second Guild merchant, being a church elder had to go to
church, and had also to entertain his relatives and friends at home.

But when the last of them had gone he at once began to prepare to drive
over to see a neighbouring proprietor about a grove which he had been
bargaining over for a long time. He was now in a hurry to start,
lest buyers from the town might forestall him in making a profitable
purchase.

The youthful landowner was asking ten thousand rubles for the grove
simply because Vasili Andreevich was offering seven thousand. Seven
thousand was, however, only a third of its real value. Vasili Andreevich
might perhaps have got it down to his own price, for the woods were in
his district and he had a long-standing agreement with the other village
dealers that no one should run up the price in another's district, but
he had now learnt that some timber-dealers from town meant to bid for
the Goryachkin grove, and he resolved to go at once and get the matter
settled. So as soon as the feast was over, he took seven hundred rubles
from his strong box, added to them two thousand three hundred rubles of
church money he had in his keeping, so as to make up the sum to three
thousand; carefully counted the notes, and having put them into his
pocket-book made haste to start.

Nikita, the only one of Vasili Andreevich's labourers who was not drunk
that day, ran to harness the horse. Nikita, though an habitual drunkard,
was not drunk that day because since the last day before the fast, when
he had drunk his coat and leather boots, he had sworn off drink and
had kept his vow for two months, and was still keeping it despite the
temptation of the vodka that had been drunk everywhere during the first
two days of the feast.

Nikita was a peasant of about fifty from a neighbouring village, 'not
a manager' as the peasants said of him, meaning that he was not the
thrifty head of a household but lived most of his time away from home
as a labourer. He was valued everywhere for his industry, dexterity, and
strength at work, and still more for his kindly and pleasant temper. But
he never settled down anywhere for long because about twice a year, or
even oftener, he had a drinking bout, and then besides spending all his
clothes on drink he became turbulent and quarrelsome. Vasili Andreevich
himself had turned him away several times, but had afterwards taken him
back again--valuing his honesty, his kindness to animals, and especially
his cheapness. Vasili Andreevich did not pay Nikita the eighty rubles
a year such a man was worth, but only about forty, which he gave him
haphazard, in small sums, and even that mostly not in cash but in goods
from his own shop and at high prices.

Nikita's wife Martha, who had once been a handsome vigorous woman,
managed the homestead with the help of her son and two daughters, and
did not urge Nikita to live at home: first because she had been living
for some twenty years already with a cooper, a peasant from another
village who lodged in their house; and secondly because though she
managed her husband as she pleased when he was sober, she feared him
like fire when he was drunk. Once when he had got drunk at home, Nikita,
probably to make up for his submissiveness when sober, broke open her
box, took out her best clothes, snatched up an axe, and chopped all her
undergarments and dresses to bits. All the wages Nikita earned went to
his wife, and he raised no objection to that. So now, two days before
the holiday, Martha had been twice to see Vasili Andreevich and had got
from him wheat flour, tea, sugar, and a quart of vodka, the lot costing
three rubles, and also five rubles in cash, for which she thanked him as
for a special favour, though he owed Nikita at least twenty rubles.

'What agreement did we ever draw up with you?' said Vasili Andreevich
to Nikita. 'If you need anything, take it; you will work it off. I'm not
like others to keep you waiting, and making up accounts and reckoning
fines. We deal straight-forwardly. You serve me and I don't neglect
you.'

And when saying this Vasili Andreevich was honestly convinced that he
was Nikita's benefactor, and he knew how to put it so plausibly that
all those who depended on him for their money, beginning with Nikita,
confirmed him in the conviction that he was their benefactor and did not
overreach them.

'Yes, I understand, Vasili Andreevich. You know that I serve you and
take as much pains as I would for my own father. I understand very
well!' Nikita would reply. He was quite aware that Vasili Andreevich was
cheating him, but at the same time he felt that it was useless to try
to clear up his accounts with him or explain his side of the matter, and
that as long as he had nowhere to go he must accept what he could get.

Now, having heard his master's order to harness, he went as usual
cheerfully and willingly to the shed, stepping briskly and easily on his
rather turned-in feet; took down from a nail the heavy tasselled leather
bridle, and jingling the rings of the bit went to the closed stable
where the horse he was to harness was standing by himself.

'What, feeling lonely, feeling lonely, little silly?' said Nikita in
answer to the low whinny with which he was greeted by the good-tempered,
medium-sized bay stallion, with a rather slanting crupper, who stood
alone in the shed. 'Now then, now then, there's time enough. Let me
water you first,' he went on, speaking to the horse just as to someone
who understood the words he was using, and having whisked the dusty,
grooved back of the well-fed young stallion with the skirt of his
coat, he put a bridle on his handsome head, straightened his ears and
forelock, and having taken off his halter led him out to water.

Picking his way out of the dung-strewn stable, Mukhorty frisked, and
making play with his hind leg pretended that he meant to kick Nikita,
who was running at a trot beside him to the pump.

'Now then, now then, you rascal!' Nikita called out, well knowing how
carefully Mukhorty threw out his hind leg just to touch his greasy
sheepskin coat but not to strike him--a trick Nikita much appreciated.

After a drink of the cold water the horse sighed, moving his strong wet
lips, from the hairs of which transparent drops fell into the trough;
then standing still as if in thought, he suddenly gave a loud snort.

'If you don't want any more, you needn't. But don't go asking for any
later,' said Nikita quite seriously and fully explaining his conduct to
Mukhorty. Then he ran back to the shed pulling the playful young horse,
who wanted to gambol all over the yard, by the rein.

There was no one else in the yard except a stranger, the cook's husband,
who had come for the holiday.

'Go and ask which sledge is to be harnessed--the wide one or the small
one--there's a good fellow!'

The cook's husband went into the house, which stood on an iron
foundation and was iron-roofed, and soon returned saying that the little
one was to be harnessed. By that time Nikita had put the collar and
brass-studded belly-band on Mukhorty and, carrying a light, painted
shaft-bow in one hand, was leading the horse with the other up to two
sledges that stood in the shed.

'All right, let it be the little one!' he said, backing the intelligent
horse, which all the time kept pretending to bite him, into the shafts,
and with the aid of the cook's husband he proceeded to harness. When
everything was nearly ready and only the reins had to be adjusted,
Nikita sent the other man to the shed for some straw and to the barn for
a drugget.

'There, that's all right! Now, now, don't bristle up!' said Nikita,
pressing down into the sledge the freshly threshed oat straw the cook's
husband had brought. 'And now let's spread the sacking like this, and
the drugget over it. There, like that it will be comfortable sitting,'
he went on, suiting the action to the words and tucking the drugget all
round over the straw to make a seat.

'Thank you, dear man. Things always go quicker with two working at it!'
he added. And gathering up the leather reins fastened together by a
brass ring, Nikita took the driver's seat and started the impatient
horse over the frozen manure which lay in the yard, towards the gate.

'Uncle Nikita! I say, Uncle, Uncle!' a high-pitched voice shouted, and a
seven-year-old boy in a black sheepskin coat, new white felt boots, and
a warm cap, ran hurriedly out of the house into the yard. 'Take me with
you!' he cried, fastening up his coat as he ran.

'All right, come along, darling!' said Nikita, and stopping the sledge
he picked up the master's pale thin little son, radiant with joy, and
drove out into the road.

It was past two o'clock and the day was windy, dull, and cold, with more
than twenty degrees Fahrenheit of frost. Half the sky was hidden by a
lowering dark cloud. In the yard it was quiet, but in the street the
wind was felt more keenly. The snow swept down from a neighbouring shed
and whirled about in the corner near the bath-house.

Hardly had Nikita driven out of the yard and turned the horse's head to
the house, before Vasili Andreevich emerged from the high porch in front
of the house with a cigarette in his mouth and wearing a cloth-covered
sheep-skin coat tightly girdled low at his waist, and stepped onto the
hard-trodden snow which squeaked under the leather soles of his felt
boots, and stopped. Taking a last whiff of his cigarette he threw it
down, stepped on it, and letting the smoke escape through his moustache
and looking askance at the horse that was coming up, began to tuck
in his sheepskin collar on both sides of his ruddy face, clean-shaven
except for the moustache, so that his breath should not moisten the
collar.

'See now! The young scamp is there already!' he exclaimed when he saw
his little son in the sledge. Vasili Andreevich was excited by the vodka
he had drunk with his visitors, and so he was even more pleased than
usual with everything that was his and all that he did. The sight of
his son, whom he always thought of as his heir, now gave him great
satisfaction. He looked at him, screwing up his eyes and showing his
long teeth.

His wife--pregnant, thin and pale, with her head and shoulders wrapped
in a shawl so that nothing of her face could be seen but her eyes--stood
behind him in the vestibule to see him off.

'Now really, you ought to take Nikita with you,' she said timidly,
stepping out from the doorway.

Vasili Andreevich did not answer. Her words evidently annoyed him and he
frowned angrily and spat.

'You have money on you,' she continued in the same plaintive voice.
'What if the weather gets worse! Do take him, for goodness' sake!'

'Why? Don't I know the road that I must needs take a guide?' exclaimed
Vasili Andreevich, uttering every word very distinctly and compressing
his lips unnaturally, as he usually did when speaking to buyers and
sellers.

'Really you ought to take him. I beg you in God's name!' his wife
repeated, wrapping her shawl more closely round her head.

'There, she sticks to it like a leech!... Where am I to take him?'

'I'm quite ready to go with you, Vasili Andreevich,' said Nikita
cheerfully. 'But they must feed the horses while I am away,' he added,
turning to his master's wife.

'I'll look after them, Nikita dear. I'll tell Simon,' replied the
mistress.

'Well, Vasili Andreevich, am I to come with you?' said Nikita, awaiting
a decision.

'It seems I must humour my old woman. But if you're coming you'd better
put on a warmer cloak,' said Vasili Andreevich, smiling again as he
winked at Nikita's short sheepskin coat, which was torn under the arms
and at the back, was greasy and out of shape, frayed to a fringe round
the skirt, and had endured many things in its lifetime.

'Hey, dear man, come and hold the horse!' shouted Nikita to the cook's
husband, who was still in the yard.

'No, I will myself, I will myself!' shrieked the little boy, pulling his
hands, red with cold, out of his pockets, and seizing the cold leather
reins.

'Only don't be too long dressing yourself up. Look alive!' shouted
Vasili Andreevich, grinning at Nikita.

'Only a moment, Father, Vasili Andreevich!' replied Nikita, and running
quickly with his inturned toes in his felt boots with their soles
patched with felt, he hurried across the yard and into the workmen's
hut.

'Arinushka! Get my coat down from the stove. I'm going with the master,'
he said, as he ran into the hut and took down his girdle from the nail
on which it hung.

The workmen's cook, who had had a sleep after dinner and was now getting
the samovar ready for her husband, turned cheerfully to Nikita, and
infected by his hurry began to move as quickly as he did, got down his
miserable worn-out cloth coat from the stove where it was drying, and
began hurriedly shaking it out and smoothing it down.

'There now, you'll have a chance of a holiday with your good man,' said
Nikita, who from kindhearted politeness always said something to anyone
he was alone with.

Then, drawing his worn narrow girdle round him, he drew in his breath,
pulling in his lean stomach still more, and girdled himself as tightly
as he could over his sheepskin.

'There now,' he said addressing himself no longer to the cook but the
girdle, as he tucked the ends in at the waist, 'now you won't come
undone!' And working his shoulders up and down to free his arms, he put
the coat over his sheepskin, arched his back more strongly to ease his
arms, poked himself under the armpits, and took down his leather-covered
mittens from the shelf. 'Now we're all right!'

'You ought to wrap your feet up, Nikita. Your boots are very bad.'

Nikita stopped as if he had suddenly realized this.

'Yes, I ought to.... But they'll do like this. It isn't far!' and he
ran out into the yard.

'Won't you be cold, Nikita?' said the mistress as he came up to the
sledge.

'Cold? No, I'm quite warm,' answered Nikita as he pushed some straw
up to the forepart of the sledge so that it should cover his feet, and
stowed away the whip, which the good horse would not need, at the bottom
of the sledge.

Vasili Andreevich, who was wearing two fur-lined coats one over the
other, was already in the sledge, his broad back filling nearly its
whole rounded width, and taking the reins he immediately touched the
horse. Nikita jumped in just as the sledge started, and seated himself
in front on the left side, with one leg hanging over the edge.




II

The good stallion took the sledge along at a brisk pace over the
smooth-frozen road through the village, the runners squeaking slightly
as they went.

'Look at him hanging on there! Hand me the whip, Nikita!' shouted Vasili
Andreevich, evidently enjoying the sight of his 'heir,' who standing on
the runners was hanging on at the back of the sledge. 'I'll give it you!
Be off to mamma, you dog!'

The boy jumped down. The horse increased his amble and, suddenly
changing foot, broke into a fast trot.

The Crosses, the village where Vasili Andreevich lived, consisted of six
houses. As soon as they had passed the blacksmith's hut, the last in
the village, they realized that the wind was much stronger than they
had thought. The road could hardly be seen. The tracks left by the
sledge-runners were immediately covered by snow and the road was only
distinguished by the fact that it was higher than the rest of the
ground. There was a swirl of snow over the fields and the line where sky
and earth met could not be seen. The Telyatin forest, usually clearly
visible, now only loomed up occasionally and dimly through the driving
snowy dust. The wind came from the left, insistently blowing over to
one side the mane on Mukhorty's sleek neck and carrying aside even his
fluffy tail, which was tied in a simple knot. Nikita's wide coat-collar,
as he sat on the windy side, pressed close to his cheek and nose.

'This road doesn't give him a chance--it's too snowy,' said Vasili
Andreevich, who prided himself on his good horse. 'I once drove to
Pashutino with him in half an hour.'

'What?' asked Nikita, who could not hear on account of his collar.

'I say I once went to Pashutino in half an hour,' shouted Vasili
Andreevich.

'It goes without saying that he's a good horse,' replied Nikita.

They were silent for a while. But Vasili Andreevich wished to talk.

'Well, did you tell your wife not to give the cooper any vodka?' he
began in the same loud tone, quite convinced that Nikita must feel
flattered to be talking with so clever and important a person as
himself, and he was so pleased with his jest that it did not enter his
head that the remark might be unpleasant to Nikita.

The wind again prevented Nikita's hearing his master's words.

Vasili Andreevich repeated the jest about the cooper in his loud, clear
voice.

'That's their business, Vasili Andreevich. I don't pry into their
affairs. As long as she doesn't ill-treat our boy--God be with them.'

'That's so,' said Vasili Andreevich. 'Well, and will you be buying a
horse in spring?' he went on, changing the subject.

'Yes, I can't avoid it,' answered Nikita, turning down his collar and
leaning back towards his master.

The conversation now became interesting to him and he did not wish to
lose a word.

'The lad's growing up. He must begin to plough for himself, but till now
we've always had to hire someone,' he said.

'Well, why not have the lean-cruppered one. I won't charge much for it,'
shouted Vasili Andreevich, feeling animated, and consequently starting
on his favourite occupation--that of horse-dealing--which absorbed all
his mental powers.

'Or you might let me have fifteen rubles and I'll buy one at the
horse-market,' said Nikita, who knew that the horse Vasili Andreevich
wanted to sell him would be dear at seven rubles, but that if he took it
from him it would be charged at twenty-five, and then he would be unable
to draw any money for half a year.

'It's a good horse. I think of your interest as of my own--according to
conscience. Brekhunov isn't a man to wrong anyone. Let the loss be mine.
I'm not like others. Honestly!' he shouted in the voice in which he
hypnotized his customers and dealers. 'It's a real good horse.'

'Quite so!' said Nikita with a sigh, and convinced that there was
nothing more to listen to, he again released his collar, which
immediately covered his ear and face.

They drove on in silence for about half an hour. The wind blew sharply
onto Nikita's side and arm where his sheepskin was torn.

He huddled up and breathed into the collar which covered his mouth, and
was not wholly cold.

'What do you think--shall we go through Karamyshevo or by the straight
road?' asked Vasili Andreevich.

The road through Karamyshevo was more frequented and was well marked
with a double row of high stakes. The straight road was nearer but
little used and had no stakes, or only poor ones covered with snow.

Nikita thought awhile.

'Though Karamyshevo is farther, it is better going,' he said.

'But by the straight road, when once we get through the hollow by the
forest, it's good going--sheltered,' said Vasili Andreevich, who wished
to go the nearest way.

'Just as you please,' said Nikita, and again let go of his collar.

Vasili Andreevich did as he had said, and having gone about half a verst
came to a tall oak stake which had a few dry leaves still dangling on
it, and there he turned to the left.

On turning they faced directly against the wind, and snow was beginning
to fall. Vasili Andreevich, who was driving, inflated his cheeks,
blowing the breath out through his moustache. Nikita dozed.

So they went on in silence for about ten minutes. Suddenly Vasili
Andreevich began saying something.

'Eh, what?' asked Nikita, opening his eyes.

Vasili Andreevich did not answer, but bent over, looking behind them and
then ahead of the horse. The sweat had curled Mukhorty's coat between
his legs and on his neck. He went at a walk.

'What is it?' Nikita asked again.

'What is it? What is it?' Vasili Andreevich mimicked him angrily. 'There
are no stakes to be seen! We must have got off the road!'

'Well, pull up then, and I'll look for it,' said Nikita, and jumping
down lightly from the sledge and taking the whip from under the straw,
he went off to the left from his own side of the sledge.

The snow was not deep that year, so that it was possible to walk
anywhere, but still in places it was knee-deep and got into Nikita's
boots. He went about feeling the ground with his feet and the whip, but
could not find the road anywhere.

'Well, how is it?' asked Vasili Andreevich when Nikita came back to the
sledge.

'There is no road this side. I must go to the other side and try there,'
said Nikita.

'There's something there in front. Go and have a look.'

Nikita went to what had appeared dark, but found that it was earth which
the wind had blown from the bare fields of winter oats and had strewn
over the snow, colouring it. Having searched to the right also, he
returned to the sledge, brushed the snow from his coat, shook it out of
his boots, and seated himself once more.

'We must go to the right,' he said decidedly. 'The wind was blowing on
our left before, but now it is straight in my face. Drive to the right,'
he repeated with decision.

Vasili Andreevich took his advice and turned to the right, but still
there was no road. They went on in that direction for some time. The
wind was as fierce as ever and it was snowing lightly.

'It seems, Vasili Andreevich, that we have gone quite astray,' Nikita
suddenly remarked, as if it were a pleasant thing. 'What is that?' he
added, pointing to some potato vines that showed up from under the snow.

Vasili Andreevich stopped the perspiring horse, whose deep sides were
heaving heavily.

'What is it?'

'Why, we are on the Zakharov lands. See where we've got to!'

'Nonsense!' retorted Vasili Andreevich.

'It's not nonsense, Vasili Andreevich. It's the truth,' replied Nikita.
'You can feel that the sledge is going over a potato-field, and there
are the heaps of vines which have been carted here. It's the Zakharov
factory land.'

'Dear me, how we have gone astray!' said Vasili Andreevich. 'What are we
to do now?'

'We must go straight on, that's all. We shall come out somewhere--if not
at Zakharova, then at the proprietor's farm,' said Nikita.

Vasili Andreevich agreed, and drove as Nikita had indicated. So they
went on for a considerable time. At times they came onto bare fields and
the sledge-runners rattled over frozen lumps of earth. Sometimes they
got onto a winter-rye field, or a fallow field on which they could see
stalks of wormwood, and straws sticking up through the snow and swaying
in the wind; sometimes they came onto deep and even white snow, above
which nothing was to be seen.

The snow was falling from above and sometimes rose from below. The horse
was evidently exhausted, his hair had all curled up from sweat and was
covered with hoar-frost, and he went at a walk. Suddenly he stumbled and
sat down in a ditch or water-course. Vasili Andreevich wanted to stop,
but Nikita cried to him:

'Why stop? We've got in and must get out. Hey, pet! Hey, darling! Gee
up, old fellow!' he shouted in a cheerful tone to the horse, jumping out
of the sledge and himself getting stuck in the ditch.

The horse gave a start and quickly climbed out onto the frozen bank. It
was evidently a ditch that had been dug there.

'Where are we now?' asked Vasili Andreevich.

'We'll soon find out!' Nikita replied. 'Go on, we'll get somewhere.'

'Why, this must be the Goryachkin forest!' said Vasili Andreevich,
pointing to something dark that appeared amid the snow in front of them.

'We'll see what forest it is when we get there,' said Nikita.

He saw that beside the black thing they had noticed, dry, oblong
willow-leaves were fluttering, and so he knew it was not a forest but a
settlement, but he did not wish to say so. And in fact they had not gone
twenty-five yards beyond the ditch before something in front of them,
evidently trees, showed up black, and they heard a new and melancholy
sound. Nikita had guessed right: it was not a wood, but a row of tall
willows with a few leaves still fluttering on them here and there. They
had evidently been planted along the ditch round a threshing-floor.
Coming up to the willows, which moaned sadly in the wind, the horse
suddenly planted his forelegs above the height of the sledge, drew up
his hind legs also, pulling the sledge onto higher ground, and turned to
the left, no longer sinking up to his knees in snow. They were back on a
road.

'Well, here we are, but heaven only knows where!' said Nikita.

The horse kept straight along the road through the drifted snow, and
before they had gone another hundred yards the straight line of the
dark wattle wall of a barn showed up black before them, its roof heavily
covered with snow which poured down from it. After passing the barn the
road turned to the wind and they drove into a snow-drift. But ahead of
them was a lane with houses on either side, so evidently the snow had
been blown across the road and they had to drive through the drift. And
so in fact it was. Having driven through the snow they came out into a
street. At the end house of the village some frozen clothes hanging on
a line--shirts, one red and one white, trousers, leg-bands, and a
petticoat--fluttered wildly in the wind. The white shirt in particular
struggled desperately, waving its sleeves about.

'There now, either a lazy woman or a dead one has not taken her clothes
down before the holiday,' remarked Nikita, looking at the fluttering
shirts.




III

At the entrance to the street the wind still raged and the road was
thickly covered with snow, but well within the village it was calm,
warm, and cheerful. At one house a dog was barking, at another a woman,
covering her head with her coat, came running from somewhere and entered
the door of a hut, stopping on the threshold to have a look at the
passing sledge. In the middle of the village girls could be heard
singing.

Here in the village there seemed to be less wind and snow, and the frost
was less keen.

'Why, this is Grishkino,' said Vasili Andreevich.

'So it is,' responded Nikita.

It really was Grishkino, which meant that they had gone too far to the
left and had travelled some six miles, not quite in the direction they
aimed at, but towards their destination for all that.

From Grishkino to Goryachkin was about another four miles.

In the middle of the village they almost ran into a tall man walking
down the middle of the street.

'Who are you?' shouted the man, stopping the horse, and recognizing
Vasili Anereevich he immediately took hold of the shaft, went along it
hand over hand till he reached the sledge, and placed himself on the
driver's seat.

He was Isay, a peasant of Vasili Andreevich's acquaintance, and well
known as the principal horse-thief in the district.

'Ah, Vasili Andreevich! Where are you off to?' said Isay, enveloping
Nikita in the odour of the vodka he had drunk.

'We were going to Goryachkin.'

'And look where you've got to! You should have gone through
Molchanovka.'

'Should have, but didn't manage it,' said Vasili Andreevich, holding in
the horse.

'That's a good horse,' said Isay, with a shrewd glance at Mukhorty, and
with a practised hand he tightened the loosened knot high in the horse's
bushy tail.

'Are you going to stay the night?'

'No, friend. I must get on.'

'Your business must be pressing. And who is this? Ah, Nikita Stepanych!'

'Who else?' replied Nikita. 'But I say, good friend, how are we to avoid
going astray again?'

'Where can you go astray here? Turn back straight down the street and
then when you come out keep straight on. Don't take to the left. You
will come out onto the high road, and then turn to the right.'

'And where do we turn off the high road? As in summer, or the winter
way?' asked Nikita.

'The winter way. As soon as you turn off you'll see some bushes, and
opposite them there is a way-mark--a large oak, one with branches--and
that's the way.'

Vasili Andreevich turned the horse back and drove through the outskirts
of the village.

'Why not stay the night?' Isay shouted after them.

But Vasili Andreevich did not answer and touched up the horse. Four
miles of good road, two of which lay through the forest, seemed easy to
manage, especially as the wind was apparently quieter and the snow had
stopped.

Having driven along the trodden village street, darkened here and there
by fresh manure, past the yard where the clothes hung out and where the
white shirt had broken loose and was now attached only by one frozen
sleeve, they again came within sound of the weird moan of the willows,
and again emerged on the open fields. The storm, far from ceasing,
seemed to have grown yet stronger. The road was completely covered with
drifting snow, and only the stakes showed that they had not lost their
way. But even the stakes ahead of them were not easy to see, since the
wind blew in their faces.

Vasili Andreevich screwed up his eyes, bent down his head, and looked
out for the way-marks, but trusted mainly to the horse's sagacity,
letting it take its own way. And the horse really did not lose the road
but followed its windings, turning now to the right and now to the left
and sensing it under his feet, so that though the snow fell thicker and
the wind strengthened they still continued to see way-marks now to the
left and now to the right of them.

So they travelled on for about ten minutes, when suddenly, through the
slanting screen of wind-driven snow, something black showed up which
moved in front of the horse.

This was another sledge with fellow-travellers. Mukhorty overtook them,
and struck his hoofs against the back of the sledge in front of them.

'Pass on... hey there... get in front!' cried voices from the
sledge.

Vasili Andreevich swerved aside to pass the other sledge.

In it sat three men and a woman, evidently visitors returning from a
feast. One peasant was whacking the snow-covered croup of their little
horse with a long switch, and the other two sitting in front waved their
arms and shouted something. The woman, completely wrapped up and covered
with snow, sat drowsing and bumping at the back.

'Who are you?' shouted Vasili Andreevich.

'From A-a-a...' was all that could be heard.

'I say, where are you from?'

'From A-a-a-a!' one of the peasants shouted with all his might, but
still it was impossible to make out who they were.

'Get along! Keep up!' shouted another, ceaselessly beating his horse
with the switch.

'So you're from a feast, it seems?'

'Go on, go on! Faster, Simon! Get in front! Faster!'

The wings of the sledges bumped against one another, almost got jammed
but managed to separate, and the peasants' sledge began to fall behind.

Their shaggy, big-bellied horse, all covered with snow, breathed heavily
under the low shaft-bow and, evidently using the last of its strength,
vainly endeavoured to escape from the switch, hobbling with its short
legs through the deep snow which it threw up under itself.

Its muzzle, young-looking, with the nether lip drawn up like that of a
fish, nostrils distended and ears pressed back from fear, kept up for a
few seconds near Nikita's shoulder and then began to fall behind.

'Just see what liquor does!' said Nikita. 'They've tired that little
horse to death. What pagans!'

For a few minutes they heard the panting of the tired little horse and
the drunken shouting of the peasants. Then the panting and the shouts
died away, and around them nothing could be heard but the whistling
of the wind in their ears and now and then the squeak of their
sledge-runners over a windswept part of the road.

This encounter cheered and enlivened Vasili Andreevich, and he drove
on more boldly without examining the way-marks, urging on the horse and
trusting to him.

Nikita had nothing to do, and as usual in such circumstances he drowsed,
making up for much sleepless time. Suddenly the horse stopped and Nikita
nearly fell forward onto his nose.

'You know we're off the track again!' said Vasili Andreevich.

'How's that?'

'Why, there are no way-marks to be seen. We must have got off the road
again.'

'Well, if we've lost the road we must find it,' said Nikita curtly, and
getting out and stepping lightly on his pigeon-toed feet he started once
more going about on the snow.

He walked about for a long time, now disappearing and now reappearing,
and finally he came back.

'There is no road here. There may be farther on,' he said, getting into
the sledge.

It was already growing dark. The snow-storm had not increased but had
also not subsided.

'If we could only hear those peasants!' said Vasili Andreevich.

'Well they haven't caught us up. We must have gone far astray. Or maybe
they have lost their way too.'

'Where are we to go then?' asked Vasili Andreevich.

'Why, we must let the horse take its own way,' said Nikita. 'He will
take us right. Let me have the reins.'

Vasili Andreevich gave him the reins, the more willingly because his
hands were beginning to feel frozen in his thick gloves.

Nikita took the reins, but only held them, trying not to shake them
and rejoicing at his favourite's sagacity. And indeed the clever horse,
turning first one ear and then the other now to one side and then to the
other, began to wheel round.

'The one thing he can't do is to talk,' Nikita kept saying. 'See what he
is doing! Go on, go on! You know best. That's it, that's it!'

The wind was now blowing from behind and it felt warmer.

'Yes, he's clever,' Nikita continued, admiring the horse. 'A Kirgiz
horse is strong but stupid. But this one--just see what he's doing with
his ears! He doesn't need any telegraph. He can scent a mile off.'

Before another half-hour had passed they saw something dark ahead of
them--a wood or a village--and stakes again appeared to the right. They
had evidently come out onto the road.

'Why, that's Grishkino again!' Nikita suddenly exclaimed.

And indeed, there on their left was that same barn with the snow flying
from it, and farther on the same line with the frozen washing, shirts
and trousers, which still fluttered desperately in the wind.

Again they drove into the street and again it grew quiet, warm, and
cheerful, and again they could see the manure-stained street and hear
voices and songs and the barking of a dog. It was already so dark that
there were lights in some of the windows.

Half-way through the village Vasili Andreevich turned the horse towards
a large double-fronted brick house and stopped at the porch.

Nikita went to the lighted snow-covered window, in the rays of which
flying snow-flakes glittered, and knocked at it with his whip.

'Who is there?' a voice replied to his knock.

'From Kresty, the Brekhunovs, dear fellow,' answered Nikita. 'Just come
out for a minute.'

Someone moved from the window, and a minute or two later there was the
sound of the passage door as it came unstuck, then the latch of the
outside door clicked and a tall white-bearded peasant, with a sheepskin
coat thrown over his white holiday shirt, pushed his way out holding the
door firmly against the wind, followed by a lad in a red shirt and high
leather boots.

'Is that you, Andreevich?' asked the old man.

'Yes, friend, we've gone astray,' said Vasili Andreevich. 'We wanted to
get to Goryachkin but found ourselves here. We went a second time but
lost our way again.'

'Just see how you have gone astray!' said the old man. 'Petrushka, go
and open the gate!' he added, turning to the lad in the red shirt.

'All right,' said the lad in a cheerful voice, and ran back into the
passage.

'But we're not staying the night,' said Vasili Andreevich.

'Where will you go in the night? You'd better stay!'

'I'd be glad to, but I must go on. It's business, and it can't be
helped.'

'Well, warm yourself at least. The samovar is just ready.'

'Warm myself? Yes, I'll do that,' said Vasili Andreevich. 'It won't get
darker. The moon will rise and it will be lighter. Let's go in and warm
ourselves, Nikita.'

'Well, why not? Let us warm ourselves,' replied Nikita, who was stiff
with cold and anxious to warm his frozen limbs.

Vasili Andreevich went into the room with the old man, and Nikita drove
through the gate opened for him by Petrushka, by whose advice he backed
the horse under the penthouse. The ground was covered with manure and
the tall bow over the horse's head caught against the beam. The hens
and the cock had already settled to roost there, and clucked peevishly,
clinging to the beam with their claws. The disturbed sheep shied and
rushed aside trampling the frozen manure with their hooves. The dog
yelped desperately with fright and anger and then burst out barking like
a puppy at the stranger.

Nikita talked to them all, excused himself to the fowls and assured
them that he would not disturb them again, rebuked the sheep for being
frightened without knowing why, and kept soothing the dog, while he tied
up the horse.

'Now that will be all right,' he said, knocking the snow off his
clothes. 'Just hear how he barks!' he added, turning to the dog. 'Be
quiet, stupid! Be quiet. You are only troubling yourself for nothing.
We're not thieves, we're friends....'

'And these are, it's said, the three domestic counsellors,' remarked the
lad, and with his strong arms he pushed under the pent-roof the sledge
that had remained outside.

'Why counsellors?' asked Nikita.

'That's what is printed in Paulson. A thief creeps to a house--the dog
barks, that means "Be on your guard!" The cock crows, that means, "Get
up!" The cat licks herself--that means, "A welcome guest is coming. Get
ready to receive him!"' said the lad with a smile.

Petrushka could read and write and knew Paulson's primer, his only book,
almost by heart, and he was fond of quoting sayings from it that he
thought suited the occasion, especially when he had had something to
drink, as to-day.

'That's so,' said Nikita.

'You must be chilled through and through,' said Petrushka.

'Yes, I am rather,' said Nikita, and they went across the yard and the
passage into the house.




IV

The household to which Vasili Andreevich had come was one of the richest
in the village. The family had five allotments, besides renting other
land. They had six horses, three cows, two calves, and some twenty
sheep. There were twenty-two members belonging to the homestead: four
married sons, six grandchildren (one of whom, Petrushka, was married),
two great-grandchildren, three orphans, and four daughters-in-law with
their babies. It was one of the few homesteads that remained still
undivided, but even here the dull internal work of disintegration which
would inevitably lead to separation had already begun, starting as usual
among the women. Two sons were living in Moscow as water-carriers, and
one was in the army. At home now were the old man and his wife, their
second son who managed the homestead, the eldest who had come from
Moscow for the holiday, and all the women and children. Besides these
members of the family there was a visitor, a neighbour who was godfather
to one of the children.

Over the table in the room hung a lamp with a shade, which brightly lit
up the tea-things, a bottle of vodka, and some refreshments, besides
illuminating the brick walls, which in the far corner were hung with
icons on both sides of which were pictures. At the head of the table
sat Vasili Andreevich in a black sheepskin coat, sucking his frozen
moustache and observing the room and the people around him with his
prominent hawk-like eyes. With him sat the old, bald, white-bearded
master of the house in a white homespun shirt, and next him the son
home from Moscow for the holiday--a man with a sturdy back and powerful
shoulders and clad in a thin print shirt--then the second son, also
broad-shouldered, who acted as head of the house, and then a lean
red-haired peasant--the neighbour.

Having had a drink of vodka and something to eat, they were about to
take tea, and the samovar standing on the floor beside the brick oven
was already humming. The children could be seen in the top bunks and on
the top of the oven. A woman sat on a lower bunk with a cradle beside
her. The old housewife, her face covered with wrinkles which wrinkled
even her lips, was waiting on Vasili Andreevich.

As Nikita entered the house she was offering her guest a small tumbler
of thick glass which she had just filled with vodka.

'Don't refuse, Vasili Andreevich, you mustn't! Wish us a merry feast.
Drink it, dear!' she said.

The sight and smell of vodka, especially now when he was chilled through
and tired out, much disturbed Nikita's mind. He frowned, and having
shaken the snow off his cap and coat, stopped in front of the icons
as if not seeing anyone, crossed himself three times, and bowed to the
icons. Then, turning to the old master of the house and bowing first
to him, then to all those at table, then to the women who stood by the
oven, and muttering: 'A merry holiday!' he began taking off his outer
things without looking at the table.

'Why, you're all covered with hoar-frost, old fellow!' said the eldest
brother, looking at Nikita's snow-covered face, eyes, and beard.

Nikita took off his coat, shook it again, hung it up beside the oven,
and came up to the table. He too was offered vodka. He went through a
moment of painful hesitation and nearly took up the glass and emptied
the clear fragrant liquid down his throat, but he glanced at Vasili
Andreevich, remembered his oath and the boots that he had sold for
drink, recalled the cooper, remembered his son for whom he had promised
to buy a horse by spring, sighed, and declined it.

'I don't drink, thank you kindly,' he said frowning, and sat down on a
bench near the second window.

'How's that?' asked the eldest brother.

'I just don't drink,' replied Nikita without lifting his eyes but
looking askance at his scanty beard and moustache and getting the
icicles out of them.

'It's not good for him,' said Vasili Andreevich, munching a cracknel
after emptying his glass.

'Well, then, have some tea,' said the kindly old hostess. 'You must
be chilled through, good soul. Why are you women dawdling so with the
samovar?'

'It is ready,' said one of the young women, and after flicking with her
apron the top of the samovar which was now boiling over, she carried it
with an effort to the table, raised it, and set it down with a thud.

Meanwhile Vasili Andreevich was telling how he had lost his way, how
they had come back twice to this same village, and how they had gone
astray and had met some drunken peasants. Their hosts were surprised,
explained where and why they had missed their way, said who the tipsy
people they had met were, and told them how they ought to go.

'A little child could find the way to Molchanovka from here. All you
have to do is to take the right turning from the high road. There's a
bush you can see just there. But you didn't even get that far!' said the
neighbour.

'You'd better stay the night. The women will make up beds for you,' said
the old woman persuasively.

'You could go on in the morning and it would be pleasanter,' said the
old man, confirming what his wife had said.

'I can't, friend. Business!' said Vasili Andreevich. 'Lose an hour and
you can't catch it up in a year,' he added, remembering the grove and
the dealers who might snatch that deal from him. 'We shall get there,
shan't we?' he said, turning to Nikita.

Nikita did not answer for some time, apparently still intent on thawing
out his beard and moustache.

'If only we don't go astray again,' he replied gloomily. He was gloomy
because he passionately longed for some vodka, and the only thing that
could assuage that longing was tea and he had not yet been offered any.

'But we have only to reach the turning and then we shan't go wrong. The
road will be through the forest the whole way,' said Vasili Andreevich.

'It's just as you please, Vasili Andreevich. If we're to go, let us go,'
said Nikita, taking the glass of tea he was offered.

'We'll drink our tea and be off.'

Nikita said nothing but only shook his head, and carefully pouring some
tea into his saucer began warming his hands, the fingers of which were
always swollen with hard work, over the steam. Then, biting off a tiny
bit of sugar, he bowed to his hosts, said, 'Your health!' and drew in
the steaming liquid.

'If somebody would see us as far as the turning,' said Vasili
Andreevich.

'Well, we can do that,' said the eldest son. 'Petrushka will harness and
go that far with you.'

'Well, then, put in the horse, lad, and I shall be thankful to you for
it.'

'Oh, what for, dear man?' said the kindly old woman. 'We are heartily
glad to do it.'

'Petrushka, go and put in the mare,' said the eldest brother.

'All right,' replied Petrushka with a smile, and promptly snatching his
cap down from a nail he ran away to harness.

While the horse was being harnessed the talk returned to the point at
which it had stopped when Vasili Andreevich drove up to the window. The
old man had been complaining to his neighbour, the village elder, about
his third son who had not sent him anything for the holiday though he
had sent a French shawl to his wife.

'The young people are getting out of hand,' said the old man.

'And how they do!' said the neighbour. 'There's no managing them! They
know too much. There's Demochkin now, who broke his father's arm. It's
all from being too clever, it seems.'

Nikita listened, watched their faces, and evidently would have liked to
share in the conversation, but he was too busy drinking his tea and only
nodded his head approvingly. He emptied one tumbler after another and
grew warmer and warmer and more and more comfortable. The talk continued
on the same subject for a long time--the harmfulness of a household
dividing up--and it was clearly not an abstract discussion but concerned
the question of a separation in that house; a separation demanded by the
second son who sat there morosely silent.

It was evidently a sore subject and absorbed them all, but out of
propriety they did not discuss their private affairs before strangers.
At last, however, the old man could not restrain himself, and with tears
in his eyes declared that he would not consent to a break-up of the
family during his lifetime, that his house was prospering, thank God,
but that if they separated they would all have to go begging.

'Just like the Matveevs,' said the neighbour. 'They used to have a
proper house, but now they've split up none of them has anything.'

'And that is what you want to happen to us,' said the old man, turning
to his son.

The son made no reply and there was an awkward pause. The silence was
broken by Petrushka, who having harnessed the horse had returned to the
hut a few minutes before this and had been listening all the time with a
smile.

'There's a fable about that in Paulson,' he said. 'A father gave his
sons a broom to break. At first they could not break it, but when they
took it twig by twig they broke it easily. And it's the same here,' and
he gave a broad smile. 'I'm ready!' he added.

'If you're ready, let's go,' said Vasili Andreevich. 'And as to
separating, don't you allow it, Grandfather. You got everything together
and you're the master. Go to the Justice of the Peace. He'll say how
things should be done.'

'He carries on so, carries on so,' the old man continued in a whining
tone. 'There's no doing anything with him. It's as if the devil
possessed him.'

Nikita having meanwhile finished his fifth tumbler of tea laid it on
its side instead of turning it upside down, hoping to be offered a sixth
glass. But there was no more water in the samovar, so the hostess did
not fill it up for him. Besides, Vasili Andreevich was putting his
things on, so there was nothing for it but for Nikita to get up too, put
back into the sugar-basin the lump of sugar he had nibbled all round,
wipe his perspiring face with the skirt of his sheepskin, and go to put
on his overcoat.

Having put it on he sighed deeply, thanked his hosts, said good-bye,
and went out of the warm bright room into the cold dark passage, through
which the wind was howling and where snow was blowing through the cracks
of the shaking door, and from there into the yard.

Petrushka stood in his sheepskin in the middle of the yard by his horse,
repeating some lines from Paulson's primer. He said with a smile:

     'Storms with mist the sky conceal,
     Snowy circles wheeling wild.
     Now like savage beast 'twill howl,
     And now 'tis wailing like a child.'

Nikita nodded approvingly as he arranged the reins.

The old man, seeing Vasili Andreevich off, brought a lantern into the
passage to show him a light, but it was blown out at once. And even in
the yard it was evident that the snowstorm had become more violent.

'Well, this is weather!' thought Vasili Andreevich. 'Perhaps we may not
get there after all. But there is nothing to be done. Business! Besides,
we have got ready, our host's horse has been harnessed, and we'll get
there with God's help!'

Their aged host also thought they ought not to go, but he had already
tried to persuade them to stay and had not been listened to.

'It's no use asking them again. Maybe my age makes me timid. They'll
get there all right, and at least we shall get to bed in good time and
without any fuss,' he thought.

Petrushka did not think of danger. He knew the road and the whole
district so well, and the lines about 'snowy circles wheeling wild'
described what was happening outside so aptly that it cheered him up.
Nikita did not wish to go at all, but he had been accustomed not to have
his own way and to serve others for so long that there was no one to
hinder the departing travellers.




V

Vasili Andreevich went over to his sledge, found it with difficulty in
the darkness, climbed in and took the reins.

'Go on in front!' he cried.

Petrushka kneeling in his low sledge started his horse. Mukhorty, who
had been neighing for some time past, now scenting a mare ahead of him
started after her, and they drove out into the street. They drove again
through the outskirts of the village and along the same road, past the
yard where the frozen linen had hung (which, however, was no longer to
be seen), past the same barn, which was now snowed up almost to the
roof and from which the snow was still endlessly pouring past the same
dismally moaning, whistling, and swaying willows, and again entered into
the sea of blustering snow raging from above and below. The wind was
so strong that when it blew from the side and the travellers steered
against it, it tilted the sledges and turned the horses to one side.
Petrushka drove his good mare in front at a brisk trot and kept shouting
lustily. Mukhorty pressed after her.

After travelling so for about ten minutes, Petrushka turned round and
shouted something. Neither Vasili Andreevich nor Nikita could hear
anything because of the wind, but they guessed that they had arrived at
the turning. In fact Petrushka had turned to the right, and now the wind
that had blown from the side blew straight in their faces, and through
the snow they saw something dark on their right. It was the bush at the
turning.

'Well now, God speed you!'

'Thank you, Petrushka!'

'Storms with mist the sky conceal!' shouted Petrushka as he disappeared.

'There's a poet for you!' muttered Vasili Andreevich, pulling at the
reins.

'Yes, a fine lad--a true peasant,' said Nikita.

They drove on.

Nikita, wrapping his coat closely about him and pressing his head down
so close to his shoulders that his short beard covered his throat, sat
silently, trying not to lose the warmth he had obtained while drinking
tea in the house. Before him he saw the straight lines of the
shafts which constantly deceived him into thinking they were on a
well-travelled road, and the horse's swaying crupper with his knotted
tail blown to one side, and farther ahead the high shaft-bow and the
swaying head and neck of the horse with its waving mane. Now and then
he caught sight of a way-sign, so that he knew they were still on a road
and that there was nothing for him to be concerned about.

Vasili Andreevich drove on, leaving it to the horse to keep to the road.
But Mukhorty, though he had had a breathing-space in the village, ran
reluctantly, and seemed now and then to get off the road, so that Vasili
Andreevich had repeatedly to correct him.

'Here's a stake to the right, and another, and here's a third,' Vasili
Andreevich counted, 'and here in front is the forest,' thought he, as he
looked at something dark in front of him. But what had seemed to him a
forest was only a bush. They passed the bush and drove on for another
hundred yards but there was no fourth way-mark nor any forest.

'We must reach the forest soon,' thought Vasili Andreevich, and animated
by the vodka and the tea he did not stop but shook the reins, and the
good obedient horse responded, now ambling, now slowly trotting in the
direction in which he was sent, though he knew that he was not going the
right way. Ten minutes went by, but there was still no forest.

'There now, we must be astray again,' said Vasili Andreevich, pulling
up.

Nikita silently got out of the sledge and holding his coat, which the
wind now wrapped closely about him and now almost tore off, started to
feel about in the snow, going first to one side and then to the other.
Three or four times he was completely lost to sight. At last he returned
and took the reins from Vasili Andreevich's hand.

'We must go to the right,' he said sternly and peremptorily, as he
turned the horse.

'Well, if it's to the right, go to the right,' said Vasili Andreevich,
yielding up the reins to Nikita and thrusting his freezing hands into
his sleeves.

Nikita did not reply.

'Now then, friend, stir yourself!' he shouted to the horse, but in spite
of the shake of the reins Mukhorty moved only at a walk.

The snow in places was up to his knees, and the sledge moved by fits and
starts with his every movement.

Nikita took the whip that hung over the front of the sledge and struck
him once. The good horse, unused to the whip, sprang forward and moved
at a trot, but immediately fell back into an amble and then to a walk.
So they went on for five minutes. It was dark and the snow whirled from
above and rose from below, so that sometimes the shaft-bow could not
be seen. At times the sledge seemed to stand still and the field to
run backwards. Suddenly the horse stopped abruptly, evidently aware
of something close in front of him. Nikita again sprang lightly out,
throwing down the reins, and went ahead to see what had brought him to
a standstill, but hardly had he made a step in front of the horse before
his feet slipped and he went rolling down an incline.

'Whoa, whoa, whoa!' he said to himself as he fell, and he tried to stop
his fall but could not, and only stopped when his feet plunged into a
thick layer of snow that had drifted to the bottom of the hollow.

The fringe of a drift of snow that hung on the edge of the hollow,
disturbed by Nikita's fall, showered down on him and got inside his
collar.

'What a thing to do!' said Nikita reproachfully, addressing the drift
and the hollow and shaking the snow from under his collar.

'Nikita! Hey, Nikita!' shouted Vasili Andreevich from above.

But Nikita did not reply. He was too occupied in shaking out the snow
and searching for the whip he had dropped when rolling down the incline.
Having found the whip he tried to climb straight up the bank where he
had rolled down, but it was impossible to do so: he kept rolling down
again, and so he had to go along at the foot of the hollow to find a way
up. About seven yards farther on he managed with difficulty to crawl up
the incline on all fours, then he followed the edge of the hollow back
to the place where the horse should have been. He could not see either
horse or sledge, but as he walked against the wind he heard Vasili
Andreevich's shouts and Mukhorty's neighing, calling him.

'I'm coming! I'm coming! What are you cackling for?' he muttered.

Only when he had come up to the sledge could he make out the horse, and
Vasili Andreevich standing beside it and looking gigantic.

'Where the devil did you vanish to? We must go back, if only to
Grishkino,' he began reproaching Nikita.

'I'd be glad to get back, Vasili Andreevich, but which way are we to go?
There is such a ravine here that if we once get in it we shan't get out
again. I got stuck so fast there myself that I could hardly get out.'

'What shall we do, then? We can't stay here! We must go somewhere!' said
Vasili Andreevich.

Nikita said nothing. He seated himself in the sledge with his back to
the wind, took off his boots, shook out the snow that had got into them,
and taking some straw from the bottom of the sledge, carefully plugged
with it a hole in his left boot.

Vasili Andreevich remained silent, as though now leaving everything to
Nikita. Having put his boots on again, Nikita drew his feet into the
sledge, put on his mittens and took up the reins, and directed the horse
along the side of the ravine. But they had not gone a hundred yards
before the horse again stopped short. The ravine was in front of him
again.

Nikita again climbed out and again trudged about in the snow. He did
this for a considerable time and at last appeared from the opposite side
to that from which he had started.

'Vasili Andreevich, are you alive?' he called out.

'Here!' replied Vasili Andreevich. 'Well, what now?'

'I can't make anything out. It's too dark. There's nothing but ravines.
We must drive against the wind again.'

They set off once more. Again Nikita went stumbling through the snow,
again he fell in, again climbed out and trudged about, and at last quite
out of breath he sat down beside the sledge.

'Well, how now?' asked Vasili Andreevich.

'Why, I am quite worn out and the horse won't go.'

'Then what's to be done?'

'Why, wait a minute.'

Nikita went away again but soon returned.

'Follow me!' he said, going in front of the horse.

Vasili Andreevich no longer gave orders but implicitly did what Nikita
told him.

'Here, follow me!' Nikita shouted, stepping quickly to the right, and
seizing the rein he led Mukhorty down towards a snow-drift.

At first the horse held back, then he jerked forward, hoping to leap the
drift, but he had not the strength and sank into it up to his collar.

'Get out!' Nikita called to Vasili Andreevich who still sat in the
sledge, and taking hold of one shaft he moved the sledge closer to
the horse. 'It's hard, brother!' he said to Mukhorty, 'but it can't be
helped. Make an effort! Now, now, just a little one!' he shouted.

The horse gave a tug, then another, but failed to clear himself and
settled down again as if considering something.

'Now, brother, this won't do!' Nikita admonished him. 'Now once more!'

Again Nikita tugged at the shaft on his side, and Vasili Andreevich did
the same on the other.

Mukhorty lifted his head and then gave a sudden jerk.

'That's it! That's it!' cried Nikita. 'Don't be afraid--you won't sink!'

One plunge, another, and a third, and at last Mukhorty was out of the
snow-drift, and stood still, breathing heavily and shaking the snow off
himself. Nikita wished to lead him farther, but Vasili Andreevich, in
his two fur coats, was so out of breath that he could not walk farther
and dropped into the sledge.

'Let me get my breath!' he said, unfastening the kerchief with which he
had tied the collar of his fur coat at the village.

'It's all right here. You lie there,' said Nikita. 'I will lead him
along.' And with Vasili Andreevich in the sledge he led the horse by the
bridle about ten paces down and then up a slight rise, and stopped.

The place where Nikita had stopped was not completely in the hollow
where the snow sweeping down from the hillocks might have buried them
altogether, but still it was partly sheltered from the wind by the
side of the ravine. There were moments when the wind seemed to abate a
little, but that did not last long and as if to make up for that respite
the storm swept down with tenfold vigour and tore and whirled the more
fiercely. Such a gust struck them at the moment when Vasili Andreevich,
having recovered his breath, got out of the sledge and went up to
Nikita to consult him as to what they should do. They both bent down
involuntarily and waited till the violence of the squall should
have passed. Mukhorty too laid back his ears and shook his head
discontentedly. As soon as the violence of the blast had abated a
little, Nikita took off his mittens, stuck them into his belt, breathed
onto his hands, and began to undo the straps of the shaft-bow.

'What's that you are doing there?' asked Vasili Andreevich.

'Unharnessing. What else is there to do? I have no strength left,' said
Nikita as though excusing himself.

'Can't we drive somewhere?'

'No, we can't. We shall only kill the horse. Why, the poor beast is not
himself now,' said Nikita, pointing to the horse, which was standing
submissively waiting for what might come, with his steep wet sides
heaving heavily. 'We shall have to stay the night here,' he said, as if
preparing to spend the night at an inn, and he proceeded to unfasten the
collar-straps. The buckles came undone.

'But shan't we be frozen?' remarked Vasili Andreevich.

'Well, if we are we can't help it,' said Nikita.




VI


Although Vasili Andreevich felt quite warm in his two fur coats,
especially after struggling in the snow-drift, a cold shiver ran down
his back on realizing that he must really spend the night where
they were. To calm himself he sat down in the sledge and got out his
cigarettes and matches.

Nikita meanwhile unharnessed Mukhorty. He unstrapped the belly-band
and the back-band, took away the reins, loosened the collar-strap, and
removed the shaft-bow, talking to him all the time to encourage him.

'Now come out! come out!' he said, leading him clear of the shafts. 'Now
we'll tie you up here and I'll put down some straw and take off your
bridle. When you've had a bite you'll feel more cheerful.'

But Mukhorty was restless and evidently not comforted by Nikita's
remarks. He stepped now on one foot and now on another, and pressed
close against the sledge, turning his back to the wind and rubbing his
head on Nikita's sleeve. Then, as if not to pain Nikita by refusing his
offer of the straw he put before him, he hurriedly snatched a wisp out
of the sledge, but immediately decided that it was now no time to think
of straw and threw it down, and the wind instantly scattered it, carried
it away, and covered it with snow.

'Now we will set up a signal,' said Nikita, and turning the front of the
sledge to the wind he tied the shafts together with a strap and set them
up on end in front of the sledge. 'There now, when the snow covers us
up, good folk will see the shafts and dig us out,' he said, slapping his
mittens together and putting them on. 'That's what the old folk taught
us!'

Vasili Andreevich meanwhile had unfastened his coat, and holding its
skirts up for shelter, struck one sulphur match after another on the
steel box. But his hands trembled, and one match after another either
did not kindle or was blown out by the wind just as he was lifting it to
the cigarette. At last a match did burn up, and its flame lit up for
a moment the fur of his coat, his hand with the gold ring on the bent
forefinger, and the snow-sprinkled oat-straw that stuck out from under
the drugget. The cigarette lighted, he eagerly took a whiff or two,
inhaled the smoke, let it out through his moustache, and would have
inhaled again, but the wind tore off the burning tobacco and whirled it
away as it had done the straw.

But even these few puffs had cheered him.

'If we must spend the night here, we must!' he said with decision. 'Wait
a bit, I'll arrange a flag as well,' he added, picking up the kerchief
which he had thrown down in the sledge after taking it from round his
collar, and drawing off his gloves and standing up on the front of
the sledge and stretching himself to reach the strap, he tied the
handkerchief to it with a tight knot.

The kerchief immediately began to flutter wildly, now clinging round the
shaft, now suddenly streaming out, stretching and flapping.

'Just see what a fine flag!' said Vasili Andreevich, admiring his
handiwork and letting himself down into the sledge. 'We should be warmer
together, but there's not room enough for two,' he added.

'I'll find a place,' said Nikita. 'But I must cover up the horse
first--he sweated so, poor thing. Let go!' he added, drawing the drugget
from under Vasili Andreevich.

Having got the drugget he folded it in two, and after taking off the
breechband and pad, covered Mukhorty with it.

'Anyhow it will be warmer, silly!' he said, putting back the breechband
and the pad on the horse over the drugget. Then having finished that
business he returned to the sledge, and addressing Vasili Andreevich,
said: 'You won't need the sackcloth, will you? And let me have some
straw.'

And having taken these things from under Vasili Andreevich, Nikita went
behind the sledge, dug out a hole for himself in the snow, put straw
into it, wrapped his coat well round him, covered himself with the
sackcloth, and pulling his cap well down seated himself on the straw he
had spread, and leant against the wooden back of the sledge to shelter
himself from the wind and the snow.

Vasili Andreevich shook his head disapprovingly at what Nikita was
doing, as in general he disapproved of the peasant's stupidity and lack
of education, and he began to settle himself down for the night.

He smoothed the remaining straw over the bottom of the sledge, putting
more of it under his side. Then he thrust his hands into his sleeves and
settled down, sheltering his head in the corner of the sledge from the
wind in front.

He did not wish to sleep. He lay and thought: thought ever of the one
thing that constituted the sole aim, meaning, pleasure, and pride of his
life--of how much money he had made and might still make, of how much
other people he knew had made and possessed, and of how those others had
made and were making it, and how he, like them, might still make much
more. The purchase of the Goryachkin grove was a matter of immense
importance to him. By that one deal he hoped to make perhaps ten
thousand rubles. He began mentally to reckon the value of the wood he
had inspected in autumn, and on five acres of which he had counted all
the trees.

'The oaks will go for sledge-runners. The undergrowth will take care of
itself, and there'll still be some thirty sazheens of fire-wood left on
each desyatin,' said he to himself. 'That means there will be at
least two hundred and twenty-five rubles' worth left on each desyatin.
Fifty-six desyatiins means fifty-six hundreds, and fifty-six hundreds,
and fifty-six tens, and another fifty-six tens, and then fifty-six
fives....' He saw that it came out to more than twelve thousand
rubles, but could not reckon it up exactly without a counting-frame.
'But I won't give ten thousand, anyhow. I'll give about eight thousand
with a deduction on account of the glades. I'll grease the surveyor's
palm--give him a hundred rubles, or a hundred and fifty, and he'll
reckon that there are some five desyatins of glade to be deducted. And
he'll let it go for eight thousand. Three thousand cash down. That'll
move him, no fear!' he thought, and he pressed his pocket-book with his
forearm.

'God only knows how we missed the turning. The forest ought to be there,
and a watchman's hut, and dogs barking. But the damned things don't
bark when they're wanted.' He turned his collar down from his ear and
listened, but as before only the whistling of the wind could be heard,
the flapping and fluttering of the kerchief tied to the shafts, and the
pelting of the snow against the woodwork of the sledge. He again covered
up his ear.

'If I had known I would have stayed the night. Well, no matter, we'll
get there to-morrow. It's only one day lost. And the others won't travel
in such weather.' Then he remembered that on the 9th he had to receive
payment from the butcher for his oxen. 'He meant to come himself, but
he won't find me, and my wife won't know how to receive the money. She
doesn't know the right way of doing things,' he thought, recalling
how at their party the day before she had not known how to treat the
police-officer who was their guest. 'Of course she's only a woman! Where
could she have seen anything? In my father's time what was our house
like? Just a rich peasant's house: just an oatmill and an inn--that was
the whole property. But what have I done in these fifteen years? A shop,
two taverns, a flour-mill, a grain-store, two farms leased out, and a
house with an iron-roofed barn,' he thought proudly. 'Not as it was in
Father's time! Who is talked of in the whole district now? Brekhunov!
And why? Because I stick to business. I take trouble, not like others
who lie abed or waste their time on foolishness while I don't sleep of
nights. Blizzard or no blizzard I start out. So business gets done. They
think money-making is a joke. No, take pains and rack your brains! You
get overtaken out of doors at night, like this, or keep awake night
after night till the thoughts whirling in your head make the pillow
turn,' he meditated with pride. 'They think people get on through luck.
After all, the Mironovs are now millionaires. And why? Take pains and
God gives. If only He grants me health!'

The thought that he might himself be a millionaire like Mironov, who
began with nothing, so excited Vasili Andreevich that he felt the need
of talking to somebody. But there was no one to talk to.... If only
he could have reached Goryachkin he would have talked to the landlord
and shown him a thing or two.

'Just see how it blows! It will snow us up so deep that we shan't be
able to get out in the morning!' he thought, listening to a gust of wind
that blew against the front of the sledge, bending it and lashing the
snow against it. He raised himself and looked round. All he could see
through the whirling darkness was Mukhorty's dark head, his back covered
by the fluttering drugget, and his thick knotted tail; while all round,
in front and behind, was the same fluctuating whity darkness, sometimes
seeming to get a little lighter and sometimes growing denser still.

'A pity I listened to Nikita,' he thought. 'We ought to have driven on.
We should have come out somewhere, if only back to Grishkino and stayed
the night at Taras's. As it is we must sit here all night. But what was
I thinking about? Yes, that God gives to those who take trouble, but not
to loafers, lie-abeds, or fools. I must have a smoke!'

He sat down again, got out his cigarette-case, and stretched himself
flat on his stomach, screening the matches with the skirt of his coat.
But the wind found its way in and put out match after match. At last
he got one to burn and lit a cigarette. He was very glad that he had
managed to do what he wanted, and though the wind smoked more of the
cigarette than he did, he still got two or three puffs and felt more
cheerful. He again leant back, wrapped himself up, started reflecting
and remembering, and suddenly and quite unexpectedly lost consciousness
and fell asleep.

Suddenly something seemed to give him a push and awoke him. Whether
it was Mukhorty who had pulled some straw from under him, or whether
something within him had startled him, at all events it woke him, and
his heart began to beat faster and faster so that the sledge seemed to
tremble under him. He opened his eyes. Everything around him was just
as before. 'It looks lighter,' he thought. 'I expect it won't be long
before dawn.' But he at once remembered that it was lighter because the
moon had risen. He sat up and looked first at the horse. Mukhorty still
stood with his back to the wind, shivering all over. One side of the
drugget, which was completely covered with snow, had been blown back,
the breeching had slipped down and the snow-covered head with its waving
forelock and mane were now more visible. Vasili Andreevich leant over
the back of the sledge and looked behind. Nikita still sat in the same
position in which he had settled himself. The sacking with which he was
covered, and his legs, were thickly covered with snow.

'If only that peasant doesn't freeze to death! His clothes are so
wretched. I may be held responsible for him. What shiftless people they
are--such a want of education,' thought Vasili Andreevich, and he felt
like taking the drugget off the horse and putting it over Nikita, but
it would be very cold to get out and move about and, moreover, the horse
might freeze to death. 'Why did I bring him with me? It was all her
stupidity!' he thought, recalling his unloved wife, and he rolled over
into his old place at the front part of the sledge. 'My uncle once spent
a whole night like this,' he reflected, 'and was all right.' But another
case came at once to his mind. 'But when they dug Sebastian out he was
dead--stiff like a frozen carcass. If I'd only stopped the night in
Grishkino all this would not have happened!'

And wrapping his coat carefully round him so that none of the warmth of
the fur should be wasted but should warm him all over, neck, knees, and
feet, he shut his eyes and tried to sleep again. But try as he would he
could not get drowsy, on the contrary he felt wide awake and animated.
Again he began counting his gains and the debts due to him, again he
began bragging to himself and feeling pleased with himself and his
position, but all this was continually disturbed by a stealthily
approaching fear and by the unpleasant regret that he had not remained
in Grishkino.

'How different it would be to be lying warm on a bench!'

He turned over several times in his attempts to get into a more
comfortable position more sheltered from the wind, he wrapped up his
legs closer, shut his eyes, and lay still. But either his legs in their
strong felt boots began to ache from being bent in one position, or the
wind blew in somewhere, and after lying still for a short time he again
began to recall the disturbing fact that he might now have been lying
quietly in the warm hut at Grishkino. He again sat up, turned about,
muffled himself up, and settled down once more.

Once he fancied that he heard a distant cock-crow. He felt glad, turned
down his coat-collar and listened with strained attention, but in spite
of all his efforts nothing could be heard but the wind whistling between
the shafts, the flapping of the kerchief, and the snow pelting against
the frame of the sledge.

Nikita sat just as he had done all the time, not moving and not even
answering Vasili Andreevich who had addressed him a couple of times.
'He doesn't care a bit--he's probably asleep!' thought Vasili Andreevich
with vexation, looking behind the sledge at Nikita who was covered with
a thick layer of snow.

Vasili Andreevich got up and lay down again some twenty times. It
seemed to him that the night would never end. 'It must be getting near
morning,' he thought, getting up and looking around. 'Let's have a look
at my watch. It will be cold to unbutton, but if I only know that it's
getting near morning I shall at any rate feel more cheerful. We could
begin harnessing.'

In the depth of his heart Vasili Andreevich knew that it could not yet
be near morning, but he was growing more and more afraid, and wished
both to get to know and yet to deceive himself. He carefully undid the
fastening of his sheepskin, pushed in his hand, and felt about for
a long time before he got to his waistcoat. With great difficulty he
managed to draw out his silver watch with its enamelled flower design,
and tried to make out the time. He could not see anything without a
light. Again he went down on his knees and elbows as he had done when he
lighted a cigarette, got out his matches, and proceeded to strike one.
This time he went to work more carefully, and feeling with his fingers
for a match with the largest head and the greatest amount of phosphorus,
lit it at the first try. Bringing the face of the watch under the light
he could hardly believe his eyes.... It was only ten minutes past
twelve. Almost the whole night was still before him.

'Oh, how long the night is!' he thought, feeling a cold shudder run down
his back, and having fastened his fur coats again and wrapped himself
up, he snuggled into a corner of the sledge intending to wait
patiently. Suddenly, above the monotonous roar of the wind, he clearly
distinguished another new and living sound. It steadily strengthened,
and having become quite clear diminished just as gradually. Beyond all
doubt it was a wolf, and he was so near that the movement of his jaws as
he changed his cry was brought down the wind. Vasili Andreevich turned
back the collar of his coat and listened attentively. Mukhorty too
strained to listen, moving his ears, and when the wolf had ceased its
howling he shifted from foot to foot and gave a warning snort. After
this Vasili Andreevich could not fall asleep again or even calm
himself. The more he tried to think of his accounts, his business, his
reputation, his worth and his wealth, the more and more was he mastered
by fear, and regrets that he had not stayed the night at Grishkino
dominated and mingled in all his thoughts.

'Devil take the forest! Things were all right without it, thank God. Ah,
if we had only put up for the night!' he said to himself. 'They say it's
drunkards that freeze,' he thought, 'and I have had some drink.' And
observing his sensations he noticed that he was beginning to shiver,
without knowing whether it was from cold or from fear. He tried to wrap
himself up and lie down as before, but could no longer do so. He could
not stay in one position. He wanted to get up, to do something to master
the gathering fear that was rising in him and against which he felt
himself powerless. He again got out his cigarettes and matches, but only
three matches were left and they were bad ones. The phosphorus rubbed
off them all without lighting.

'The devil take you! Damned thing! Curse you!' he muttered, not knowing
whom or what he was cursing, and he flung away the crushed cigarette.
He was about to throw away the matchbox too, but checked the movement of
his hand and put the box in his pocket instead. He was seized with such
unrest that he could no longer remain in one spot. He climbed out of the
sledge and standing with his back to the wind began to shift his belt
again, fastening it lower down in the waist and tightening it.

'What's the use of lying and waiting for death? Better mount the horse
and get away!' The thought suddenly occurred to him. 'The horse will
move when he has someone on his back. As for him,' he thought of
Nikita--'it's all the same to him whether he lives or dies. What is his
life worth? He won't grudge his life, but I have something to live for,
thank God.'

He untied the horse, threw the reins over his neck and tried to mount,
but his coats and boots were so heavy that he failed. Then he clambered
up in the sledge and tried to mount from there, but the sledge tilted
under his weight, and he failed again. At last he drew Mukhorty nearer
to the sledge, cautiously balanced on one side of it, and managed to
lie on his stomach across the horse's back. After lying like that for a
while he shifted forward once and again, threw a leg over, and finally
seated himself, supporting his feet on the loose breeching-straps. The
shaking of the sledge awoke Nikita. He raised himself, and it seemed to
Vasili Andreevich that he said something.

'Listen to such fools as you! Am I to die like this for nothing?'
exclaimed Vasili Andreevich. And tucking the loose skirts of his fur
coat in under his knees, he turned the horse and rode away from
the sledge in the direction in which he thought the forest and the
forester's hut must be.




VII

From the time he had covered himself with the sackcloth and seated
himself behind the sledge, Nikita had not stirred. Like all those who
live in touch with nature and have known want, he was patient and could
wait for hours, even days, without growing restless or irritable. He
heard his master call him, but did not answer because he did not want to
move or talk. Though he still felt some warmth from the tea he had drunk
and from his energetic struggle when clambering about in the snowdrift,
he knew that this warmth would not last long and that he had no strength
left to warm himself again by moving about, for he felt as tired as a
horse when it stops and refuses to go further in spite of the whip, and
its master sees that it must be fed before it can work again. The foot
in the boot with a hole in it had already grown numb, and he could no
longer feel his big toe. Besides that, his whole body began to feel
colder and colder.

The thought that he might, and very probably would, die that night
occurred to him, but did not seem particularly unpleasant or dreadful.
It did not seem particularly unpleasant, because his whole life had been
not a continual holiday, but on the contrary an unceasing round of
toil of which he was beginning to feel weary. And it did not seem
particularly dreadful, because besides the masters he had served here,
like Vasili Andreevich, he always felt himself dependent on the Chief
Master, who had sent him into this life, and he knew that when dying he
would still be in that Master's power and would not be ill-used by Him.
'It seems a pity to give up what one is used to and accustomed to. But
there's nothing to be done, I shall get used to the new things.'

'Sins?' he thought, and remembered his drunkenness, the money that had
gone on drink, how he had offended his wife, his cursing, his neglect of
church and of the fasts, and all the things the priest blamed him for
at confession. 'Of course they are sins. But then, did I take them on of
myself? That's evidently how God made me. Well, and the sins? Where am I
to escape to?'

So at first he thought of what might happen to him that night, and
then did not return to such thoughts but gave himself up to whatever
recollections came into his head of themselves. Now he thought of
Martha's arrival, of the drunkenness among the workers and his own
renunciation of drink, then of their present journey and of Taras's
house and the talk about the breaking-up of the family, then of his own
lad, and of Mukhorty now sheltered under the drugget, and then of his
master who made the sledge creak as he tossed about in it. 'I expect
you're sorry yourself that you started out, dear man,' he thought. 'It
would seem hard to leave a life such as his! It's not like the likes of
us.'

Then all these recollections began to grow confused and got mixed in his
head, and he fell asleep.

But when Vasili Andreevich, getting on the horse, jerked the sledge,
against the back of which Nikita was leaning, and it shifted away and
hit him in the back with one of its runners, he awoke and had to change
his position whether he liked it or not. Straightening his legs with
difficulty and shaking the snow off them he got up, and an agonizing
cold immediately penetrated his whole body. On making out what was
happening he called to Vasili Andreevich to leave him the drugget which
the horse no longer needed, so that he might wrap himself in it.

But Vasili Andreevich did not stop, but disappeared amid the powdery
snow.

Left alone Nikita considered for a moment what he should do. He felt
that he had not the strength to go off in search of a house. It was no
longer possible to sit down in his old place--it was by now all filled
with snow. He felt that he could not get warmer in the sledge either,
for there was nothing to cover himself with, and his coat and sheepskin
no longer warmed him at all. He felt as cold as though he had nothing on
but a shirt. He became frightened. 'Lord, heavenly Father!' he muttered,
and was comforted by the consciousness that he was not alone but that
there was One who heard him and would not abandon him. He gave a deep
sigh, and keeping the sackcloth over his head he got inside the sledge
and lay down in the place where his master had been.

But he could not get warm in the sledge either. At first he shivered all
over, then the shivering ceased and little by little he began to lose
consciousness. He did not know whether he was dying or falling asleep,
but felt equally prepared for the one as for the other.




VIII

Meanwhile Vasili Andreevich, with his feet and the ends of the reins,
urged the horse on in the direction in which for some reason he expected
the forest and forester's hut to be. The snow covered his eyes and the
wind seemed intent on stopping him, but bending forward and constantly
lapping his coat over and pushing it between himself and the cold
harness pad which prevented him from sitting properly, he kept urging
the horse on. Mukhorty ambled on obediently though with difficulty, in
the direction in which he was driven.

Vasili Andreevich rode for about five minutes straight ahead, as he
thought, seeing nothing but the horse's head and the white waste, and
hearing only the whistle of the wind about the horse's ears and his coat
collar.

Suddenly a dark patch showed up in front of him. His heart beat with
joy, and he rode towards the object, already seeing in imagination the
walls of village houses. But the dark patch was not stationary, it
kept moving; and it was not a village but some tall stalks of wormwood
sticking up through the snow on the boundary between two fields, and
desperately tossing about under the pressure of the wind which beat
it all to one side and whistled through it. The sight of that wormwood
tormented by the pitiless wind made Vasili Andreevich shudder, he knew
not why, and he hurriedly began urging the horse on, not noticing that
when riding up to the wormwood he had quite changed his direction and
was now heading the opposite way, though still imagining that he was
riding towards where the hut should be. But the horse kept making
towards the right, and Vasili Andreevich kept guiding it to the left.

Again something dark appeared in front of him. Again he rejoiced,
convinced that now it was certainly a village. But once more it was the
same boundary line overgrown with wormwood, once more the same wormwood
desperately tossed by the wind and carrying unreasoning terror to his
heart. But its being the same wormwood was not all, for beside it
there was a horse's track partly snowed over. Vasili Andreevich stopped,
stooped down and looked carefully. It was a horse-track only partially
covered with snow, and could be none but his own horse's hoofprints. He
had evidently gone round in a small circle. 'I shall perish like that!'
he thought, and not to give way to his terror he urged on the horse
still more, peering into the snowy darkness in which he saw only
flitting and fitful points of light. Once he thought he heard the
barking of dogs or the howling of wolves, but the sounds were so faint
and indistinct that he did not know whether he heard them or merely
imagined them, and he stopped and began to listen intently.

Suddenly some terrible, deafening cry resounded near his ears, and
everything shivered and shook under him. He seized Mukhorty's neck,
but that too was shaking all over and the terrible cry grew still more
frightful. For some seconds Vasili Andreevich could not collect himself
or understand what was happening. It was only that Mukhorty, whether
to encourage himself or to call for help, had neighed loudly and
resonantly. 'Ugh, you wretch! How you frightened me, damn you!' thought
Vasili Andreevich. But even when he understood the cause of his terror
he could not shake it off.

'I must calm myself and think things over,' he said to himself, but yet
he could not stop, and continued to urge the horse on, without noticing
that he was now going with the wind instead of against it. His body,
especially between his legs where it touched the pad of the harness and
was not covered by his overcoats, was getting painfully cold, especially
when the horse walked slowly. His legs and arms trembled and his
breathing came fast. He saw himself perishing amid this dreadful snowy
waste, and could see no means of escape.

Suddenly the horse under him tumbled into something and, sinking into
a snow-drift, began to plunge and fell on his side. Vasili Andreevich
jumped off, and in so doing dragged to one side the breechband on which
his foot was resting, and twisted round the pad to which he held as he
dismounted. As soon as he had jumped off, the horse struggled to his
feet, plunged forward, gave one leap and another, neighed again, and
dragging the drugget and the breechband after him, disappeared, leaving
Vasili Andreevich alone on the snow-drift.

The latter pressed on after the horse, but the snow lay so deep and
his coats were so heavy that, sinking above his knees at each step, he
stopped breathless after taking not more than twenty steps. 'The copse,
the oxen, the lease-hold, the shop, the tavern, the house with the
iron-roofed barn, and my heir,' thought he. 'How can I leave all that?
What does this mean? It cannot be!' These thoughts flashed through his
mind. Then he thought of the wormwood tossed by the wind, which he had
twice ridden past, and he was seized with such terror that he did not
believe in the reality of what was happening to him. 'Can this be a
dream?' he thought, and tried to wake up but could not. It was real snow
that lashed his face and covered him and chilled his right hand from
which he had lost the glove, and this was a real desert in which he was
now left alone like that wormwood, awaiting an inevitable, speedy, and
meaningless death.

'Queen of Heaven! Holy Father Nicholas, teacher of temperance!' he
thought, recalling the service of the day before and the holy icon with
its black face and gilt frame, and the tapers which he sold to be set
before that icon and which were almost immediately brought back to him
scarcely burnt at all, and which he put away in the store-chest. He
began to pray to that same Nicholas the Wonder-Worker to save him,
promising him a thanksgiving service and some candles. But he clearly
and indubitably realized that the icon, its frame, the candles,
the priest, and the thanksgiving service, though very important and
necessary in church, could do nothing for him here, and that there was
and could be no connexion between those candles and services and his
present disastrous plight. 'I must not despair,' he thought. 'I must
follow the horse's track before it is snowed under. He will lead me out,
or I may even catch him. Only I must not hurry, or I shall stick fast
and be more lost than ever.'

But in spite of his resolution to go quietly, he rushed forward and
even ran, continually falling, getting up and falling again. The horse's
track was already hardly visible in places where the snow did not lie
deep. 'I am lost!' thought Vasili Andreevich. 'I shall lose the track
and not catch the horse.' But at that moment he saw something black. It
was Mukhorty, and not only Mukhorty, but the sledge with the shafts
and the kerchief. Mukhorty, with the sacking and the breechband twisted
round to one side, was standing not in his former place but nearer to
the shafts, shaking his head which the reins he was stepping on drew
downwards. It turned out that Vasili Andreevich had sunk in the same
ravine Nikita had previously fallen into, and that Mukhorty had been
bringing him back to the sledge and he had got off his back no more than
fifty paces from where the sledge was.




IX

Having stumbled back to the sledge Vasili Andreevich caught hold of it
and for a long time stood motionless, trying to calm himself and recover
his breath. Nikita was not in his former place, but something, already
covered with snow, was lying in the sledge and Vasili Andreevich
concluded that this was Nikita. His terror had now quite left him, and
if he felt any fear it was lest the dreadful terror should return that
he had experienced when on the horse and especially when he was left
alone in the snow-drift. At any cost he had to avoid that terror, and
to keep it away he must do something--occupy himself with something. And
the first thing he did was to turn his back to the wind and open his fur
coat. Then, as soon as he recovered his breath a little, he shook the
snow out of his boots and out of his left-hand glove (the right-hand
glove was hopelessly lost and by this time probably lying somewhere
under a dozen inches of snow); then as was his custom when going out of
his shop to buy grain from the peasants, he pulled his girdle low down
and tightened it and prepared for action. The first thing that occurred
to him was to free Mukhorty's leg from the rein. Having done that, and
tethered him to the iron cramp at the front of the sledge where he
had been before, he was going round the horse's quarters to put the
breechband and pad straight and cover him with the cloth, but at that
moment he noticed that something was moving in the sledge and Nikita's
head rose up out of the snow that covered it. Nikita, who was half
frozen, rose with great difficulty and sat up, moving his hand before
his nose in a strange manner just as if he were driving away flies. He
waved his hand and said something, and seemed to Vasili Andreevich to be
calling him. Vasili Andreevich left the cloth unadjusted and went up to
the sledge.

'What is it?' he asked. 'What are you saying?'

'I'm dy... ing, that's what,' said Nikita brokenly and with
difficulty. 'Give what is owing to me to my lad, or to my wife, no
matter.'

'Why, are you really frozen?' asked Vasili Andreevich.

'I feel it's my death. Forgive me for Christ's sake...' said Nikita
in a tearful voice, continuing to wave his hand before his face as if
driving away flies.

Vasili Andreevich stood silent and motionless for half a minute. Then
suddenly, with the same resolution with which he used to strike hands
when making a good purchase, he took a step back and turning up his
sleeves began raking the snow off Nikita and out of the sledge. Having
done this he hurriedly undid his girdle, opened out his fur coat, and
having pushed Nikita down, lay down on top of him, covering him not
only with his fur coat but with the whole of his body, which glowed
with warmth. After pushing the skirts of his coat between Nikita and
the sides of the sledge, and holding down its hem with his knees, Vasili
Andreevich lay like that face down, with his head pressed against the
front of the sledge. Here he no longer heard the horse's movements or
the whistling of the wind, but only Nikita's breathing. At first and for
a long time Nikita lay motionless, then he sighed deeply and moved.

'There, and you say you are dying! Lie still and get warm, that's our
way...' began Vasili Andreevich.

But to his great surprise he could say no more, for tears came to his
eyes and his lower jaw began to quiver rapidly. He stopped speaking
and only gulped down the risings in his throat. 'Seems I was badly
frightened and have gone quite weak,' he thought. But this weakness was
not only unpleasant, but gave him a peculiar joy such as he had never
felt before.

'That's our way!' he said to himself, experiencing a strange and solemn
tenderness. He lay like that for a long time, wiping his eyes on the fur
of his coat and tucking under his knee the right skirt, which the wind
kept turning up.

But he longed so passionately to tell somebody of his joyful condition
that he said: 'Nikita!'

'It's comfortable, warm!' came a voice from beneath.

'There, you see, friend, I was going to perish. And you would have been
frozen, and I should have...'

But again his jaws began to quiver and his eyes to fill with tears, and
he could say no more.

'Well, never mind,' he thought. 'I know about myself what I know.'

He remained silent and lay like that for a long time.

Nikita kept him warm from below and his fur coats from above. Only his
hands, with which he kept his coat-skirts down round Nikita's sides, and
his legs which the wind kept uncovering, began to freeze, especially his
right hand which had no glove. But he did not think of his legs or of
his hands but only of how to warm the peasant who was lying under him.
He looked out several times at Mukhorty and could see that his back was
uncovered and the drugget and breeching lying on the snow, and that he
ought to get up and cover him, but he could not bring himself to leave
Nikita and disturb even for a moment the joyous condition he was in. He
no longer felt any kind of terror.

'No fear, we shan't lose him this time!' he said to himself, referring
to his getting the peasant warm with the same boastfulness with which he
spoke of his buying and selling.

Vasili Andreevich lay in that way for one hour, another, and a third,
but he was unconscious of the passage of time. At first impressions
of the snow-storm, the sledge-shafts, and the horse with the shaft-bow
shaking before his eyes, kept passing through his mind, then he
remembered Nikita lying under him, then recollections of the festival,
his wife, the police-officer, and the box of candles, began to mingle
with these; then again Nikita, this time lying under that box, then the
peasants, customers and traders, and the white walls of his house with
its iron roof with Nikita lying underneath, presented themselves to
his imagination. Afterwards all these impressions blended into one
nothingness. As the colours of the rainbow unite into one white light,
so all these different impressions mingled into one, and he fell asleep.

For a long time he slept without dreaming, but just before dawn the
visions recommenced. It seemed to him that he was standing by the box of
tapers and that Tikhon's wife was asking for a five kopek taper for the
Church fete. He wished to take one out and give it to her, but his hands
would not lift, being held tight in his pockets. He wanted to walk round
the box but his feet would not move and his new clean goloshes had grown
to the stone floor, and he could neither lift them nor get his feet out
of the goloshes. Then the taper-box was no longer a box but a bed, and
suddenly Vasili Andreevich saw himself lying in his bed at home. He was
lying in his bed and could not get up. Yet it was necessary for him to
get up because Ivan Matveich, the police-officer, would soon call for
him and he had to go with him--either to bargain for the forest or to
put Mukhorty's breeching straight.

He asked his wife: 'Nikolaevna, hasn't he come yet?' 'No, he hasn't,'
she replied. He heard someone drive up to the front steps. 'It must be
him.' 'No, he's gone past.' 'Nikolaevna! I say, Nikolaevna, isn't he
here yet?' 'No.' He was still lying on his bed and could not get up, but
was always waiting. And this waiting was uncanny and yet joyful. Then
suddenly his joy was completed. He whom he was expecting came; not Ivan
Matveich the police-officer, but someone else--yet it was he whom he had
been waiting for. He came and called him; and it was he who had called
him and told him to lie down on Nikita. And Vasili Andreevich was glad
that that one had come for him.

'I'm coming!' he cried joyfully, and that cry awoke him, but woke him up
not at all the same person he had been when he fell asleep. He tried to
get up but could not, tried to move his arm and could not, to move his
leg and also could not, to turn his head and could not. He was surprised
but not at all disturbed by this. He understood that this was death, and
was not at all disturbed by that either.

He remembered that Nikita was lying under him and that he had got warm
and was alive, and it seemed to him that he was Nikita and Nikita was
he, and that his life was not in himself but in Nikita. He strained his
ears and heard Nikita breathing and even slightly snoring. 'Nikita is
alive, so I too am alive!' he said to himself triumphantly.

And he remembered his money, his shop, his house, the buying and
selling, and Mironov's millions, and it was hard for him to understand
why that man, called Vasili Brekhunov, had troubled himself with all
those things with which he had been troubled.

'Well, it was because he did not know what the real thing was,' he
thought, concerning that Vasili Brekhunov. 'He did not know, but now I
know and know for sure. Now I know!' And again he heard the voice of
the one who had called him before. 'I'm coming! Coming!' he responded
gladly, and his whole being was filled with joyful emotion. He felt
himself free and that nothing could hold him back any longer.

After that Vasili Andreevich neither saw, heard, nor felt anything more
in this world.

All around the snow still eddied. The same whirlwinds of snow circled
about, covering the dead Vasili Andreevich's fur coat, the shivering
Mukhorty, the sledge, now scarcely to be seen, and Nikita lying at the
bottom of it, kept warm beneath his dead master.




X

Nikita awoke before daybreak. He was aroused by the cold that had begun
to creep down his back. He had dreamt that he was coming from the mill
with a load of his master's flour and when crossing the stream had
missed the bridge and let the cart get stuck. And he saw that he had
crawled under the cart and was trying to lift it by arching his back.
But strange to say the cart did not move, it stuck to his back and he
could neither lift it nor get out from under it. It was crushing the
whole of his loins. And how cold it felt! Evidently he must crawl out.
'Have done!' he exclaimed to whoever was pressing the cart down on him.
'Take out the sacks!' But the cart pressed down colder and colder,
and then he heard a strange knocking, awoke completely, and remembered
everything. The cold cart was his dead and frozen master lying upon him.
And the knock was produced by Mukhorty, who had twice struck the sledge
with his hoof.

'Andreevich! Eh, Andreevich!' Nikita called cautiously, beginning to
realize the truth, and straightening his back. But Vasili Andreevich did
not answer and his stomach and legs were stiff and cold and heavy like
iron weights.

'He must have died! May the Kingdom of Heaven be his!' thought Nikita.

He turned his head, dug with his hand through the snow about him and
opened his eyes. It was daylight; the wind was whistling as before
between the shafts, and the snow was falling in the same way, except
that it was no longer driving against the frame of the sledge but
silently covered both sledge and horse deeper and deeper, and neither
the horse's movements nor his breathing were any longer to be heard.

'He must have frozen too,' thought Nikita of Mukhorty, and indeed those
hoof knocks against the sledge, which had awakened Nikita, were the last
efforts the already numbed Mukhorty had made to keep on his feet before
dying.

'O Lord God, it seems Thou art calling me too!' said Nikita. 'Thy Holy
Will be done. But it's uncanny.... Still, a man can't die twice and
must die once. If only it would come soon!'

And he again drew in his head, closed his eyes, and became unconscious,
fully convinced that now he was certainly and finally dying.


It was not till noon that day that peasants dug Vasili Andreevich and
Nikita out of the snow with their shovels, not more than seventy yards
from the road and less than half a mile from the village.

The snow had hidden the sledge, but the shafts and the kerchief tied to
them were still visible. Mukhorty, buried up to his belly in snow, with
the breeching and drugget hanging down, stood all white, his dead head
pressed against his frozen throat: icicles hung from his nostrils, his
eyes were covered with hoar-frost as though filled with tears, and he
had grown so thin in that one night that he was nothing but skin and
bone.

Vasili Andreevich was stiff as a frozen carcass, and when they rolled
him off Nikita his legs remained apart and his arms stretched out as
they had been. His bulging hawk eyes were frozen, and his open mouth
under his clipped moustache was full of snow. But Nikita though chilled
through was still alive. When he had been brought to, he felt sure
that he was already dead and that what was taking place with him was
no longer happening in this world but in the next. When he heard the
peasants shouting as they dug him out and rolled the frozen body of
Vasili Andreevich from off him, he was at first surprised that in the
other world peasants should be shouting in the same old way and had the
same kind of body, and then when he realized that he was still in this
world he was sorry rather than glad, especially when he found that the
toes on both his feet were frozen.

Nikita lay in hospital for two months. They cut off three of his toes,
but the others recovered so that he was still able to work and went on
living for another twenty years, first as a farm-labourer, then in his
old age as a watchman. He died at home as he had wished, only this year,
under the icons with a lighted taper in his hands. Before he died he
asked his wife's forgiveness and forgave her for the cooper. He also
took leave of his son and grandchildren, and died sincerely glad that
he was relieving his son and daughter-in-law of the burden of having to
feed him, and that he was now really passing from this life of which
he was weary into that other life which every year and every hour grew
clearer and more desirable to him. Whether he is better or worse off
there where he awoke after his death, whether he was disappointed or
found there what he expected, we shall all soon learn.

========================================
========================================

FATHER SERGIUS

By Leo Tolstoy




I

In Petersburg in the eighteen-forties a surprising event occurred. An
officer of the Cuirassier Life Guards, a handsome prince who everyone
predicted would become aide-de-camp to the Emperor Nicholas I and have
a brilliant career, left the service, broke off his engagement to a
beautiful maid of honour, a favourite of the Empress's, gave his small
estate to his sister, and retired to a monastery to become a monk.

This event appeared extraordinary and inexplicable to those who did not
know his inner motives, but for Prince Stepan Kasatsky himself it all
occurred so naturally that he could not imagine how he could have acted
otherwise.

His father, a retired colonel of the Guards, had died when Stepan was
twelve, and sorry as his mother was to part from her son, she entered
him at the Military College as her deceased husband had intended.

The widow herself, with her daughter, Varvara, moved to Petersburg to be
near her son and have him with her for the holidays.

The boy was distinguished both by his brilliant ability and by his
immense self-esteem. He was first both in his studies--especially in
mathematics, of which he was particularly fond--and also in drill and in
riding. Though of more than average height, he was handsome and agile,
and he would have been an altogether exemplary cadet had it not been for
his quick temper. He was remarkably truthful, and was neither dissipated
nor addicted to drink. The only faults that marred his conduct were
fits of fury to which he was subject and during which he lost control of
himself and became like a wild animal. He once nearly threw out of the
window another cadet who had begun to tease him about his collection
of minerals. On another occasion he came almost completely to grief
by flinging a whole dish of cutlets at an officer who was acting as
steward, attacking him and, it was said, striking him for having broken
his word and told a barefaced lie. He would certainly have been reduced
to the ranks had not the Director of the College hushed up the whole
matter and dismissed the steward.

By the time he was eighteen he had finished his College course and
received a commission as lieutenant in an aristocratic regiment of the
Guards.

The Emperor Nicholas Pavlovich (Nicholas I) had noticed him while he
was still at the College, and continued to take notice of him in the
regiment, and it was on this account that people predicted for him an
appointment as aide-de-camp to the Emperor. Kasatsky himself strongly
desired it, not from ambition only but chiefly because since his cadet
days he had been passionately devoted to Nicholas Pavlovich. The Emperor
had often visited the Military College and every time Kasatsky saw
that tall erect figure, with breast expanded in its military overcoat,
entering with brisk step, saw the cropped side-whiskers, the moustache,
the aquiline nose, and heard the sonorous voice exchanging greetings
with the cadets, he was seized by the same rapture that he experienced
later on when he met the woman he loved. Indeed, his passionate
adoration of the Emperor was even stronger: he wished to sacrifice
something--everything, even himself--to prove his complete devotion.
And the Emperor Nicholas was conscious of evoking this rapture and
deliberately aroused it. He played with the cadets, surrounded himself
with them, treating them sometimes with childish simplicity, sometimes
as a friend, and then again with majestic solemnity. After that affair
with the officer, Nicholas Pavlovich said nothing to Kasatsky, but when
the latter approached he waved him away theatrically, frowned, shook his
finger at him, and afterwards when leaving, said: 'Remember that I know
everything. There are some things I would rather not know, but they
remain here,' and he pointed to his heart.

When on leaving College the cadets were received by the Emperor, he did
not again refer to Kasatsky's offence, but told them all, as was his
custom, that they should serve him and the fatherland loyally, that he
would always be their best friend, and that when necessary they might
approach him direct. All the cadets were as usual greatly moved, and
Kasatsky even shed tears, remembering the past, and vowed that he would
serve his beloved Tsar with all his soul.

When Kasatsky took up his commission his mother moved with her daughter
first to Moscow and then to their country estate. Kasatsky gave half his
property to his sister and kept only enough to maintain himself in the
expensive regiment he had joined.

To all appearance he was just an ordinary, brilliant young officer
of the Guards making a career for himself; but intense and complex
strivings went on within him. From early childhood his efforts had
seemed to be very varied, but essentially they were all one and the
same. He tried in everything he took up to attain such success and
perfection as would evoke praise and surprise. Whether it was his
studies or his military exercises, he took them up and worked at them
till he was praised and held up as an example to others. Mastering one
subject he took up another, and obtained first place in his studies. For
example, while still at College he noticed in himself an awkwardness in
French conversation, and contrived to master French till he spoke it
as well as Russian, and then he took up chess and became an excellent
player.

Apart from his main vocation, which was the service of his Tsar and
the fatherland, he always set himself some particular aim, and however
unimportant it was, devoted himself completely to it and lived for it
until it was accomplished. And as soon as it was attained another
aim would immediately present itself, replacing its predecessor. This
passion for distinguishing himself, or for accomplishing something
in order to distinguish himself, filled his life. On taking up his
commission he set himself to acquire the utmost perfection in knowledge
of the service, and very soon became a model officer, though still with
the same fault of ungovernable irascibility, which here in the service
again led him to commit actions inimical to his success. Then he took to
reading, having once in conversation in society felt himself deficient
in general education--and again achieved his purpose. Then, wishing
to secure a brilliant position in high society, he learnt to dance
excellently and very soon was invited to all the balls in the best
circles, and to some of their evening gatherings. But this did not
satisfy him: he was accustomed to being first, and in this society was
far from being so.

The highest society then consisted, and I think always consist, of
four sorts of people: rich people who are received at Court, people
not wealthy but born and brought up in Court circles, rich people who
ingratiate themselves into the Court set, and people neither rich nor
belonging to the Court but who ingratiate themselves into the first and
second sets.

Kasatsky did not belong to the first two sets, but was readily welcomed
in the others. On entering society he determined to have relations with
some society lady, and to his own surprise quickly accomplished this
purpose. He soon realized, however, that the circles in which he moved
were not the highest, and that though he was received in the highest
spheres he did not belong to them. They were polite to him, but showed
by their whole manner that they had their own set and that he was not of
it. And Kasatsky wished to belong to that inner circle. To attain that
end it would be necessary to be an aide-de-camp to the Emperor--which
he expected to become--or to marry into that exclusive set, which he
resolved to do. And his choice fell on a beauty belonging to the
Court, who not merely belonged to the circle into which he wished to be
accepted, but whose friendship was coveted by the very highest people
and those most firmly established in that highest circle. This was
Countess Korotkova. Kasatsky began to pay court to her, and not merely
for the sake of his career. She was extremely attractive and he soon
fell in love with her. At first she was noticeably cool towards him,
but then suddenly changed and became gracious, and her mother gave him
pressing invitations to visit them. Kasatsky proposed and was accepted.
He was surprised at the facility with which he attained such happiness.
But though he noticed something strange and unusual in the behaviour
towards him of both mother and daughter, he was blinded by being
so deeply in love, and did not realize what almost the whole town
knew--namely, that his fiancee had been the Emperor Nicholas's mistress
the previous year.

Two weeks before the day arranged for the wedding, Kasatsky was at
Tsarskoe Selo at his fiancee's country place. It was a hot day in May.
He and his betrothed had walked about the garden and were sitting on
a bench in a shady linden alley. Mary's white muslin dress suited her
particularly well, and she seemed the personification of innocence and
love as she sat, now bending her head, now gazing up at the very tall
and handsome man who was speaking to her with particular tenderness and
self-restraint, as if he feared by word or gesture to offend or sully
her angelic purity.

Kasatsky belonged to those men of the eighteen-forties (they are now no
longer to be found) who while deliberately and without any conscientious
scruples condoning impurity in themselves, required ideal and angelic
purity in their women, regarded all unmarried women of their circle as
possessed of such purity, and treated them accordingly. There was much
that was false and harmful in this outlook, as concerning the laxity the
men permitted themselves, but in regard to the women that old-fashioned
view (sharply differing from that held by young people to-day who see in
every girl merely a female seeking a mate) was, I think, of value. The
girls, perceiving such adoration, endeavoured with more or less success
to be goddesses.

Such was the view Kasatsky held of women, and that was how he regarded
his fiancee. He was particularly in love that day, but did not
experience any sensual desire for her. On the contrary he regarded her
with tender adoration as something unattainable.

He rose to his full height, standing before her with both hands on his
sabre.

'I have only now realized what happiness a man can experience! And it is
you, my darling, who have given me this happiness,' he said with a timid
smile.

Endearments had not yet become usual between them, and feeling himself
morally inferior he felt terrified at this stage to use them to such an
angel.

'It is thanks to you that I have come to know myself. I have learnt that
I am better than I thought.'

'I have known that for a long time. That was why I began to love you.'

Nightingales trilled near by and the fresh leafage rustled, moved by a
passing breeze.

He took her hand and kissed it, and tears came into his eyes.

She understood that he was thanking her for having said she loved him.
He silently took a few steps up and down, and then approached her again
and sat down.

'You know... I have to tell you... I was not disinterested when I
began to make love to you. I wanted to get into society; but later...
how unimportant that became in comparison with you--when I got to know
you. You are not angry with me for that?'

She did not reply but merely touched his hand. He understood that this
meant: 'No, I am not angry.'

'You said...' He hesitated. It seemed too bold to say. 'You said that
you began to love me. I believe it--but there is something that troubles
you and checks your feeling. What is it?'

'Yes--now or never!' thought she. 'He is bound to know of it anyway. But
now he will not forsake me. Ah, if he should, it would be terrible!' And
she threw a loving glance at his tall, noble, powerful figure. She loved
him now more than she had loved the Tsar, and apart from the Imperial
dignity would not have preferred the Emperor to him.

'Listen! I cannot deceive you. I have to tell you. You ask what it is?
It is that I have loved before.'

She again laid her hand on his with an imploring gesture. He was silent.

'You want to know who it was? It was--the Emperor.'

'We all love him. I can imagine you, a schoolgirl at the Institute...'

'No, it was later. I was infatuated, but it passed... I must tell
you...'

'Well, what of it?'

'No, it was not simply--' She covered her face with her hands.

'What? You gave yourself to him?'

She was silent.

'His mistress?'

She did not answer.

He sprang up and stood before her with trembling jaws, pale as death. He
now remembered how the Emperor, meeting him on the Nevsky, had amiably
congratulated him.

'O God, what have I done! Stiva!'

'Don't touch me! Don't touch me! Oh, how it pains!'

He turned away and went to the house. There he met her mother.

'What is the matter, Prince? I...' She became silent on seeing his
face. The blood had suddenly rushed to his head.

'You knew it, and used me to shield them! If you weren't a woman...!'
he cried, lifting his enormous fist, and turning aside he ran away.

Had his fiancee's lover been a private person he would have killed him,
but it was his beloved Tsar.

Next day he applied both for furlough and his discharge, and professing
to be ill, so as to see no one, he went away to the country.

He spent the summer at his village arranging his affairs. When summer
was over he did not return to Petersburg, but entered a monastery and
there became a monk.

His mother wrote to try to dissuade him from this decisive step, but
he replied that he felt God's call which transcended all other
considerations. Only his sister, who was as proud and ambitious as he,
understood him.

She understood that he had become a monk in order to be above those who
considered themselves his superiors. And she understood him correctly.
By becoming a monk he showed contempt for all that seemed most important
to others and had seemed so to him while he was in the service, and
he now ascended a height from which he could look down on those he had
formerly envied.... But it was not this alone, as his sister Varvara
supposed, that influenced him. There was also in him something else--a
sincere religious feeling which Varvara did not know, which intertwined
itself with the feeling of pride and the desire for pre-eminence,
and guided him. His disillusionment with Mary, whom he had thought
of angelic purity, and his sense of injury, were so strong that they
brought him to despair, and the despair led him--to what? To God, to his
childhood's faith which had never been destroyed in him.




II

Kasatsky entered the monastery on the feast of the Intercession of the
Blessed Virgin. The Abbot of that monastery was a gentleman by birth, a
learned writer and a starets, that is, he belonged to that succession
of monks originating in Walachia who each choose a director and teacher
whom they implicitly obey. This Superior had been a disciple of the
starets Ambrose, who was a disciple of Makarius, who was a disciple of
the starets Leonid, who was a disciple of Paussy Velichkovsky.

To this Abbot Kasatsky submitted himself as to his chosen director. Here
in the monastery, besides the feeling of ascendency over others that
such a life gave him, he felt much as he had done in the world: he found
satisfaction in attaining the greatest possible perfection outwardly
as well as inwardly. As in the regiment he had been not merely an
irreproachable officer but had even exceeded his duties and widened the
borders of perfection, so also as a monk he tried to be perfect, and was
always industrious, abstemious, submissive, and meek, as well as
pure both in deed and in thought, and obedient. This last quality in
particular made life far easier for him. If many of the demands of life
in the monastery, which was near the capital and much frequented, did
not please him and were temptations to him, they were all nullified by
obedience: 'It is not for me to reason; my business is to do the task
set me, whether it be standing beside the relics, singing in the choir,
or making up accounts in the monastery guest-house.' All possibility of
doubt about anything was silenced by obedience to the starets. Had
it not been for this, he would have been oppressed by the length and
monotony of the church services, the bustle of the many visitors, and
the bad qualities of the other monks. As it was, he not only bore it
all joyfully but found in it solace and support. 'I don't know why it is
necessary to hear the same prayers several times a day, but I know that
it is necessary; and knowing this I find joy in them.' His director told
him that as material food is necessary for the maintenance of the life
of the body, so spiritual food--the church prayers--is necessary for
the maintenance of the spiritual life. He believed this, and though the
church services, for which he had to get up early in the morning, were
a difficulty, they certainly calmed him and gave him joy. This was the
result of his consciousness of humility, and the certainty that whatever
he had to do, being fixed by the starets, was right.

The interest of his life consisted not only in an ever greater and
greater subjugation of his will, but in the attainment of all the
Christian virtues, which at first seemed to him easily attainable. He
had given his whole estate to his sister and did not regret it, he had
no personal claims, humility towards his inferiors was not merely easy
for him but afforded him pleasure. Even victory over the sins of the
flesh, greed and lust, was easily attained. His director had specially
warned him against the latter sin, but Kasatsky felt free from it and
was glad.

One thing only tormented him--the remembrance of his fiancee; and not
merely the remembrance but the vivid image of what might have been.
Involuntarily he recalled a lady he knew who had been a favourite of the
Emperor's, but had afterwards married and become an admirable wife and
mother. The husband had a high position, influence and honour, and a
good and penitent wife.

In his better hours Kasatsky was not disturbed by such thoughts, and
when he recalled them at such times he was merely glad to feel that the
temptation was past. But there were moments when all that made up his
present life suddenly grew dim before him, moments when, if he did not
cease to believe in the aims he had set himself, he ceased to see them
and could evoke no confidence in them but was seized by a remembrance
of, and--terrible to say--a regret for, the change of life he had made.

The only thing that saved him in that state of mind was obedience and
work, and the fact that the whole day was occupied by prayer. He went
through the usual forms of prayer, he bowed in prayer, he even prayed
more than usual, but it was lip-service only and his soul was not in it.
This condition would continue for a day, or sometimes for two days, and
would then pass of itself. But those days were dreadful. Kasatsky felt
that he was neither in his own hands nor in God's, but was subject
to something else. All he could do then was to obey the starets, to
restrain himself, to undertake nothing, and simply to wait. In general
all this time he lived not by his own will but by that of the starets,
and in this obedience he found a special tranquillity.

So he lived in his first monastery for seven years. At the end of the
third year he received the tonsure and was ordained to the priesthood by
the name of Sergius. The profession was an important event in his inner
life. He had previously experienced a great consolation and spiritual
exaltation when receiving communion, and now when he himself officiated,
the performance of the preparation filled him with ecstatic and deep
emotion. But subsequently that feeling became more and more deadened,
and once when he was officiating in a depressed state of mind he felt
that the influence produced on him by the service would not endure. And
it did in fact weaken till only the habit remained.

In general in the seventh year of his life in the monastery Sergius grew
weary. He had learnt all there was to learn and had attained all there
was to attain, there was nothing more to do and his spiritual drowsiness
increased. During this time he heard of his mother's death and his
sister Varvara's marriage, but both events were matters of indifference
to him. His whole attention and his whole interest were concentrated on
his inner life.

In the fourth year of his priesthood, during which the Bishop had been
particularly kind to him, the starets told him that he ought not to
decline it if he were offered an appointment to higher duties. Then
monastic ambition, the very thing he had found so repulsive in other
monks, arose within him. He was assigned to a monastery near the
metropolis. He wished to refuse but the starets ordered him to accept
the appointment. He did so, and took leave of the starets and moved to
the other monastery.

The exchange into the metropolitan monastery was an important event in
Sergius's life. There he encountered many temptations, and his whole
will-power was concentrated on meeting them.

In the first monastery, women had not been a temptation to him, but
here that temptation arose with terrible strength and even took definite
shape. There was a lady known for her frivolous behaviour who began to
seek his favour. She talked to him and asked him to visit her. Sergius
sternly declined, but was horrified by the definiteness of his desire.
He was so alarmed that he wrote about it to the starets. And in
addition, to keep himself in hand, he spoke to a young novice and,
conquering his sense of shame, confessed his weakness to him, asking him
to keep watch on him and not let him go anywhere except to service and
to fulfil his duties.

Besides this, a great pitfall for Sergius lay in the fact of his extreme
antipathy to his new Abbot, a cunning worldly man who was making a
career for himself in the Church. Struggle with himself as he might, he
could not master that feeling. He was submissive to the Abbot, but in
the depths of his soul he never ceased to condemn him. And in the second
year of his residence at the new monastery that ill-feeling broke out.

The Vigil service was being performed in the large church on the eve of
the feast of the Intercession of the Blessed Virgin, and there were many
visitors. The Abbot himself was conducting the service. Father Sergius
was standing in his usual place and praying: that is, he was in that
condition of struggle which always occupied him during the service,
especially in the large church when he was not himself conducting the
service. This conflict was occasioned by his irritation at the presence
of fine folk, especially ladies. He tried not to see them or to notice
all that went on: how a soldier conducted them, pushing the
common people aside, how the ladies pointed out the monks to one
another--especially himself and a monk noted for his good looks. He
tried as it were to keep his mind in blinkers, to see nothing but
the light of the candles on the altar-screen, the icons, and those
conducting the service. He tried to hear nothing but the prayers
that were being chanted or read, to feel nothing but self-oblivion in
consciousness of the fulfilment of duty--a feeling he always experienced
when hearing or reciting in advance the prayers he had so often heard.

So he stood, crossing and prostrating himself when necessary, and
struggled with himself, now giving way to cold condemnation and now to
a consciously evoked obliteration of thought and feeling. Then the
sacristan, Father Nicodemus--also a great stumbling-block to Sergius
who involuntarily reproached him for flattering and fawning on the
Abbot--approached him and, bowing low, requested his presence behind the
holy gates. Father Sergius straightened his mantle, put on his biretta,
and went circumspectly through the crowd.

'Lise, regarde a droite, c'est lui!' he heard a woman's voice say.

'Ou, ou? Il n'est pas tellement beau.'

He knew that they were speaking of him. He heard them and, as always
at moments of temptation, he repeated the words, 'Lead us not into
temptation,' and bowing his head and lowering his eyes went past the
ambo and in by the north door, avoiding the canons in their cassocks who
were just then passing the altar-screen. On entering the sanctuary he
bowed, crossing himself as usual and bending double before the icons.
Then, raising his head but without turning, he glanced out of the corner
of his eye at the Abbot, whom he saw standing beside another glittering
figure.

The Abbot was standing by the wall in his vestments. Having freed his
short plump hands from beneath his chasuble he had folded them over
his fat body and protruding stomach, and fingering the cords of his
vestments was smilingly saying something to a military man in the
uniform of a general of the Imperial suite, with its insignia
and shoulder-knots which Father Sergius's experienced eye at once
recognized. This general had been the commander of the regiment in which
Sergius had served. He now evidently occupied an important position, and
Father Sergius at once noticed that the Abbot was aware of this and that
his red face and bald head beamed with satisfaction and pleasure. This
vexed and disgusted Father Sergius, the more so when he heard that the
Abbot had only sent for him to satisfy the general's curiosity to see a
man who had formerly served with him, as he expressed it.

'Very pleased to see you in your angelic guise,' said the general,
holding out his hand. 'I hope you have not forgotten an old comrade.'

The whole thing--the Abbot's red, smiling face amid its fringe of grey,
the general's words, his well-cared-for face with its self-satisfied
smile and the smell of wine from his breath and of cigars from his
whiskers--revolted Father Sergius. He bowed again to the Abbot and said:

'Your reverence deigned to send for me?'--and stopped, the whole
expression of his face and eyes asking why.

'Yes, to meet the General,' replied the Abbot.

'Your reverence, I left the world to save myself from temptation,' said
Father Sergius, turning pale and with quivering lips. 'Why do you expose
me to it during prayers and in God's house?'

'You may go! Go!' said the Abbot, flaring up and frowning.

Next day Father Sergius asked pardon of the Abbot and of the brethren
for his pride, but at the same time, after a night spent in prayer, he
decided that he must leave this monastery, and he wrote to the starets
begging permission to return to him. He wrote that he felt his weakness
and incapacity to struggle against temptation without his help and
penitently confessed his sin of pride. By return of post came a letter
from the starets, who wrote that Sergius's pride was the cause of all
that had happened. The old man pointed out that his fits of anger were
due to the fact that in refusing all clerical honours he humiliated
himself not for the sake of God but for the sake of his pride. 'There
now, am I not a splendid man not to want anything?' That was why he
could not tolerate the Abbot's action. 'I have renounced everything for
the glory of God, and here I am exhibited like a wild beast!' 'Had you
renounced vanity for God's sake you would have borne it. Worldly pride
is not yet dead in you. I have thought about you, Sergius my son, and
prayed also, and this is what God has suggested to me. At the Tambov
hermitage the anchorite Hilary, a man of saintly life, has died. He had
lived there eighteen years. The Tambov Abbot is asking whether there is
not a brother who would take his place. And here comes your letter. Go
to Father Paissy of the Tambov Monastery. I will write to him about you,
and you must ask for Hilary's cell. Not that you can replace Hilary, but
you need solitude to quell your pride. May God bless you!'

Sergius obeyed the starets, showed his letter to the Abbot, and having
obtained his permission, gave up his cell, handed all his possessions
over to the monastery, and set out for the Tambov hermitage.

There the Abbot, an excellent manager of merchant origin, received
Sergius simply and quietly and placed him in Hilary's cell, at first
assigning to him a lay brother but afterwards leaving him alone, at
Sergius's own request. The cell was a dual cave, dug into the hillside,
and in it Hilary had been buried. In the back part was Hilary's grave,
while in the front was a niche for sleeping, with a straw mattress, a
small table, and a shelf with icons and books. Outside the outer door,
which fastened with a hook, was another shelf on which, once a day, a
monk placed food from the monastery.

And so Sergius became a hermit.




III

At Carnival time, in the sixth year of Sergius's life at the hermitage,
a merry company of rich people, men and women from a neighbouring town,
made up a troyka-party, after a meal of carnival-pancakes and wine. The
company consisted of two lawyers, a wealthy landowner, an officer, and
four ladies. One lady was the officer's wife, another the wife of
the landowner, the third his sister--a young girl--and the fourth a
divorcee, beautiful, rich, and eccentric, who amazed and shocked the
town by her escapades.

The weather was excellent and the snow-covered road smooth as a floor.
They drove some seven miles out of town, and then stopped and consulted
as to whether they should turn back or drive farther.

'But where does this road lead to?' asked Makovkina, the beautiful
divorcee.

'To Tambov, eight miles from here,' replied one of the lawyers, who was
having a flirtation with her.

'And then where?'

'Then on to L----, past the Monastery.'

'Where that Father Sergius lives?'

'Yes.'

'Kasatsky, the handsome hermit?'

'Yes.'

'Mesdames et messieurs, let us drive on and see Kasatsky! We can stop at
Tambov and have something to eat.'

'But we shouldn't get home to-night!'

'Never mind, we will stay at Kasatsky's.'

'Well, there is a very good hostelry at the Monastery. I stayed there
when I was defending Makhin.'

'No, I shall spend the night at Kasatsky's!'

'Impossible! Even your omnipotence could not accomplish that!'

'Impossible? Will you bet?'

'All right! If you spend the night with him, the stake shall be whatever
you like.'

'A DISCRETION!'

'But on your side too!'

'Yes, of course. Let us drive on.'

Vodka was handed to the drivers, and the party got out a box of pies,
wine, and sweets for themselves. The ladies wrapped up in their white
dogskins. The drivers disputed as to whose troyka should go ahead, and
the youngest, seating himself sideways with a dashing air, swung his
long knout and shouted to the horses. The troyka-bells tinkled and the
sledge-runners squeaked over the snow.

The sledge swayed hardly at all. The shaft-horse, with his tightly bound
tail under his decorated breechband, galloped smoothly and briskly; the
smooth road seemed to run rapidly backwards, while the driver dashingly
shook the reins. One of the lawyers and the officer sitting opposite
talked nonsense to Makovkina's neighbour, but Makovkina herself sat
motionless and in thought, tightly wrapped in her fur. 'Always the same
and always nasty! The same red shiny faces smelling of wine and cigars!
The same talk, the same thoughts, and always about the same things! And
they are all satisfied and confident that it should be so, and will
go on living like that till they die. But I can't. It bores me. I want
something that would upset it all and turn it upside down. Suppose
it happened to us as to those people--at Saratov was it?--who kept on
driving and froze to death.... What would our people do? How would
they behave? Basely, for certain. Each for himself. And I too should act
badly. But I at any rate have beauty. They all know it. And how about
that monk? Is it possible that he has become indifferent to it? No! That
is the one thing they all care for--like that cadet last autumn. What a
fool he was!'

'Ivan Nikolaevich!' she said aloud.

'What are your commands?'

'How old is he?'

'Who?'

'Kasatsky.'

'Over forty, I should think.'

'And does he receive all visitors?'

'Yes, everybody, but not always.'

'Cover up my feet. Not like that--how clumsy you are! No! More,
more--like that! But you need not squeeze them!'

So they came to the forest where the cell was.

Makovkina got out of the sledge, and told them to drive on. They tried
to dissuade her, but she grew irritable and ordered them to go on.

When the sledges had gone she went up the path in her white dogskin
coat. The lawyer got out and stopped to watch her.

It was Father Sergius's sixth year as a recluse, and he was now
forty-nine. His life in solitude was hard--not on account of the fasts
and the prayers (they were no hardship to him) but on account of an
inner conflict he had not at all anticipated. The sources of that
conflict were two: doubts, and the lust of the flesh. And these two
enemies always appeared together. It seemed to him that they were two
foes, but in reality they were one and the same. As soon as doubt was
gone so was the lustful desire. But thinking them to be two different
fiends he fought them separately.

'O my God, my God!' thought he. 'Why dost thou not grant me faith? There
is lust, of course: even the saints had to fight that--Saint Anthony and
others. But they had faith, while I have moments, hours, and days, when
it is absent. Why does the whole world, with all its delights, exist
if it is sinful and must be renounced? Why hast Thou created this
temptation? Temptation? Is it not rather a temptation that I wish to
abandon all the joys of earth and prepare something for myself there
where perhaps there is nothing?' And he became horrified and filled with
disgust at himself. 'Vile creature! And it is you who wish to become a
saint!' he upbraided himself, and he began to pray. But as soon as he
started to pray he saw himself vividly as he had been at the Monastery,
in a majestic post in biretta and mantle, and he shook his head. 'No,
that is not right. It is deception. I may deceive others, but not myself
or God. I am not a majestic man, but a pitiable and ridiculous one!' And
he threw back the folds of his cassock and smiled as he looked at his
thin legs in their underclothing.

Then he dropped the folds of the cassock again and began reading the
prayers, making the sign of the cross and prostrating himself. 'Can
it be that this couch will be my bier?' he read. And it seemed as if a
devil whispered to him: 'A solitary couch is itself a bier. Falsehood!'
And in imagination he saw the shoulders of a widow with whom he had
lived. He shook himself, and went on reading. Having read the precepts
he took up the Gospels, opened the book, and happened on a passage
he often repeated and knew by heart: 'Lord, I believe. Help thou my
unbelief!'--and he put away all the doubts that had arisen. As one
replaces an object of insecure equilibrium, so he carefully replaced his
belief on its shaky pedestal and carefully stepped back from it so as
not to shake or upset it. The blinkers were adjusted again and he felt
tranquillized, and repeating his childhood's prayer: 'Lord, receive me,
receive me!' he felt not merely at ease, but thrilled and joyful. He
crossed himself and lay down on the bedding on his narrow bench, tucking
his summer cassock under his head. He fell asleep at once, and in his
light slumber he seemed to hear the tinkling of sledge bells. He did not
know whether he was dreaming or awake, but a knock at the door aroused
him. He sat up, distrusting his senses, but the knock was repeated. Yes,
it was a knock close at hand, at his door, and with it the sound of a
woman's voice.

'My God! Can it be true, as I have read in the Lives of the Saints, that
the devil takes on the form of a woman? Yes--it is a woman's voice.
And a tender, timid, pleasant voice. Phui!' And he spat to exorcise the
devil. 'No, it was only my imagination,' he assured himself, and he
went to the corner where his lectern stood, falling on his knees in the
regular and habitual manner which of itself gave him consolation and
satisfaction. He sank down, his hair hanging over his face, and pressed
his head, already going bald in front, to the cold damp strip of drugget
on the draughty floor. He read the psalm old Father Pimon had told him
warded off temptation. He easily raised his light and emaciated body
on his strong sinewy legs and tried to continue saying his prayers, but
instead of doing so he involuntarily strained his hearing. He wished
to hear more. All was quiet. From the corner of the roof regular drops
continued to fall into the tub below. Outside was a mist and fog eating
into the snow that lay on the ground. It was still, very still. And
suddenly there was a rustling at the window and a voice--that
same tender, timid voice, which could only belong to an attractive
woman--said:

'Let me in, for Christ's sake!'

It seemed as though his blood had all rushed to his heart and settled
there. He could hardly breathe. 'Let God arise and let his enemies be
scattered...'

'But I am not a devil!' It was obvious that the lips that uttered this
were smiling. 'I am not a devil, but only a sinful woman who has lost
her way, not figuratively but literally!' She laughed. 'I am frozen and
beg for shelter.'

He pressed his face to the window, but the little icon-lamp was
reflected by it and shone on the whole pane. He put his hands to both
sides of his face and peered between them. Fog, mist, a tree, and--just
opposite him--she herself. Yes, there, a few inches from him, was the
sweet, kindly frightened face of a woman in a cap and a coat of long
white fur, leaning towards him. Their eyes met with instant recognition:
not that they had ever known one another, they had never met before,
but by the look they exchanged they--and he particularly--felt that they
knew and understood one another. After that glance to imagine her to be
a devil and not a simple, kindly, sweet, timid woman, was impossible.

'Who are you? Why have you come?' he asked.

'Do please open the door!' she replied, with capricious authority. 'I am
frozen. I tell you I have lost my way.'

'But I am a monk--a hermit.'

'Oh, do please open the door--or do you wish me to freeze under your
window while you say your prayers?'

'But how have you...'

'I shan't eat you. For God's sake let me in! I am quite frozen.'

She really did feel afraid, and said this in an almost tearful voice.

He stepped back from the window and looked at an icon of the Saviour
in His crown of thorns. 'Lord, help me! Lord, help me!' he exclaimed,
crossing himself and bowing low. Then he went to the door, and opening
it into the tiny porch, felt for the hook that fastened the outer door
and began to lift it. He heard steps outside. She was coming from the
window to the door. 'Ah!' she suddenly exclaimed, and he understood
that she had stepped into the puddle that the dripping from the roof had
formed at the threshold. His hands trembled, and he could not raise the
hook of the tightly closed door.

'Oh, what are you doing? Let me in! I am all wet. I am frozen! You are
thinking about saving your soul and are letting me freeze to death...'

He jerked the door towards him, raised the hook, and without considering
what he was doing, pushed it open with such force that it struck her.

'Oh--PARDON!' he suddenly exclaimed, reverting completely to his old
manner with ladies.

She smiled on hearing that PARDON. 'He is not quite so terrible, after
all,' she thought. 'It's all right. It is you who must pardon me,' she
said, stepping past him. 'I should never have ventured, but such an
extraordinary circumstance...'

'If you please!' he uttered, and stood aside to let her pass him. A
strong smell of fine scent, which he had long not encountered, struck
him. She went through the little porch into the cell where he lived. He
closed the outer door without fastening the hook, and stepped in after
her.

'Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me a sinner! Lord, have
mercy on me a sinner!' he prayed unceasingly, not merely to himself but
involuntarily moving his lips. 'If you please!' he said to her again.
She stood in the middle of the room, moisture dripping from her to the
floor as she looked him over. Her eyes were laughing.

'Forgive me for having disturbed your solitude. But you see what a
position I am in. It all came about from our starting from town for a
sledge-drive, and my making a bet that I would walk back by myself from
the Vorobevka to the town. But then I lost my way, and if I had not
happened to come upon your cell...' She began lying, but his face
confused her so that she could not continue, but became silent. She had
not expected him to be at all such as he was. He was not as handsome
as she had imagined, but was nevertheless beautiful in her eyes: his
greyish hair and beard, slightly curling, his fine, regular nose,
and his eyes like glowing coal when he looked at her, made a strong
impression on her.

He saw that she was lying.

'Yes... so,' said he, looking at her and again lowering his eyes. 'I
will go in there, and this place is at your disposal.'

And taking down the little lamp, he lit a candle, and bowing low to her
went into the small cell beyond the partition, and she heard him begin
to move something about there. 'Probably he is barricading himself in
from me!' she thought with a smile, and throwing off her white dogskin
cloak she tried to take off her cap, which had become entangled in her
hair and in the woven kerchief she was wearing under it. She had not
got at all wet when standing under the window, and had said so only as
a pretext to get him to let her in. But she really had stepped into the
puddle at the door, and her left foot was wet up to the ankle and her
overshoe full of water. She sat down on his bed--a bench only covered by
a bit of carpet--and began to take off her boots. The little cell seemed
to her charming. The narrow little room, some seven feet by nine, was as
clean as glass. There was nothing in it but the bench on which she
was sitting, the book-shelf above it, and a lectern in the corner.
A sheepskin coat and a cassock hung on nails by the door. Above the
lectern was the little lamp and an icon of Christ in His crown of
thorns. The room smelt strangely of perspiration and of earth. It all
pleased her--even that smell. Her wet feet, especially one of them, were
uncomfortable, and she quickly began to take off her boots and stockings
without ceasing to smile, pleased not so much at having achieved her
object as because she perceived that she had abashed that charming,
strange, striking, and attractive man. 'He did not respond, but what of
that?' she said to herself.

'Father Sergius! Father Sergius! Or how does one call you?'

'What do you want?' replied a quiet voice.

'Please forgive me for disturbing your solitude, but really I could not
help it. I should simply have fallen ill. And I don't know that I shan't
now. I am all wet and my feet are like ice.'

'Pardon me,' replied the quiet voice. 'I cannot be of any assistance to
you.'

'I would not have disturbed you if I could have helped it. I am only
here till daybreak.'

He did not reply and she heard him muttering something, probably his
prayers.

'You will not be coming in here?' she asked, smiling. 'For I must
undress to dry myself.'

He did not reply, but continued to read his prayers.

'Yes, that is a man!' thought she, getting her dripping boot off with
difficulty. She tugged at it, but could not get it off. The absurdity of
it struck her and she began to laugh almost inaudibly. But knowing that
he would hear her laughter and would be moved by it just as she wished
him to be, she laughed louder, and her laughter--gay, natural, and
kindly--really acted on him just in the way she wished.

'Yes, I could love a man like that--such eyes and such a simple noble
face, and passionate too despite all the prayers he mutters!' thought
she. 'You can't deceive a woman in these things. As soon as he put his
face to the window and saw me, he understood and knew. The glimmer of it
was in his eyes and remained there. He began to love me and desired me.
Yes--desired!' said she, getting her overshoe and her boot off at last
and starting to take off her stockings. To remove those long stockings
fastened with elastic it was necessary to raise her skirts. She felt
embarrassed and said:

'Don't come in!'

But there was no reply from the other side of the wall. The steady
muttering continued and also a sound of moving.

'He is prostrating himself to the ground, no doubt,' thought she.
'But he won't bow himself out of it. He is thinking of me just as I
am thinking of him. He is thinking of these feet of mine with the same
feeling that I have!' And she pulled off her wet stockings and put her
feet up on the bench, pressing them under her. She sat a while like that
with her arms round her knees and looking pensively before her. 'But it
is a desert, here in this silence. No one would ever know....'

She rose, took her stockings over to the stove, and hung them on the
damper. It was a queer damper, and she turned it about, and then,
stepping lightly on her bare feet, returned to the bench and sat down
there again with her feet up.

There was complete silence on the other side of the partition. She
looked at the tiny watch that hung round her neck. It was two o'clock.
'Our party should return about three!' She had not more than an hour
before her. 'Well, am I to sit like this all alone? What nonsense! I
don't want to. I will call him at once.'

'Father Sergius, Father Sergius! Sergey Dmitrich! Prince Kasatsky!'

Beyond the partition all was silent.

'Listen! This is cruel. I would not call you if it were not necessary.
I am ill. I don't know what is the matter with me!' she exclaimed in a
tone of suffering. 'Oh! Oh!' she groaned, falling back on the bench. And
strange to say she really felt that her strength was failing, that
she was becoming faint, that everything in her ached, and that she was
shivering with fever.

'Listen! Help me! I don't know what is the matter with me. Oh! Oh!' She
unfastened her dress, exposing her breast, and lifted her arms, bare to
the elbow. 'Oh! Oh!'

All this time he stood on the other side of the partition and prayed.
Having finished all the evening prayers, he now stood motionless, his
eyes looking at the end of his nose, and mentally repeated with all his
soul: 'Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy upon me!'

But he had heard everything. He had heard how the silk rustled when she
took off her dress, how she stepped with bare feet on the floor, and had
heard how she rubbed her feet with her hand. He felt his own weakness,
and that he might be lost at any moment. That was why he prayed
unceasingly. He felt rather as the hero in the fairy-tale must have felt
when he had to go on and on without looking round. So Sergius heard and
felt that danger and destruction were there, hovering above and
around him, and that he could only save himself by not looking in that
direction for an instant. But suddenly the desire to look seized him. At
the same instant she said:

'This is inhuman. I may die....'

'Yes, I will go to her, but like the Saint who laid one hand on the
adulteress and thrust his other into the brazier. But there is no
brazier here.' He looked round. The lamp! He put his finger over the
flame and frowned, preparing himself to suffer. And for a rather long
time, as it seemed to him, there was no sensation, but suddenly--he
had not yet decided whether it was painful enough--he writhed all over,
jerked his hand away, and waved it in the air. 'No, I can't stand that!'

'For God's sake come to me! I am dying! Oh!'

'Well--shall I perish? No, not so!'

'I will come to you directly,' he said, and having opened his door, he
went without looking at her through the cell into the porch where he
used to chop wood. There he felt for the block and for an axe which
leant against the wall.

'Immediately!' he said, and taking up the axe with his right hand he
laid the forefinger of his left hand on the block, swung the axe, and
struck with it below the second joint. The finger flew off more lightly
than a stick of similar thickness, and bounding up, turned over on the
edge of the block and then fell to the floor.

He heard it fall before he felt any pain, but before he had time to be
surprised he felt a burning pain and the warmth of flowing blood. He
hastily wrapped the stump in the skirt of his cassock, and pressing it
to his hip went back into the room, and standing in front of the woman,
lowered his eyes and asked in a low voice: 'What do you want?'

She looked at his pale face and his quivering left cheek, and suddenly
felt ashamed. She jumped up, seized her fur cloak, and throwing it round
her shoulders, wrapped herself up in it.

'I was in pain... I have caught cold... I... Father Sergius...
I...'

He let his eyes, shining with a quiet light of joy, rest upon her, and
said:

'Dear sister, why did you wish to ruin your immortal soul? Temptations
must come into the world, but woe to him by whom temptation comes. Pray
that God may forgive us!'

She listened and looked at him. Suddenly she heard the sound of
something dripping. She looked down and saw that blood was flowing from
his hand and down his cassock.

'What have you done to your hand?' She remembered the sound she had
heard, and seizing the little lamp ran out into the porch. There on the
floor she saw the bloody finger. She returned with her face paler than
his and was about to speak to him, but he silently passed into the back
cell and fastened the door.

'Forgive me!' she said. 'How can I atone for my sin?'

'Go away.'

'Let me tie up your hand.'

'Go away from here.'

She dressed hurriedly and silently, and when ready sat waiting in her
furs. The sledge-bells were heard outside.

'Father Sergius, forgive me!'

'Go away. God will forgive.'

'Father Sergius! I will change my life. Do not forsake me!'

'Go away.'

'Forgive me--and give me your blessing!'

'In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost!'--she
heard his voice from behind the partition. 'Go!'

She burst into sobs and left the cell. The lawyer came forward to meet
her.

'Well, I see I have lost the bet. It can't be helped. Where will you
sit?'

'It is all the same to me.'

She took a seat in the sledge, and did not utter a word all the way
home.

A year later she entered a convent as a novice, and lived a strict life
under the direction of the hermit Arseny, who wrote letters to her at
long intervals.




IV

Father Sergius lived as a recluse for another seven years.

At first he accepted much of what people brought him--tea, sugar, white
bread, milk, clothing, and fire-wood. But as time went on he led a more
and more austere life, refusing everything superfluous, and finally he
accepted nothing but rye-bread once a week. Everything else that was
brought to him he gave to the poor who came to him. He spent his entire
time in his cell, in prayer or in conversation with callers, who became
more and more numerous as time went on. Only three times a year did
he go out to church, and when necessary he went out to fetch water and
wood.

The episode with Makovkina had occurred after five years of his hermit
life. That occurrence soon became generally known--her nocturnal visit,
the change she underwent, and her entry into a convent. From that time
Father Sergius's fame increased. More and more visitors came to see him,
other monks settled down near his cell, and a church was erected there
and also a hostelry. His fame, as usual exaggerating his feats, spread
ever more and more widely. People began to come to him from a distance,
and began bringing invalids to him whom they declared he cured.

His first cure occurred in the eighth year of his life as a hermit. It
was the healing of a fourteen-year-old boy, whose mother brought him
to Father Sergius insisting that he should lay his hand on the child's
head. It had never occurred to Father Sergius that he could cure the
sick. He would have regarded such a thought as a great sin of pride; but
the mother who brought the boy implored him insistently, falling at his
feet and saying: 'Why do you, who heal others, refuse to help my son?'
She besought him in Christ's name. When Father Sergius assured her that
only God could heal the sick, she replied that she only wanted him to
lay his hands on the boy and pray for him. Father Sergius refused and
returned to his cell. But next day (it was in autumn and the nights were
already cold) on going out for water he saw the same mother with her
son, a pale boy of fourteen, and was met by the same petition.

He remembered the parable of the unjust judge, and though he had
previously felt sure that he ought to refuse, he now began to hesitate
and, having hesitated, took to prayer and prayed until a decision formed
itself in his soul. This decision was, that he ought to accede to the
woman's request and that her faith might save her son. As for himself,
he would in this case be but an insignificant instrument chosen by God.

And going out to the mother he did what she asked--laid his hand on the
boy's head and prayed.

The mother left with her son, and a month later the boy recovered, and
the fame of the holy healing power of the starets Sergius (as they now
called him) spread throughout the whole district. After that, not a week
passed without sick people coming, riding or on foot, to Father Sergius;
and having acceded to one petition he could not refuse others, and he
laid his hands on many and prayed. Many recovered, and his fame spread
more and more.

So seven years passed in the Monastery and thirteen in his hermit's
cell. He now had the appearance of an old man: his beard was long and
grey, but his hair, though thin, was still black and curly.




V

For some weeks Father Sergius had been living with one persistent
thought: whether he was right in accepting the position in which he had
not so much placed himself as been placed by the Archimandrite and
the Abbot. That position had begun after the recovery of the
fourteen-year-old boy. From that time, with each month, week, and day
that passed, Sergius felt his own inner life wasting away and being
replaced by external life. It was as if he had been turned inside out.

Sergius saw that he was a means of attracting visitors and contributions
to the monastery, and that therefore the authorities arranged matters in
such a way as to make as much use of him as possible. For instance, they
rendered it impossible for him to do any manual work. He was supplied
with everything he could want, and they only demanded of him that he
should not refuse his blessing to those who came to seek it. For his
convenience they appointed days when he would receive. They arranged a
reception-room for men, and a place was railed in so that he should not
be pushed over by the crowds of women visitors, and so that he could
conveniently bless those who came.

They told him that people needed him, and that fulfilling Christ's law
of love he could not refuse their demand to see him, and that to avoid
them would be cruel. He could not but agree with this, but the more he
gave himself up to such a life the more he felt that what was internal
became external, and that the fount of living water within him dried
up, and that what he did now was done more and more for men and less and
less for God.

Whether he admonished people, or simply blessed them, or prayed for the
sick, or advised people about their lives, or listened to expressions of
gratitude from those he had helped by precepts, or alms, or healing (as
they assured him)--he could not help being pleased at it, and could not
be indifferent to the results of his activity and to the influence he
exerted. He thought himself a shining light, and the more he felt this
the more was he conscious of a weakening, a dying down of the divine
light of truth that shone within him.

'In how far is what I do for God and in how far is it for men?' That was
the question that insistently tormented him and to which he was not so
much unable to give himself an answer as unable to face the answer.

In the depth of his soul he felt that the devil had substituted an
activity for men in place of his former activity for God. He felt this
because, just as it had formerly been hard for him to be torn from his
solitude so now that solitude itself was hard for him. He was oppressed
and wearied by visitors, but at the bottom of his heart he was glad of
their presence and glad of the praise they heaped upon him.

There was a time when he decided to go away and hide. He even planned
all that was necessary for that purpose. He prepared for himself a
peasant's shirt, trousers, coat, and cap. He explained that he wanted
these to give to those who asked. And he kept these clothes in his cell,
planning how he would put them on, cut his hair short, and go away.
First he would go some three hundred versts by train, then he would
leave the train and walk from village to village. He asked an old man
who had been a soldier how he tramped: what people gave him, and what
shelter they allowed him. The soldier told him where people were most
charitable, and where they would take a wanderer in for the night, and
Father Sergius intended to avail himself of this information. He even
put on those clothes one night in his desire to go, but he could not
decide what was best--to remain or to escape. At first he was in doubt,
but afterwards this indecision passed. He submitted to custom and
yielded to the devil, and only the peasant garb reminded him of the
thought and feeling he had had.

Every day more and more people flocked to him and less and less time was
left him for prayer and for renewing his spiritual strength. Sometimes
in lucid moments he thought he was like a place where there had once
been a spring. 'There used to be a feeble spring of living water which
flowed quietly from me and through me. That was true life, the time when
she tempted me!' (He always thought with ecstasy of that night and of
her who was now Mother Agnes.) She had tasted of that pure water, but
since then there had not been time for it to collect before thirsty
people came crowding in and pushing one another aside. And they had
trampled everything down and nothing was left but mud.

So he thought in rare moments of lucidity, but his usual state of mind
was one of weariness and a tender pity for himself because of that
weariness.

It was in spring, on the eve of the mid-Pentecostal feast. Father
Sergius was officiating at the Vigil Service in his hermitage church,
where the congregation was as large as the little church could
hold--about twenty people. They were all well-to-do proprietors or
merchants. Father Sergius admitted anyone, but a selection was made by
the monk in attendance and by an assistant who was sent to the hermitage
every day from the monastery. A crowd of some eighty people--pilgrims
and peasants, and especially peasant-women--stood outside waiting for
Father Sergius to come out and bless them. Meanwhile he conducted
the service, but at the point at which he went out to the tomb of his
predecessor, he staggered and would have fallen had he not been caught
by a merchant standing behind him and by the monk acting as deacon.

'What is the matter, Father Sergius? Dear man! O Lord!' exclaimed the
women. 'He is as white as a sheet!'

But Father Sergius recovered immediately, and though very pale, he waved
the merchant and the deacon aside and continued to chant the service.

Father Seraphim, the deacon, the acolytes, and Sofya Ivanovna, a lady
who always lived near the hermitage and tended Father Sergius, begged
him to bring the service to an end.

'No, there's nothing the matter,' said Father Sergius, slightly smiling
from beneath his moustache and continuing the service. 'Yes, that is the
way the Saints behave!' thought he.

'A holy man--an angel of God!' he heard just then the voice of Sofya
Ivanovna behind him, and also of the merchant who had supported him.
He did not heed their entreaties, but went on with the service. Again
crowding together they all made their way by the narrow passages back
into the little church, and there, though abbreviating it slightly,
Father Sergius completed vespers.

Immediately after the service Father Sergius, having pronounced the
benediction on those present, went over to the bench under the elm tree
at the entrance to the cave. He wished to rest and breathe the fresh
air--he felt in need of it. But as soon as he left the church the crowd
of people rushed to him soliciting his blessing, his advice, and his
help. There were pilgrims who constantly tramped from one holy place to
another and from one starets to another, and were always entranced by
every shrine and every starets. Father Sergius knew this common, cold,
conventional, and most irreligious type. There were pilgrims, for
the most part discharged soldiers, unaccustomed to a settled life,
poverty-stricken, and many of them drunken old men, who tramped from
monastery to monastery merely to be fed. And there were rough peasants
and peasant-women who had come with their selfish requirements, seeking
cures or to have doubts about quite practical affairs solved for them:
about marrying off a daughter, or hiring a shop, or buying a bit
of land, or how to atone for having overlaid a child or having an
illegitimate one.

All this was an old story and not in the least interesting to him. He
knew he would hear nothing new from these folk, that they would arouse
no religious emotion in him; but he liked to see the crowd to which
his blessing and advice was necessary and precious, so while that crowd
oppressed him it also pleased him. Father Seraphim began to drive them
away, saying that Father Sergius was tired.

But Father Sergius, remembering the words of the Gospel: 'Forbid them'
(children) 'not to come unto me,' and feeling tenderly towards himself
at this recollection, said they should be allowed to approach.

He rose, went to the railing beyond which the crowd had gathered, and
began blessing them and answering their questions, but in a voice so
weak that he was touched with pity for himself. Yet despite his wish to
receive them all he could not do it. Things again grew dark before his
eyes, and he staggered and grasped the railings. He felt a rush of blood
to his head and first went pale and then suddenly flushed.

'I must leave the rest till to-morrow. I cannot do more to-day,'
and, pronouncing a general benediction, he returned to the bench. The
merchant again supported him, and leading him by the arm helped him to
be seated.

'Father!' came voices from the crowd. 'Dear Father! Do not forsake us.
Without you we are lost!'

The merchant, having seated Father Sergius on the bench under the elm,
took on himself police duties and drove the people off very resolutely.
It is true that he spoke in a low voice so that Father Sergius might not
hear him, but his words were incisive and angry.

'Be off, be off! He has blessed you, and what more do you want? Get
along with you, or I'll wring your necks! Move on there! Get along, you
old woman with your dirty leg-bands! Go, go! Where are you shoving to?
You've been told that it is finished. To-morrow will be as God wills,
but for to-day he has finished!'

'Father! Only let my eyes have a glimpse of his dear face!' said an old
woman.

'I'll glimpse you! Where are you shoving to?'

Father Sergius noticed that the merchant seemed to be acting roughly,
and in a feeble voice told the attendant that the people should not be
driven away. He knew that they would be driven away all the same, and
he much desired to be left alone and to rest, but he sent the attendant
with that message to produce an impression.

'All right, all right! I am not driving them away. I am only
remonstrating with them,' replied the merchant. 'You know they wouldn't
hesitate to drive a man to death. They have no pity, they only consider
themselves.... You've been told you cannot see him. Go away!
To-morrow!' And he got rid of them all.

He took all these pains because he liked order and liked to domineer
and drive the people away, but chiefly because he wanted to have Father
Sergius to himself. He was a widower with an only daughter who was an
invalid and unmarried, and whom he had brought fourteen hundred versts
to Father Sergius to be healed. For two years past he had been taking
her to different places to be cured: first to the university clinic in
the chief town of the province, but that did no good; then to a peasant
in the province of Samara, where she got a little better; then to a
doctor in Moscow to whom he paid much money, but this did no good at
all. Now he had been told that Father Sergius wrought cures, and had
brought her to him. So when all the people had been driven away he
approached Father Sergius, and suddenly falling on his knees loudly
exclaimed:

'Holy Father! Bless my afflicted offspring that she may be healed of her
malady. I venture to prostrate myself at your holy feet.'

And he placed one hand on the other, cup-wise. He said and did all this
as if he were doing something clearly and firmly appointed by law and
usage--as if one must and should ask for a daughter to be cured in just
this way and no other. He did it with such conviction that it seemed
even to Father Sergius that it should be said and done in just that way,
but nevertheless he bade him rise and tell him what the trouble was. The
merchant said that his daughter, a girl of twenty-two, had fallen ill
two years ago, after her mother's sudden death. She had moaned (as
he expressed it) and since then had not been herself. And now he had
brought her fourteen hundred versts and she was waiting in the hostelry
till Father Sergius should give orders to bring her. She did not go out
during the day, being afraid of the light, and could only come after
sunset.

'Is she very weak?' asked Father Sergius.

'No, she has no particular weakness. She is quite plump, and is only
"nerastenic" the doctors say. If you will only let me bring her this
evening, Father Sergius, I'll fly like a spirit to fetch her. Holy
Father! Revive a parent's heart, restore his line, save his afflicted
daughter by your prayers!' And the merchant again threw himself on his
knees and bending sideways, with his head resting on his clenched fists,
remained stock still. Father Sergius again told him to get up, and
thinking how heavy his activities were and how he went through with them
patiently notwithstanding, he sighed heavily and after a few seconds of
silence, said:

'Well, bring her this evening. I will pray for her, but now I am
tired....' and he closed his eyes. 'I will send for you.'

The merchant went away, stepping on tiptoe, which only made his boots
creak the louder, and Father Sergius remained alone.

His whole life was filled by Church services and by people who came
to see him, but to-day had been a particularly difficult one. In
the morning an important official had arrived and had had a long
conversation with him; after that a lady had come with her son. This son
was a sceptical young professor whom the mother, an ardent believer and
devoted to Father Sergius, had brought that he might talk to him. The
conversation had been very trying. The young man, evidently not wishing
to have a controversy with a monk, had agreed with him in everything
as with someone who was mentally inferior. Father Sergius saw that the
young man did not believe but yet was satisfied, tranquil, and at ease,
and the memory of that conversation now disquieted him.

'Have something to eat, Father,' said the attendant.

'All right, bring me something.'

The attendant went to a hut that had been arranged some ten paces from
the cave, and Father Sergius remained alone.

The time was long past when he had lived alone doing everything for
himself and eating only rye-bread, or rolls prepared for the Church. He
had been advised long since that he had no right to neglect his health,
and he was given wholesome, though Lenten, food. He ate sparingly,
though much more than he had done, and often he ate with much pleasure,
and not as formerly with aversion and a sense of guilt. So it was now.
He had some gruel, drank a cup of tea, and ate half a white roll.

The attendant went away, and Father Sergius remained alone under the elm
tree.

It was a wonderful May evening, when the birches, aspens, elms, wild
cherries, and oaks, had just burst into foliage.

The bush of wild cherries behind the elm tree was in full bloom and had
not yet begun to shed its blossoms, and the nightingales--one quite near
at hand and two or three others in the bushes down by the river--burst
into full song after some preliminary twitters. From the river came the
far-off songs of peasants returning, no doubt, from their work. The sun
was setting behind the forest, its last rays glowing through the leaves.
All that side was brilliant green, the other side with the elm tree was
dark. The cockchafers flew clumsily about, falling to the ground when
they collided with anything.

After supper Father Sergius began to repeat a silent prayer: 'O Lord
Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy upon us!' and then he read a psalm,
and suddenly in the middle of the psalm a sparrow flew out from the
bush, alighted on the ground, and hopped towards him chirping as it
came, but then it took fright at something and flew away. He said a
prayer which referred to his abandonment of the world, and hastened to
finish it in order to send for the merchant with the sick daughter. She
interested him in that she presented a distraction, and because both she
and her father considered him a saint whose prayers were efficacious.
Outwardly he disavowed that idea, but in the depths of his soul he
considered it to be true.

He was often amazed that this had happened, that he, Stepan Kasatsky,
had come to be such an extraordinary saint and even a worker of
miracles, but of the fact that he was such there could not be the
least doubt. He could not fail to believe in the miracles he himself
witnessed, beginning with the sick boy and ending with the old woman who
had recovered her sight when he had prayed for her.

Strange as it might be, it was so. Accordingly the merchant's daughter
interested him as a new individual who had faith in him, and also as a
fresh opportunity to confirm his healing powers and enhance his fame.
'They bring people a thousand versts and write about it in the papers.
The Emperor knows of it, and they know of it in Europe, in unbelieving
Europe'--thought he. And suddenly he felt ashamed of his vanity and
again began to pray. 'Lord, King of Heaven, Comforter, Soul of Truth!
Come and enter into me and cleanse me from all sin and save and bless
my soul. Cleanse me from the sin of worldly vanity that troubles me!' he
repeated, and he remembered how often he had prayed about this and how
vain till now his prayers had been in that respect. His prayers worked
miracles for others, but in his own case God had not granted him
liberation from this petty passion.

He remembered his prayers at the commencement of his life at the
hermitage, when he prayed for purity, humility, and love, and how it
seemed to him then that God heard his prayers. He had retained his
purity and had chopped off his finger. And he lifted the shrivelled
stump of that finger to his lips and kissed it. It seemed to him now
that he had been humble then when he had always seemed loathsome to
himself on account of his sinfulness; and when he remembered the tender
feelings with which he had then met an old man who was bringing a
drunken soldier to him to ask alms; and how he had received HER, it
seemed to him that he had then possessed love also. But now? And he
asked himself whether he loved anyone, whether he loved Sofya Ivanovna,
or Father Seraphim, whether he had any feeling of love for all who had
come to him that day--for that learned young man with whom he had had
that instructive discussion in which he was concerned only to show off
his own intelligence and that he had not lagged behind the times in
knowledge. He wanted and needed their love, but felt none towards them.
He now had neither love nor humility nor purity.

He was pleased to know that the merchant's daughter was twenty-two, and
he wondered whether she was good-looking. When he inquired whether she
was weak, he really wanted to know if she had feminine charm.

'Can I have fallen so low?' he thought. 'Lord, help me! Restore me, my
Lord and God!' And he clasped his hands and began to pray.

The nightingales burst into song, a cockchafer knocked against him and
crept up the back of his neck. He brushed it off. 'But does He exist?
What if I am knocking at a door fastened from outside? The bar is on the
door for all to see. Nature--the nightingales and the cockchafers--is
that bar. Perhaps the young man was right.' And he began to pray aloud.
He prayed for a long time till these thoughts vanished and he again felt
calm and confident. He rang the bell and told the attendant to say that
the merchant might bring his daughter to him now.

The merchant came, leading his daughter by the arm. He led her into the
cell and immediately left her.

She was a very fair girl, plump and very short, with a pale, frightened,
childish face and a much developed feminine figure. Father Sergius
remained seated on the bench at the entrance and when she was passing
and stopped beside him for his blessing he was aghast at himself for
the way he looked at her figure. As she passed by him he was acutely
conscious of her femininity, though he saw by her face that she was
sensual and feeble-minded. He rose and went into the cell. She was
sitting on a stool waiting for him, and when he entered she rose.

'I want to go back to Papa,' she said.

'Don't be afraid,' he replied. 'What are you suffering from?'

'I am in pain all over,' she said, and suddenly her face lit up with a
smile.

'You will be well,' said he. 'Pray!'

'What is the use of praying? I have prayed and it does no good'--and she
continued to smile. 'I want you to pray for me and lay your hands on me.
I saw you in a dream.'

'How did you see me?'

'I saw you put your hands on my breast like that.' She took his hand and
pressed it to her breast. 'Just here.'

He yielded his right hand to her.

'What is your name?' he asked, trembling all over and feeling that he
was overcome and that his desire had already passed beyond control.

'Marie. Why?'

She took his hand and kissed it, and then put her arm round his waist
and pressed him to herself.

'What are you doing?' he said. 'Marie, you are a devil!'

'Oh, perhaps. What does it matter?'

And embracing him she sat down with him on the bed.

At dawn he went out into the porch.

'Can this all have happened? Her father will come and she will tell him
everything. She is a devil! What am I to do? Here is the axe with which
I chopped off my finger.' He snatched up the axe and moved back towards
the cell.

The attendant came up.

'Do you want some wood chopped? Let me have the axe.'

Sergius yielded up the axe and entered the cell. She was lying
there asleep. He looked at her with horror, and passed on beyond the
partition, where he took down the peasant clothes and put them on. Then
he seized a pair of scissors, cut off his long hair, and went out along
the path down the hill to the river, where he had not been for more than
three years.

A road ran beside the river and he went along it and walked till noon.
Then he went into a field of rye and lay down there. Towards evening
he approached a village, but without entering it went towards the cliff
that overhung the river. There he again lay down to rest.

It was early morning, half an hour before sunrise. All was damp and
gloomy and a cold early wind was blowing from the west. 'Yes, I must end
it all. There is no God. But how am I to end it? Throw myself into the
river? I can swim and should not drown. Hang myself? Yes, just throw
this sash over a branch.' This seemed so feasible and so easy that
he felt horrified. As usual at moments of despair he felt the need of
prayer. But there was no one to pray to. There was no God. He lay down
resting on his arm, and suddenly such a longing for sleep overcame him
that he could no longer support his head on his hand, but stretched out
his arm, laid his head upon it, and fell asleep. But that sleep lasted
only for a moment. He woke up immediately and began not to dream but to
remember.

He saw himself as a child in his mother's home in the country. A
carriage drives up, and out of it steps Uncle Nicholas Sergeevich,
with his long, spade-shaped, black beard, and with him Pashenka, a thin
little girl with large mild eyes and a timid pathetic face. And into
their company of boys Pashenka is brought and they have to play with
her, but it is dull. She is silly, and it ends by their making fun of
her and forcing her to show how she can swim. She lies down on the floor
and shows them, and they all laugh and make a fool of her. She sees this
and blushes red in patches and becomes more pitiable than before,
so pitiable that he feels ashamed and can never forget that crooked,
kindly, submissive smile. And Sergius remembered having seen her since
then. Long after, just before he became a monk, she had married a
landowner who squandered all her fortune and was in the habit of beating
her. She had had two children, a son and a daughter, but the son had
died while still young. And Sergius remembered having seen her very
wretched. Then again he had seen her in the monastery when she was a
widow. She had been still the same, not exactly stupid, but insipid,
insignificant, and pitiable. She had come with her daughter and her
daughter's fiance. They were already poor at that time and later on he
had heard that she was living in a small provincial town and was very
poor.

'Why am I thinking about her?' he asked himself, but he could not cease
doing so. 'Where is she? How is she getting on? Is she still as unhappy
as she was then when she had to show us how to swim on the floor? But
why should I think about her? What am I doing? I must put an end to
myself.'

And again he felt afraid, and again, to escape from that thought, he
went on thinking about Pashenka.

So he lay for a long time, thinking now of his unavoidable end and now
of Pashenka. She presented herself to him as a means of salvation. At
last he fell asleep, and in his sleep he saw an angel who came to him
and said: 'Go to Pashenka and learn from her what you have to do, what
your sin is, and wherein lies your salvation.'

He awoke, and having decided that this was a vision sent by God, he felt
glad, and resolved to do what had been told him in the vision. He knew
the town where she lived. It was some three hundred versts (two hundred
miles) away, and he set out to walk there.




VI

Pashenka had already long ceased to be Pashenka and had become old,
withered, wrinkled Praskovya Mikhaylovna, mother-in-law of that failure,
the drunken official Mavrikyev. She was living in the country town
where he had had his last appointment, and there she was supporting the
family: her daughter, her ailing neurasthenic son-in-law, and her five
grandchildren. She did this by giving music lessons to tradesmen's
daughters, giving four and sometimes five lessons a day of an hour each,
and earning in this way some sixty rubles (6 pounds) a month. So they
lived for the present, in expectation of another appointment. She had
sent letters to all her relations and acquaintances asking them to
obtain a post for her son-in-law, and among the rest she had written to
Sergius, but that letter had not reached him.

It was a Saturday, and Praskovya Mikhaylovna was herself mixing dough
for currant bread such as the serf-cook on her father's estate used
to make so well. She wished to give her grandchildren a treat on the
Sunday.

Masha, her daughter, was nursing her youngest child, the eldest boy and
girl were at school, and her son-in-law was asleep, not having slept
during the night. Praskovya Mikhaylovna had remained awake too for a
great part of the night, trying to soften her daughter's anger against
her husband.

She saw that it was impossible for her son-in-law, a weak creature, to
be other than he was, and realized that his wife's reproaches could do
no good--so she used all her efforts to soften those reproaches and to
avoid recrimination and anger. Unkindly relations between people caused
her actual physical suffering. It was so clear to her that bitter
feelings do not make anything better, but only make everything worse.
She did not in fact think about this: she simply suffered at the sight
of anger as she would from a bad smell, a harsh noise, or from blows on
her body.

She had--with a feeling of self-satisfaction--just taught Lukerya how
to mix the dough, when her six-year-old grandson Misha, wearing an
apron and with darned stockings on his crooked little legs, ran into the
kitchen with a frightened face.

'Grandma, a dreadful old man wants to see you.'

Lukerya looked out at the door.

'There is a pilgrim of some kind, a man...'

Praskovya Mikhaylovna rubbed her thin elbows against one another, wiped
her hands on her apron and went upstairs to get a five-kopek piece
[about a penny] out of her purse for him, but remembering that she had
nothing less than a ten-kopek piece she decided to give him some bread
instead. She returned to the cupboard, but suddenly blushed at the
thought of having grudged the ten-kopek piece, and telling Lukerya to
cut a slice of bread, went upstairs again to fetch it. 'It serves you
right,' she said to herself. 'You must now give twice over.'

She gave both the bread and the money to the pilgrim, and when doing
so--far from being proud of her generosity--she excused herself for
giving so little. The man had such an imposing appearance.

Though he had tramped two hundred versts as a beggar, though he was
tattered and had grown thin and weatherbeaten, though he had cropped his
long hair and was wearing a peasant's cap and boots, and though he bowed
very humbly, Sergius still had the impressive appearance that made him
so attractive. But Praskovya Mikhaylovna did not recognize him. She
could hardly do so, not having seen him for almost twenty years.

'Don't think ill of me, Father. Perhaps you want something to eat?'

He took the bread and the money, and Praskovya Mikhaylovna was surprised
that he did not go, but stood looking at her.

'Pashenka, I have come to you! Take me in...'

His beautiful black eyes, shining with the tears that started in them,
were fixed on her with imploring insistence. And under his greyish
moustache his lips quivered piteously.

Praskovya Mikhaylovna pressed her hands to her withered breast, opened
her mouth, and stood petrified, staring at the pilgrim with dilated
eyes.

'It can't be! Stepa! Sergey! Father Sergius!'

'Yes, it is I,' said Sergius in a low voice. 'Only not Sergius, or
Father Sergius, but a great sinner, Stepan Kasatsky--a great and lost
sinner. Take me in and help me!'

'It's impossible! How have you so humbled yourself? But come in.'

She reached out her hand, but he did not take it and only followed her
in.

But where was she to take him? The lodging was a small one. Formerly
she had had a tiny room, almost a closet, for herself, but later she had
given it up to her daughter, and Masha was now sitting there rocking the
baby.

'Sit here for the present,' she said to Sergius, pointing to a bench in
the kitchen.

He sat down at once, and with an evidently accustomed movement slipped
the straps of his wallet first off one shoulder and then off the other.

'My God, my God! How you have humbled yourself, Father! Such great fame,
and now like this...'

Sergius did not reply, but only smiled meekly, placing his wallet under
the bench on which he sat.

'Masha, do you know who this is?'--And in a whisper Praskovya
Mikhaylovna told her daughter who he was, and together they then carried
the bed and the cradle out of the tiny room and cleared it for Sergius.

Praskovya Mikhaylovna led him into it.

'Here you can rest. Don't take offence... but I must go out.'

'Where to?'

'I have to go to a lesson. I am ashamed to tell you, but I teach music!'

'Music? But that is good. Only just one thing, Praskovya Mikhaylovna,
I have come to you with a definite object. When can I have a talk with
you?'

'I shall be very glad. Will this evening do?'

'Yes. But one thing more. Don't speak about me, or say who I am. I have
revealed myself only to you. No one knows where I have gone to. It must
be so.'

'Oh, but I have told my daughter.'

'Well, ask her not to mention it.'

And Sergius took off his boots, lay down, and at once fell asleep after
a sleepless night and a walk of nearly thirty miles.

When Praskovya Mikhaylovna returned, Sergius was sitting in the little
room waiting for her. He did not come out for dinner, but had some soup
and gruel which Lukerya brought him.

'How is it that you have come back earlier than you said?' asked
Sergius. 'Can I speak to you now?'

'How is it that I have the happiness to receive such a guest? I have
missed one of my lessons. That can wait... I had always been planning
to go to see you. I wrote to you, and now this good fortune has come.'

'Pashenka, please listen to what I am going to tell you as to a
confession made to God at my last hour. Pashenka, I am not a holy man,
I am not even as good as a simple ordinary man; I am a loathsome,
vile, and proud sinner who has gone astray, and who, if not worse than
everyone else, is at least worse than most very bad people.'

Pashenka looked at him at first with staring eyes. But she believed what
he said, and when she had quite grasped it she touched his hand, smiling
pityingly, and said:

'Perhaps you exaggerate, Stiva?'

'No, Pashenka. I am an adulterer, a murderer, a blasphemer, and a
deceiver.'

'My God! How is that?' exclaimed Praskovya Mikhaylovna.

'But I must go on living. And I, who thought I knew everything, who
taught others how to live--I know nothing and ask you to teach me.'

'What are you saying, Stiva? You are laughing at me. Why do you always
make fun of me?'

'Well, if you think I am jesting you must have it as you please. But
tell me all the same how you live, and how you have lived your life.'

'I? I have lived a very nasty, horrible life, and now God is punishing
me as I deserve. I live so wretchedly, so wretchedly...'

'How was it with your marriage? How did you live with your husband?'

'It was all bad. I married because I fell in love in the nastiest way.
Papa did not approve. But I would not listen to anything and just
got married. Then instead of helping my husband I tormented him by my
jealousy, which I could not restrain.'

'I heard that he drank...'

'Yes, but I did not give him any peace. I always reproached him, though
you know it is a disease! He could not refrain from it. I now remember
how I tried to prevent his having it, and the frightful scenes we had!'

And she looked at Kasatsky with beautiful eyes, suffering from the
remembrance.

Kasatsky remembered how he had been told that Pashenka's husband used
to beat her, and now, looking at her thin withered neck with prominent
veins behind her ears, and her scanty coil of hair, half grey half
auburn, he seemed to see just how it had occurred.

'Then I was left with two children and no means at all.'

'But you had an estate!'

'Oh, we sold that while Vasya was still alive, and the money was all
spent. We had to live, and like all our young ladies I did not know how
to earn anything. I was particularly useless and helpless. So we spent
all we had. I taught the children and improved my own education a
little. And then Mitya fell ill when he was already in the fourth
form, and God took him. Masha fell in love with Vanya, my son-in-law.
And--well, he is well-meaning but unfortunate. He is ill.'

'Mamma!'--her daughter's voice interrupted her--'Take Mitya! I can't be
in two places at once.'

Praskovya Mikhaylovna shuddered, but rose and went out of the room,
stepping quickly in her patched shoes. She soon came back with a boy of
two in her arms, who threw himself backwards and grabbed at her shawl
with his little hands.

'Where was I? Oh yes, he had a good appointment here, and his chief
was a kind man too. But Vanya could not go on, and had to give up his
position.'

'What is the matter with him?'

'Neurasthenia--it is a dreadful complaint. We consulted a doctor, who
told us he ought to go away, but we had no means.... I always hope it
will pass of itself. He has no particular pain, but...'

'Lukerya!' cried an angry and feeble voice. 'She is always sent away
when I want her. Mamma...'

'I'm coming!' Praskovya Mikhaylovna again interrupted herself. 'He has
not had his dinner yet. He can't eat with us.'

She went out and arranged something, and came back wiping her thin dark
hands.

'So that is how I live. I always complain and am always dissatisfied,
but thank God the grandchildren are all nice and healthy, and we can
still live. But why talk about me?'

'But what do you live on?'

'Well, I earn a little. How I used to dislike music, but how useful it
is to me now!' Her small hand lay on the chest of drawers beside which
she was sitting, and she drummed an exercise with her thin fingers.

'How much do you get for a lesson?'

'Sometimes a ruble, sometimes fifty kopeks, or sometimes thirty. They
are all so kind to me.'

'And do your pupils get on well?' asked Kasatsky with a slight smile.

Praskovya Mikhaylovna did not at first believe that he was asking
seriously, and looked inquiringly into his eyes.

'Some of them do. One of them is a splendid girl--the butcher's
daughter--such a good kind girl! If I were a clever woman I ought, of
course, with the connexions Papa had, to be able to get an appointment
for my son-in-law. But as it is I have not been able to do anything, and
have brought them all to this--as you see.'

'Yes, yes,' said Kasatsky, lowering his head. 'And how is it,
Pashenka--do you take part in Church life?'

'Oh, don't speak of it. I am so bad that way, and have neglected it so!
I keep the fasts with the children and sometimes go to church, and then
again sometimes I don't go for months. I only send the children.'

'But why don't you go yourself?'

'To tell the truth' (she blushed) 'I am ashamed, for my daughter's
sake and the children's, to go there in tattered clothes, and I haven't
anything else. Besides, I am just lazy.'

'And do you pray at home?'

'I do. But what sort of prayer is it? Only mechanical. I know it should
not be like that, but I lack real religious feeling. The only thing is
that I know how bad I am...'

'Yes, yes, that's right!' said Kasatsky, as if approvingly.

'I'm coming! I'm coming!' she replied to a call from her son-in-law, and
tidying her scanty plait she left the room.

But this time it was long before she returned. When she came back,
Kasatsky was sitting in the same position, his elbows resting on his
knees and his head bowed. But his wallet was strapped on his back.

When she came in, carrying a small tin lamp without a shade, he raised
his fine weary eyes and sighed very deeply.

'I did not tell them who you are,' she began timidly. 'I only said that
you are a pilgrim, a nobleman, and that I used to know you. Come into
the dining-room for tea.'

'No...'

'Well then, I'll bring some to you here.'

'No, I don't want anything. God bless you, Pashenka! I am going now. If
you pity me, don't tell anyone that you have seen me. For the love of
God don't tell anyone. Thank you. I would bow to your feet but I know
it would make you feel awkward. Thank you, and forgive me for Christ's
sake!'

'Give me your blessing.'

'God bless you! Forgive me for Christ's sake!'

He rose, but she would not let him go until she had given him bread and
butter and rusks. He took it all and went away.

It was dark, and before he had passed the second house he was lost to
sight. She only knew he was there because the dog at the priest's house
was barking.

'So that is what my dream meant! Pashenka is what I ought to have been
but failed to be. I lived for men on the pretext of living for God,
while she lived for God imagining that she lives for men. Yes, one good
deed--a cup of water given without thought of reward--is worth more
than any benefit I imagined I was bestowing on people. But after all was
there not some share of sincere desire to serve God?' he asked himself,
and the answer was: 'Yes, there was, but it was all soiled and overgrown
by desire for human praise. Yes, there is no God for the man who lives,
as I did, for human praise. I will now seek Him!'

And he walked from village to village as he had done on his way to
Pashenka, meeting and parting from other pilgrims, men and women, and
asking for bread and a night's rest in Christ's name. Occasionally some
angry housewife scolded him, or a drunken peasant reviled him, but for
the most part he was given food and drink and even something to take
with him. His noble bearing disposed some people in his favour, while
others on the contrary seemed pleased at the sight of a gentleman who
had come to beggary.

But his gentleness prevailed with everyone.

Often, finding a copy of the Gospels in a hut he would read it aloud,
and when they heard him the people were always touched and surprised, as
at something new yet familiar.

When he succeeded in helping people, either by advice, or by his
knowledge of reading and writing, or by settling some quarrel, he did
not wait to see their gratitude but went away directly afterwards. And
little by little God began to reveal Himself within him.

Once he was walking along with two old women and a soldier. They were
stopped by a party consisting of a lady and gentleman in a gig and
another lady and gentleman on horseback. The husband was on horseback
with his daughter, while in the gig his wife was driving with a
Frenchman, evidently a traveller.

The party stopped to let the Frenchman see the pilgrims who, in accord
with a popular Russian superstition, tramped about from place to place
instead of working.

They spoke French, thinking that the others would not understand them.

'Demandez-leur,' said the Frenchman, 's'ils sont bien sur de ce que leur
pelerinage est agreable a Dieu.'

The question was asked, and one old woman replied:

'As God takes it. Our feet have reached the holy places, but our hearts
may not have done so.'

They asked the soldier. He said that he was alone in the world and had
nowhere else to go.

They asked Kasatsky who he was.

'A servant of God.'

'Qu'est-ce qu'il dit? Il ne repond pas.'

'Il dit qu'il est un serviteur de Dieu. Cela doit etre un fils de
preetre. Il a de la race. Avez-vous de la petite monnaie?'

The Frenchman found some small change and gave twenty kopeks to each of
the pilgrims.

'Mais dites-leur que ce n'est pas pour les cierges que je leur donne,
mais pour qu'ils se regalent de the. Chay, chay pour vous, mon vieux!'
he said with a smile. And he patted Kasatsky on the shoulder with his
gloved hand.

'May Christ bless you,' replied Kasatsky without replacing his cap and
bowing his bald head.

He rejoiced particularly at this meeting, because he had disregarded the
opinion of men and had done the simplest, easiest thing--humbly accepted
twenty kopeks and given them to his comrade, a blind beggar. The less
importance he attached to the opinion of men the more did he feel the
presence of God within him.

For eight months Kasatsky tramped on in this manner, and in the ninth
month he was arrested for not having a passport. This happened at a
night-refuge in a provincial town where he had passed the night with
some pilgrims. He was taken to the police-station, and when asked who he
was and where was his passport, he replied that he had no passport and
that he was a servant of God. He was classed as a tramp, sentenced, and
sent to live in Siberia.

In Siberia he has settled down as the hired man of a well-to-do peasant,
in which capacity he works in the kitchen-garden, teaches children, and
attends to the sick.

========================================
========================================

CHILDHOOD

By Leo Tolstoy


Translated by C.J. Hogarth




I -- THE TUTOR, KARL IVANITCH

On the 12th of August, 18-- (just three days after my tenth birthday,
when I had been given such wonderful presents), I was awakened at seven
o'clock in the morning by Karl Ivanitch slapping the wall close to my
head with a fly-flap made of sugar paper and a stick. He did this so
roughly that he hit the image of my patron saint suspended to the oaken
back of my bed, and the dead fly fell down on my curls. I peeped out
from under the coverlet, steadied the still shaking image with my hand,
flicked the dead fly on to the floor, and gazed at Karl Ivanitch with
sleepy, wrathful eyes. He, in a parti-coloured wadded dressing-gown
fastened about the waist with a wide belt of the same material, a red
knitted cap adorned with a tassel, and soft slippers of goat skin, went
on walking round the walls and taking aim at, and slapping, flies.

"Suppose," I thought to myself, "that I am only a small boy, yet why
should he disturb me? Why does he not go killing flies around Woloda's
bed? No; Woloda is older than I, and I am the youngest of the family, so
he torments me. That is what he thinks of all day long--how to tease
me. He knows very well that he has woken me up and frightened me, but he
pretends not to notice it. Disgusting brute! And his dressing-gown and
cap and tassel too--they are all of them disgusting."

While I was thus inwardly venting my wrath upon Karl Ivanitch, he had
passed to his own bedstead, looked at his watch (which hung suspended in
a little shoe sewn with bugles), and deposited the fly-flap on a nail,
then, evidently in the most cheerful mood possible, he turned round to
us.

"Get up, children! It is quite time, and your mother is already in the
drawing-room," he exclaimed in his strong German accent. Then he crossed
over to me, sat down at my feet, and took his snuff-box out of his
pocket. I pretended to be asleep. Karl Ivanitch sneezed, wiped his
nose, flicked his fingers, and began amusing himself by teasing me and
tickling my toes as he said with a smile, "Well, well, little lazy one!"

For all my dread of being tickled, I determined not to get out of bed
or to answer him, but hid my head deeper in the pillow, kicked out with
all my strength, and strained every nerve to keep from laughing.

"How kind he is, and how fond of us!" I thought to myself. "Yet to think
that I could be hating him so just now!"

I felt angry, both with myself and with Karl Ivanitch, I wanted to laugh
and to cry at the same time, for my nerves were all on edge.

"Leave me alone, Karl!" I exclaimed at length, with tears in my eyes, as
I raised my head from beneath the bed-clothes.

Karl Ivanitch was taken aback. He left off tickling my feet, and asked
me kindly what the matter was. Had I had a disagreeable dream? His good
German face and the sympathy with which he sought to know the cause
of my tears made them flow the faster. I felt conscience-stricken, and
could not understand how, only a minute ago, I had been hating Karl,
and thinking his dressing-gown and cap and tassel disgusting. On the
contrary, they looked eminently lovable now. Even the tassel seemed
another token of his goodness. I replied that I was crying because I had
had a bad dream, and had seen Mamma dead and being buried. Of course it
was a mere invention, since I did not remember having dreamt anything
at all that night, but the truth was that Karl's sympathy as he tried to
comfort and reassure me had gradually made me believe that I HAD dreamt
such a horrible dream, and so weep the more--though from a different
cause to the one he imagined.

When Karl Ivanitch had left me, I sat up in bed and proceeded to draw
my stockings over my little feet. The tears had quite dried now, yet the
mournful thought of the invented dream was still haunting me a little.
Presently Uncle [This term is often applied by children to old servants
in Russia] Nicola came in--a neat little man who was always grave,
methodical, and respectful, as well as a great friend of Karl's. He
brought with him our clothes and boots--at least, boots for Woloda, and
for myself the old detestable, be-ribanded shoes. In his presence I
felt ashamed to cry, and, moreover, the morning sun was shining so gaily
through the window, and Woloda, standing at the washstand as he mimicked
Maria Ivanovna (my sister's governess), was laughing so loud and so
long, that even the serious Nicola--a towel over his shoulder, the soap
in one hand, and the basin in the other--could not help smiling as he
said, "Will you please let me wash you, Vladimir Petrovitch?" I had
cheered up completely.

"Are you nearly ready?" came Karl's voice from the schoolroom. The tone
of that voice sounded stern now, and had nothing in it of the kindness
which had just touched me so much. In fact, in the schoolroom Karl was
altogether a different man from what he was at other times. There he was
the tutor. I washed and dressed myself hurriedly, and, a brush still
in my hand as I smoothed my wet hair, answered to his call. Karl,
with spectacles on nose and a book in his hand, was sitting, as usual,
between the door and one of the windows. To the left of the door were
two shelves--one of them the children's (that is to say, ours), and the
other one Karl's own. Upon ours were heaped all sorts of books--lesson
books and play books--some standing up and some lying down. The only
two standing decorously against the wall were two large volumes of a
Histoire des Voyages, in red binding. On that shelf could be seen books
thick and thin and books large and small, as well as covers without
books and books without covers, since everything got crammed up together
anyhow when play time arrived and we were told to put the "library" (as
Karl called these shelves) in order. The collection of books on his own
shelf was, if not so numerous as ours, at least more varied. Three of
them in particular I remember, namely, a German pamphlet (minus a cover)
on Manuring Cabbages in Kitchen-Gardens, a History of the Seven Years'
War (bound in parchment and burnt at one corner), and a Course of
Hydrostatics. Though Karl passed so much of his time in reading that he
had injured his sight by doing so, he never read anything beyond these
books and The Northern Bee.

Another article on Karl's shelf I remember well. This was a round piece
of cardboard fastened by a screw to a wooden stand, with a sort of comic
picture of a lady and a hairdresser glued to the cardboard. Karl was
very clever at fixing pieces of cardboard together, and had devised this
contrivance for shielding his weak eyes from any very strong light.

I can see him before me now--the tall figure in its wadded dressing-gown
and red cap (a few grey hairs visible beneath the latter) sitting beside
the table; the screen with the hairdresser shading his face; one hand
holding a book, and the other one resting on the arm of the chair.
Before him lie his watch, with a huntsman painted on the dial, a
check cotton handkerchief, a round black snuff-box, and a green
spectacle-case. The neatness and orderliness of all these articles show
clearly that Karl Ivanitch has a clear conscience and a quiet mind.

Sometimes, when tired of running about the salon downstairs, I would
steal on tiptoe to the schoolroom and find Karl sitting alone in his
armchair as, with a grave and quiet expression on his face, he perused
one of his favourite books. Yet sometimes, also, there were moments when
he was not reading, and when the spectacles had slipped down his large
aquiline nose, and the blue, half-closed eyes and faintly smiling lips
seemed to be gazing before them with a curious expression. All would be
quiet in the room--not a sound being audible save his regular breathing
and the ticking of the watch with the hunter painted on the dial. He
would not see me, and I would stand at the door and think: "Poor, poor
old man! There are many of us, and we can play together and be happy,
but he sits there all alone, and has nobody to be fond of him. Surely
he speaks truth when he says that he is an orphan. And the story of his
life, too--how terrible it is! I remember him telling it to Nicola. How
dreadful to be in his position!" Then I would feel so sorry for him that
I would go to him, and take his hand, and say, "Dear Karl Ivanitch!"
and he would be visibly delighted whenever I spoke to him like this, and
would look much brighter.

On the second wall of the schoolroom hung some maps--mostly torn, but
glued together again by Karl's hand. On the third wall (in the middle of
which stood the door) hung, on one side of the door, a couple of rulers
(one of them ours--much bescratched, and the other one his--quite a new
one), with, on the further side of the door, a blackboard on which our
more serious faults were marked by circles and our lesser faults by
crosses. To the left of the blackboard was the corner in which we had to
kneel when naughty. How well I remember that corner--the shutter on the
stove, the ventilator above it, and the noise which it made when turned!
Sometimes I would be made to stay in that corner till my back and knees
were aching all over, and I would think to myself. "Has Karl Ivanitch
forgotten me? He goes on sitting quietly in his arm-chair and reading
his Hydrostatics, while I--!" Then, to remind him of my presence, I
would begin gently turning the ventilator round. Or scratching some
plaster off the wall; but if by chance an extra large piece fell upon
the floor, the fright of it was worse than any punishment. I would
glance round at Karl, but he would still be sitting there quietly, book
in hand, and pretending that he had noticed nothing.

In the middle of the room stood a table, covered with a torn black
oilcloth so much cut about with penknives that the edge of the table
showed through. Round the table stood unpainted chairs which, through
use, had attained a high degree of polish. The fourth and last wall
contained three windows, from the first of which the view was as
follows. Immediately beneath it there ran a high road on which every
irregularity, every pebble, every rut was known and dear to me. Beside
the road stretched a row of lime-trees, through which glimpses could be
caught of a wattled fence, with a meadow with farm buildings on one side
of it and a wood on the other--the whole bounded by the keeper's hut at
the further end of the meadow. The next window to the right overlooked
the part of the terrace where the "grownups" of the family used to sit
before luncheon. Sometimes, when Karl was correcting our exercises, I
would look out of that window and see Mamma's dark hair and the backs
of some persons with her, and hear the murmur of their talking and
laughter. Then I would feel vexed that I could not be there too, and
think to myself, "When am I going to be grown up, and to have no more
lessons, but sit with the people whom I love instead of with these
horrid dialogues in my hand?" Then my anger would change to sadness, and
I would fall into such a reverie that I never heard Karl when he scolded
me for my mistakes.

At last, on the morning of which I am speaking, Karl Ivanitch took
off his dressing-gown, put on his blue frockcoat with its creased and
crumpled shoulders, adjusted his tie before the looking-glass, and took
us down to greet Mamma.




II -- MAMMA

Mamma was sitting in the drawing-room and making tea. In one hand she
was holding the tea-pot, while with the other one she was drawing water
from the urn and letting it drip into the tray. Yet though she appeared
to be noticing what she doing, in reality she noted neither this fact
nor our entry.

However vivid be one's recollection of the past, any attempt to recall
the features of a beloved being shows them to one's vision as through
a mist of tears--dim and blurred. Those tears are the tears of the
imagination. When I try to recall Mamma as she was then, I see, true,
her brown eyes, expressive always of love and kindness, the small mole
on her neck below where the small hairs grow, her white embroidered
collar, and the delicate, fresh hand which so often caressed me,
and which I so often kissed; but her general appearance escapes me
altogether.

To the left of the sofa stood an English piano, at which my dark-haired
sister Lubotshka was sitting and playing with manifest effort (for
her hands were rosy from a recent washing in cold water) Clementi's
"Etudes." Then eleven years old, she was dressed in a short cotton frock
and white lace-frilled trousers, and could take her octaves only in
arpeggio. Beside her was sitting Maria Ivanovna, in a cap adorned
with pink ribbons and a blue shawl. Her face was red and cross, and it
assumed an expression even more severe when Karl Ivanitch entered the
room. Looking angrily at him without answering his bow, she went on
beating time with her foot and counting, "One, two, three--one, two,
three," more loudly and commandingly than ever.

Karl Ivanitch paid no attention to this rudeness, but went, as usual,
with German politeness to kiss Mamma's hand. She drew herself up, shook
her head as though by the movement to chase away sad thoughts from her,
and gave Karl her hand, kissing him on his wrinkled temple as he bent
his head in salutation.

"I thank you, dear Karl Ivanitch," she said in German, and then, still
using the same language asked him how we (the children) had slept.
Karl Ivanitch was deaf in one ear, and the added noise of the piano now
prevented him from hearing anything at all. He moved nearer to the sofa,
and, leaning one hand upon the table and lifting his cap above his
head, said with, a smile which in those days always seemed to me the
perfection of politeness: "You, will excuse me, will you not, Natalia
Nicolaevna?"

The reason for this was that, to avoid catching cold, Karl never took
off his red cap, but invariably asked permission, on entering the
drawing-room, to retain it on his head.

"Yes, pray replace it, Karl Ivanitch," said Mamma, bending towards him
and raising her voice, "But I asked you whether the children had slept
well?"

Still he did not hear, but, covering his bald head again with the red
cap, went on smiling more than ever.

"Stop a moment, Mimi," said Mamma (now smiling also) to Maria Ivanovna.
"It is impossible to hear anything."

How beautiful Mamma's face was when she smiled! It made her so
infinitely more charming, and everything around her seemed to grow
brighter! If in the more painful moments of my life I could have seen
that smile before my eyes, I should never have known what grief is. In
my opinion, it is in the smile of a face that the essence of what we
call beauty lies. If the smile heightens the charm of the face, then the
face is a beautiful one. If the smile does not alter the face, then the
face is an ordinary one. But if the smile spoils the face, then the face
is an ugly one indeed.

Mamma took my head between her hands, bent it gently backwards, looked
at me gravely, and said: "You have been crying this morning?"

I did not answer. She kissed my eyes, and said again in German: "Why did
you cry?"

When talking to us with particular intimacy she always used this
language, which she knew to perfection.

"I cried about a dream, Mamma" I replied, remembering the invented
vision, and trembling involuntarily at the recollection.

Karl Ivanitch confirmed my words, but said nothing as to the subject of
the dream. Then, after a little conversation on the weather, in which
Mimi also took part, Mamma laid some lumps of sugar on the tray for
one or two of the more privileged servants, and crossed over to her
embroidery frame, which stood near one of the windows.

"Go to Papa now, children," she said, "and ask him to come to me before
he goes to the home farm."

Then the music, the counting, and the wrathful looks from Mimi began
again, and we went off to see Papa. Passing through the room which had
been known ever since Grandpapa's time as "the pantry," we entered the
study.




III -- PAPA

He was standing near his writing-table, and pointing angrily to some
envelopes, papers, and little piles of coin upon it as he addressed some
observations to the bailiff, Jakoff Michaelovitch, who was standing in
his usual place (that is to say, between the door and the barometer)
and rapidly closing and unclosing the fingers of the hand which he held
behind his back. The more angry Papa grew, the more rapidly did those
fingers twirl, and when Papa ceased speaking they came to rest also.
Yet, as soon as ever Jakoff himself began to talk, they flew here,
there, and everywhere with lightning rapidity. These movements always
appeared to me an index of Jakoff's secret thoughts, though his face was
invariably placid, and expressive alike of dignity and submissiveness,
as who should say, "I am right, yet let it be as you wish." On seeing
us, Papa said, "Directly--wait a moment," and looked towards the door as
a hint for it to be shut.

"Gracious heavens! What can be the matter with you to-day, Jakoff?" he
went on with a hitch of one shoulder (a habit of his). "This envelope
here with the 800 roubles enclosed,"--Jacob took out a set of tablets,
put down "800" and remained looking at the figures while he waited
for what was to come next--"is for expenses during my absence. Do you
understand? From the mill you ought to receive 1000 roubles. Is not
that so? And from the Treasury mortgage you ought to receive some 8000
roubles. From the hay--of which, according to your calculations, we
shall be able to sell 7000 poods [The pood = 40 lbs.]at 45 copecks a
piece there should come in 3000. Consequently the sum-total that you
ought to have in hand soon is--how much?--12,000 roubles. Is that
right?"

"Precisely," answered Jakoff. Yet by the extreme rapidity with which
his fingers were twitching I could see that he had an objection to make.
Papa went on:

"Well, of this money you will send 10,000 roubles to the Petrovskoe
local council. As for the money already at the office, you will remit it
to me, and enter it as spent on this present date." Jakoff turned over
the tablet marked "12,000," and put down "21,000"--seeming, by his
action, to imply that 12,000 roubles had been turned over in the
same fashion as he had turned the tablet. "And this envelope with the
enclosed money," concluded Papa, "you will deliver for me to the person
to whom it is addressed."

I was standing close to the table, and could see the address. It was "To
Karl Ivanitch Mayer." Perhaps Papa had an idea that I had read something
which I ought not, for he touched my shoulder with his hand and made me
aware, by a slight movement, that I must withdraw from the table. Not
sure whether the movement was meant for a caress or a command, I kissed
the large, sinewy hand which rested upon my shoulder.

"Very well," said Jakoff. "And what are your orders about the accounts
for the money from Chabarovska?" (Chabarovska was Mamma's village.)

"Only that they are to remain in my office, and not to be taken thence
without my express instructions."

For a minute or two Jakoff was silent. Then his fingers began to twitch
with extraordinary rapidity, and, changing the expression of deferential
vacancy with which he had listened to his orders for one of shrewd
intelligence, he turned his tablets back and spoke.

"Will you allow me to inform you, Peter Alexandritch," he said, with
frequent pauses between his words, "that, however much you wish it, it
is out of the question to repay the local council now. You enumerated
some items, I think, as to what ought to come in from the mortgage, the
mill, and the hay (he jotted down each of these items on his tablets
again as he spoke). Yet I fear that we must have made a mistake
somewhere in the accounts." Here he paused a while, and looked gravely
at Papa.

"How so?"

"Well, will you be good enough to look for yourself? There is the
account for the mill. The miller has been to me twice to ask for time,
and I am afraid that he has no money whatever in hand. He is here now.
Would you like to speak to him?"

"No. Tell me what he says," replied Papa, showing by a movement of his
head that he had no desire to have speech with the miller.

"Well, it is easy enough to guess what he says. He declares that there
is no grinding to be got now, and that his last remaining money has gone
to pay for the dam. What good would it do for us to turn him out? As to
what you were pleased to say about the mortgage, you yourself are aware
that your money there is locked up and cannot be recovered at a moment's
notice. I was sending a load of flour to Ivan Afanovitch to-day, and
sent him a letter as well, to which he replies that he would have been
glad to oblige you, Peter Alexandritch, were it not that the matter is
out of his hands now, and that all the circumstances show that it would
take you at least two months to withdraw the money. From the hay I
understood you to estimate a return of 3000 roubles?" (Here Jakoff
jotted down "3000" on his tablets, and then looked for a moment from the
figures to Papa with a peculiar expression on his face.) "Well, surely
you see for yourself how little that is? And even then we should lose if
we were to sell the stuff now, for you must know that--"

It was clear that he would have had many other arguments to adduce had
not Papa interrupted him.

"I cannot make any change in my arrangements," said Papa. "Yet if there
should REALLY have to be any delay in the recovery of these sums, we
could borrow what we wanted from the Chabarovska funds."

"Very well, sir." The expression of Jakoff's face and the way in which
he twitched his fingers showed that this order had given him great
satisfaction. He was a serf, and a most zealous, devoted one, but,
like all good bailiffs, exacting and parsimonious to a degree in the
interests of his master. Moreover, he had some queer notions of his own.
He was forever endeavouring to increase his master's property at the
expense of his mistress's, and to prove that it would be impossible to
avoid using the rents from her estates for the benefit of Petrovskoe (my
father's village, and the place where we lived). This point he had now
gained and was delighted in consequence.

Papa then greeted ourselves, and said that if we stayed much longer in
the country we should become lazy boys; that we were growing quite big
now, and must set about doing lessons in earnest,

"I suppose you know that I am starting for Moscow to-night?" he went on,
"and that I am going to take you with me? You will live with Grandmamma,
but Mamma and the girls will remain here. You know, too, I am sure, that
Mamma's one consolation will be to hear that you are doing your lessons
well and pleasing every one around you."

The preparations which had been in progress for some days past had
made us expect some unusual event, but this news left us thunderstruck,
Woloda turned red, and, with a shaking voice, delivered Mamma's message
to Papa.

"So this was what my dream foreboded!" I thought to myself. "God send
that there come nothing worse!" I felt terribly sorry to have to leave
Mamma, but at the same rejoiced to think that I should soon be grown up,
"If we are going to-day, we shall probably have no lessons to do, and
that will be splendid. However, I am sorry for Karl Ivanitch, for he
will certainly be dismissed now. That was why that envelope had been
prepared for him. I think I would almost rather stay and do lessons here
than leave Mamma or hurt poor Karl. He is miserable enough already."

As these thoughts crossed my mind I stood looking sadly at the black
ribbons on my shoes. After a few words to Karl Ivanitch about the
depression of the barometer and an injunction to Jakoff not to feed
the hounds, since a farewell meet was to be held after luncheon, Papa
disappointed my hopes by sending us off to lessons--though he also
consoled us by promising to take us out hunting later.

On my way upstairs I made a digression to the terrace. Near the door
leading on to it Papa's favourite hound, Milka, was lying in the sun and
blinking her eyes.

"Miloshka," I cried as I caressed her and kissed her nose, "we are going
away today. Good-bye. Perhaps we shall never see each other again." I
was crying and laughing at the same time.




IV -- LESSONS

Karl Ivanitch was in a bad temper. This was clear from his contracted
brows, and from the way in which he flung his frockcoat into a drawer,
angrily donned his old dressing-gown again, and made deep dints with
his nails to mark the place in the book of dialogues to which we were
to learn by heart. Woloda began working diligently, but I was too
distracted to do anything at all. For a long while I stared vacantly
at the book; but tears at the thought of the impending separation kept
rushing to my eyes and preventing me from reading a single word. When at
length the time came to repeat the dialogues to Karl (who listened to us
with blinking eyes--a very bad sign), I had no sooner reached the place
where some one asks, "Wo kommen Sie her?" ("Where do you come from?")
and some one else answers him, "Ich komme vom Kaffeehaus" ("I come from
the coffee-house"), than I burst into tears and, for sobbing, could not
pronounce, "Haben Sie die Zeitung nicht gelesen?" ("Have you not read the
newspaper?") at all. Next, when we came to our writing lesson, the tears
kept falling from my eyes and, making a mess on the paper, as though
some one had written on blotting-paper with water, Karl was very
angry. He ordered me to go down upon my knees, declared that it was all
obstinacy and "puppet-comedy playing" (a favourite expression of his)
on my part, threatened me with the ruler, and commanded me to say that
I was sorry. Yet for sobbing and crying I could not get a word out. At
last--conscious, perhaps, that he was unjust--he departed to Nicola's
pantry, and slammed the door behind him. Nevertheless their conversation
there carried to the schoolroom.

"Have you heard that the children are going to Moscow, Nicola?" said
Karl.

"Yes. How could I help hearing it?"

At this point Nicola seemed to get up for Karl said, "Sit down, Nicola,"
and then locked the door. However, I came out of my corner and crept to
the door to listen.

"However much you may do for people, and however fond of them you may
be, never expect any gratitude, Nicola," said Karl warmly. Nicola, who
was shoe-cobbling by the window, nodded his head in assent.

"Twelve years have I lived in this house," went on Karl, lifting his
eyes and his snuff-box towards the ceiling, "and before God I can say
that I have loved them, and worked for them, even more than if they had
been my own children. You recollect, Nicola, when Woloda had the fever?
You recollect how, for nine days and nights, I never closed my eyes as
I sat beside his bed? Yes, at that time I was 'the dear, good Karl
Ivanitch'--I was wanted then; but now"--and he smiled ironically--"the
children are growing up, and must go to study in earnest. Perhaps they
never learnt anything with me, Nicola? Eh?"

"I am sure they did," replied Nicola, laying his awl down and
straightening a piece of thread with his hands.

"No, I am wanted no longer, and am to be turned out. What good are
promises and gratitude? Natalia Nicolaevna"--here he laid his hand upon
his heart--"I love and revere, but what can SHE I do here? Her will is
powerless in this house."

He flung a strip of leather on the floor with an angry gesture. "Yet I
know who has been playing tricks here, and why I am no longer wanted. It
is because I do not flatter and toady as certain people do. I am in
the habit of speaking the truth in all places and to all persons," he
continued proudly, "God be with these children, for my leaving them will
benefit them little, whereas I--well, by God's help I may be able to
earn a crust of bread somewhere. Nicola, eh?"

Nicola raised his head and looked at Karl as though to consider whether
he would indeed be able to earn a crust of bread, but he said nothing.
Karl said a great deal more of the same kind--in particular how much
better his services had been appreciated at a certain general's where
he had formerly lived (I regretted to hear that). Likewise he spoke of
Saxony, his parents, his friend the tailor, Schonheit (beauty), and so
on.

I sympathised with his distress, and felt dreadfully sorry that he and
Papa (both of whom I loved about equally) had had a difference. Then I
returned to my corner, crouched down upon my heels, and fell to thinking
how a reconciliation between them might be effected.

Returning to the study, Karl ordered me to get up and prepare to write
from dictation. When I was ready he sat down with a dignified air in
his arm-chair, and in a voice which seemed to come from a profound abyss
began to dictate: "Von al-len Lei-den-shaf-ten die grau-samste ist. Have
you written that?" He paused, took a pinch of snuff, and began again:
"Die grausamste ist die Un-dank-bar-keit [The most cruel of all passions
is ingratitude.] a capital U, mind."

The last word written, I looked at him, for him to go on.

"Punctum" (stop), he concluded, with a faintly perceptible smile, as he
signed to us to hand him our copy-books.

Several times, and in several different tones, and always with an
expression of the greatest satisfaction, did he read out that sentence,
which expressed his predominant thought at the moment. Then he set us
to learn a lesson in history, and sat down near the window. His face did
not look so depressed now, but, on the contrary, expressed eloquently
the satisfaction of a man who had avenged himself for an injury dealt
him.

By this time it was a quarter to one o'clock, but Karl Ivanitch never
thought of releasing us. He merely set us a new lesson to learn. My
fatigue and hunger were increasing in equal proportions, so that I
eagerly followed every sign of the approach of luncheon. First came the
housemaid with a cloth to wipe the plates. Next, the sound of crockery
resounded in the dining-room, as the table was moved and chairs placed
round it. After that, Mimi, Lubotshka, and Katenka. (Katenka was Mimi's
daughter, and twelve years old) came in from the garden, but Foka (the
servant who always used to come and announce luncheon) was not yet to be
seen. Only when he entered was it lawful to throw one's books aside and
run downstairs.

Hark! Steps resounded on the staircase, but they were not Foka's. Foka's
I had learnt to study, and knew the creaking of his boots well. The door
opened, and a figure unknown to me made its appearance.




V -- THE IDIOT

The man who now entered the room was about fifty years old, with a pale,
attenuated face pitted with smallpox, long grey hair, and a scanty beard
of a reddish hue. Likewise he was so tall that, on coming through the
doorway, he was forced not only to bend his head, but to incline his
whole body forward. He was dressed in a sort of smock that was much
torn, and held in his hand a stout staff. As he entered he smote this
staff upon the floor, and, contracting his brows and opening his mouth
to its fullest extent, laughed in a dreadful, unnatural way. He had lost
the sight of one eye, and its colourless pupil kept rolling about and
imparting to his hideous face an even more repellent expression than it
otherwise bore.

"Hullo, you are caught!" he exclaimed as he ran to Woloda with little
short steps and, seizing him round the head, looked at it searchingly.
Next he left him, went to the table, and, with a perfectly serious
expression on his face, began to blow under the oil-cloth, and to make
the sign of the cross over it, "O-oh, what a pity! O-oh, how it hurts!
They are angry! They fly from me!" he exclaimed in a tearful choking
voice as he glared at Woloda and wiped away the streaming tears with his
sleeve. His voice was harsh and rough, all his movements hysterical and
spasmodic, and his words devoid of sense or connection (for he used no
conjunctions). Yet the tone of that voice was so heartrending, and his
yellow, deformed face at times so sincere and pitiful in its expression,
that, as one listened to him, it was impossible to repress a mingled
sensation of pity, grief, and fear.

This was the idiot Grisha. Whence he had come, or who were his parents,
or what had induced him to choose the strange life which he led, no
one ever knew. All that I myself knew was that from his fifteenth year
upwards he had been known as an imbecile who went barefooted both in
winter and summer, visited convents, gave little images to any one who
cared to take them, and spoke meaningless words which some people took
for prophecies; that nobody remembered him as being different; that at,
rare intervals he used to call at Grandmamma's house; and that by some
people he was said to be the outcast son of rich parents and a pure,
saintly soul, while others averred that he was a mere peasant and an
idler.

At last the punctual and wished-for Foka arrived, and we went
downstairs. Grisha followed us sobbing and continuing to talk nonsense,
and knocking his staff on each step of the staircase. When we entered
the drawing-room we found Papa and Mamma walking up and down there, with
their hands clasped in each other's, and talking in low tones. Maria
Ivanovna was sitting bolt upright in an arm-chair placed at tight angles
to the sofa, and giving some sort of a lesson to the two girls sitting
beside her. When Karl Ivanitch entered the room she looked at him for a
moment, and then turned her eyes away with an expression which seemed to
say, "You are beneath my notice, Karl Ivanitch." It was easy to see from
the girls' eyes that they had important news to communicate to us as
soon as an opportunity occurred (for to leave their seats and approach
us first was contrary to Mimi's rules). It was for us to go to her
and say, "Bon jour, Mimi," and then make her a low bow; after which we
should possibly be permitted to enter into conversation with the girls.

What an intolerable creature that Mimi was! One could hardly say a word
in her presence without being found fault with. Also whenever we wanted
to speak in Russian, she would say, "Parlez, donc, francais," as though
on purpose to annoy us, while, if there was any particularly nice
dish at luncheon which we wished to enjoy in peace, she would keep on
ejaculating, "Mangez, donc, avec du pain!" or, "Comment est-ce que vous
tenez votre fourchette?" "What has SHE got to do with us?" I used to
think to myself. "Let her teach the girls. WE have our Karl Ivanitch." I
shared to the full his dislike of "certain people."

"Ask Mamma to let us go hunting too," Katenka whispered to me, as she
caught me by the sleeve just when the elders of the family were making a
move towards the dining-room.

"Very well. I will try."

Grisha likewise took a seat in the dining-room, but at a little table
apart from the rest. He never lifted his eyes from his plate, but kept
on sighing and making horrible grimaces, as he muttered to himself:
"What a pity! It has flown away! The dove is flying to heaven! The stone
lies on the tomb!" and so forth.

Ever since the morning Mamma had been absent-minded, and Grisha's
presence, words, and actions seemed to make her more so.

"By the way, there is something I forgot to ask you," she said, as she
handed Papa a plate of soup.

"What is it?"

"That you will have those dreadful dogs of yours tied up. They nearly
worried poor Grisha to death when he entered the courtyard, and I am
sure they will bite the children some day."

No sooner did Grisha hear himself mentioned that he turned towards our
table and showed us his torn clothes. Then, as he went on with his meal,
he said: "He would have let them tear me in pieces, but God would not
allow it! What a sin to let the dogs loose--a great sin! But do not beat
him, master; do not beat him! It is for God to forgive! It is past now!"

"What does he say?" said Papa, looking at him gravely and sternly. "I
cannot understand him at all."

"I think he is saying," replied Mamma, "that one of the huntsmen set
the dogs on him, but that God would not allow him to be torn in pieces.
Therefore he begs you not to punish the man."

"Oh, is that it?" said Papa, "How does he know that I intended to
punish the huntsman? You know, I am not very fond of fellows like this,"
he added in French, "and this one offends me particularly. Should it
ever happen that--"

"Oh, don't say so," interrupted Mamma, as if frightened by some thought.
"How can you know what he is?"

"I think I have plenty of opportunities for doing so, since no lack of
them come to see you--all of them the same sort, and probably all with
the same story."

I could see that Mamma's opinion differed from his, but that she did not
mean to quarrel about it.

"Please hand me the cakes," she said to him, "Are they good to-day or
not?"

"Yes, I AM angry," he went on as he took the cakes and put them where
Mamma could not reach them, "very angry at seeing supposedly reasonable
and educated people let themselves be deceived," and he struck the table
with his fork.

"I asked you to hand me the cakes," she repeated with outstretched hand.

"And it is a good thing," Papa continued as he put the hand aside, "that
the police run such vagabonds in. All they are good for is to play upon
the nerves of certain people who are already not over-strong in
that respect," and he smiled, observing that Mamma did not like the
conversation at all. However, he handed her the cakes.

"All that I have to say," she replied, "is that one can hardly believe
that a man who, though sixty years of age, goes barefooted winter and
summer, and always wears chains of two pounds' weight, and never
accepts the offers made to him to live a quiet, comfortable life--it is
difficult to believe that such a man should act thus out of laziness."
Pausing a moment, she added with a sigh: "As to predictions, je suis
payee pour y croire, I told you, I think, that Grisha prophesied the
very day and hour of poor Papa's death?"

"Oh, what HAVE you gone and done?" said Papa, laughing and putting his
hand to his cheek (whenever he did this I used to look for something
particularly comical from him). "Why did you call my attention to his
feet? I looked at them, and now can eat nothing more."

Luncheon was over now, and Lubotshka and Katenka were winking at us,
fidgeting about in their chairs, and showing great restlessness. The
winking, of course, signified, "Why don't you ask whether we too may go
to the hunt?" I nudged Woloda, and Woloda nudged me back, until at last
I took heart of grace, and began (at first shyly, but gradually with
more assurance) to ask if it would matter much if the girls too were
allowed to enjoy the sport. Thereupon a consultation was held among the
elder folks, and eventually leave was granted--Mamma, to make things
still more delightful, saying that she would come too.




VI -- PREPARATIONS FOR THE CHASE

During dessert Jakoff had been sent for, and orders given him to have
ready the carriage, the hounds, and the saddle-horses--every detail
being minutely specified, and every horse called by its own particular
name. As Woloda's usual mount was lame, Papa ordered a "hunter" to be
saddled for him; which term, "hunter" so horrified Mamma's ears, that
she imagined it to be some kind of an animal which would at once run
away and bring about Woloda's death. Consequently, in spite of all
Papa's and Woloda's assurances (the latter glibly affirming that it was
nothing, and that he liked his horse to go fast), poor Mamma continued
to exclaim that her pleasure would be quite spoilt for her.

When luncheon was over, the grown-ups had coffee in the study, while
we younger ones ran into the garden and went chattering along the
undulating paths with their carpet of yellow leaves. We talked about
Woloda's riding a hunter and said what a shame it was that Lubotshka,
could not run as fast as Katenka, and what fun it would be if we could
see Grisha's chains, and so forth; but of the impending separation
we said not a word. Our chatter was interrupted by the sound of the
carriage driving up, with a village urchin perched on each of its
springs. Behind the carriage rode the huntsmen with the hounds, and
they, again, were followed by the groom Ignat on the steed intended
for Woloda, with my old horse trotting alongside. After running to
the garden fence to get a sight of all these interesting objects, and
indulging in a chorus of whistling and hallooing, we rushed upstairs to
dress--our one aim being to make ourselves look as like the huntsmen as
possible. The obvious way to do this was to tuck one's breeches inside
one's boots. We lost no time over it all, for we were in a hurry to run
to the entrance steps again there to feast our eyes upon the horses and
hounds, and to have a chat with the huntsmen. The day was exceedingly
warm while, though clouds of fantastic shape had been gathering on the
horizon since morning and driving before a light breeze across the sun,
it was clear that, for all their menacing blackness, they did not
really intend to form a thunderstorm and spoil our last day's pleasure.
Moreover, towards afternoon some of them broke, grew pale and elongated,
and sank to the horizon again, while others of them changed to the
likeness of white transparent fish-scales. In the east, over Maslovska,
a single lurid mass was louring, but Karl Ivanitch (who always seemed to
know the ways of the heavens) said that the weather would still continue
to be fair and dry.

In spite of his advanced years, it was in quite a sprightly manner that
Foka came out to the entrance steps, to give the order "Drive up."
In fact, as he planted his legs firmly apart and took up his station
between the lowest step and the spot where the coachman was to halt,
his mien was that of a man who knew his duties and had no need to be
reminded of them by anybody. Presently the ladies, also came out, and
after a little discussions as to seats and the safety of the girls (all
of which seemed to me wholly superfluous), they settled themselves in
the vehicle, opened their parasols, and started. As the carriage was,
driving away, Mamma pointed to the hunter and asked nervously "Is that
the horse intended for Vladimir Petrovitch?" On the groom answering
in the affirmative, she raised her hands in horror and turned her head
away. As for myself, I was burning with impatience. Clambering on to
the back of my steed (I was just tall enough to see between its ears), I
proceeded to perform evolutions in the courtyard.

"Mind you don't ride over the hounds, sir," said one of the huntsmen.

"Hold your tongue. It is not the first time I have been one of the
party." I retorted with dignity.

Although Woloda had plenty of pluck, he was not altogether free from
apprehensions as he sat on the hunter. Indeed, he more than once asked
as he patted it, "Is he quiet?" He looked very well on horseback--almost
a grown-up young man, and held himself so upright in the saddle that I
envied him since my shadow seemed to show that I could not compare with
him in looks.

Presently Papa's footsteps sounded on the flagstones, the whip collected
the hounds, and the huntsmen mounted their steeds. Papa's horse came up
in charge of a groom, the hounds of his particular leash sprang up from
their picturesque attitudes to fawn upon him, and Milka, in a collar
studded with beads, came bounding joyfully from behind his heels to
greet and sport with the other dogs. Finally, as soon as Papa had
mounted we rode away.




VII -- THE HUNT

AT the head of the cavalcade rode Turka, on a hog-backed roan. On his
head he wore a shaggy cap, while, with a magnificent horn slung across
his shoulders and a knife at his belt, he looked so cruel and inexorable
that one would have thought he was going to engage in bloody strife with
his fellow men rather than to hunt a small animal. Around the hind legs
of his horse the hounds gambolled like a cluster of checkered, restless
balls. If one of them wished to stop, it was only with the greatest
difficulty that it could do so, since not only had its leash-fellow
also to be induced to halt, but at once one of the huntsmen would wheel
round, crack his whip, and shout to the delinquent,

"Back to the pack, there!"

Arrived at a gate, Papa told us and the huntsmen to continue our way
along the road, and then rode off across a cornfield. The harvest was at
its height. On the further side of a large, shining, yellow stretch of
cornland lay a high purple belt of forest which always figured in my
eyes as a distant, mysterious region behind which either the world ended
or an uninhabited waste began. This expanse of corn-land was dotted with
swathes and reapers, while along the lanes where the sickle had passed
could be seen the backs of women as they stooped among the tall, thick
grain or lifted armfuls of corn and rested them against the shocks. In
one corner a woman was bending over a cradle, and the whole stubble was
studded with sheaves and cornflowers. In another direction shirt-sleeved
men were standing on waggons, shaking the soil from the stalks of
sheaves, and stacking them for carrying. As soon as the foreman (dressed
in a blouse and high boots, and carrying a tally-stick) caught sight of
Papa, he hastened to take off his lamb's-wool cap and, wiping his red
head, told the women to get up. Papa's chestnut horse went trotting
along with a prancing gait as it tossed its head and swished its tail
to and fro to drive away the gadflies and countless other insects which
tormented its flanks, while his two greyhounds--their tails curved like
sickles--went springing gracefully over the stubble. Milka was always
first, but every now and then she would halt with a shake of her head
to await the whipper-in. The chatter of the peasants; the rumbling of
horses and waggons; the joyous cries of quails; the hum of insects as
they hung suspended in the motionless air; the smell of the soil and
grain and steam from our horses; the thousand different lights and
shadows which the burning sun cast upon the yellowish-white cornland;
the purple forest in the distance; the white gossamer threads which were
floating in the air or resting on the soil-all these things I observed
and heard and felt to the core.

Arrived at the Kalinovo wood, we found the carriage awaiting us
there, with, beside it, a one-horse waggonette driven by the butler--a
waggonette in which were a tea-urn, some apparatus for making ices, and
many other attractive boxes and bundles, all packed in straw! There was
no mistaking these signs, for they meant that we were going to have tea,
fruit, and ices in the open air. This afforded us intense delight, since
to drink tea in a wood and on the grass and where none else had ever
drunk tea before seemed to us a treat beyond expressing.

When Turka arrived at the little clearing where the carriage was
halted he took Papa's detailed instructions as to how we were to divide
ourselves and where each of us was to go (though, as a matter of fact,
he never acted according to such instructions, but always followed his
own devices). Then he unleashed the hounds, fastened the leashes to
his saddle, whistled to the pack, and disappeared among the young birch
trees the liberated hounds jumping about him in high delight, wagging
their tails, and sniffing and gambolling with one another as they
dispersed themselves in different directions.

"Has anyone a pocket-handkerchief to spare?" asked Papa. I took mine
from my pocket and offered it to him.

"Very well. Fasten it to this greyhound here."

"Gizana?" I asked, with the air of a connoisseur.

"Yes. Then run him along the road with you. When you come to a little
clearing in the wood stop and look about you, and don't come back to me
without a hare."

Accordingly I tied my handkerchief round Gizana's soft neck, and set off
running at full speed towards the appointed spot, Papa laughing as he
shouted after me, "Hurry up, hurry up or you'll be late!"

Every now and then Gizana kept stopping, pricking up his ears, and
listening to the hallooing of the beaters. Whenever he did this I was
not strong enough to move him, and could do no more than shout, "Come
on, come on!" Presently he set off so fast that I could not restrain
him, and I encountered more than one fall before we reached our
destination. Selecting there a level, shady spot near the roots of a
great oak-tree, I lay down on the turf, made Gizana crouch beside me,
and waited. As usual, my imagination far outstripped reality. I fancied
that I was pursuing at least my third hare when, as a matter of fact,
the first hound was only just giving tongue. Presently, however, Turka's
voice began to sound through the wood in louder and more excited tones,
the baying of a hound came nearer and nearer, and then another, and then
a third, and then a fourth, deep throat joined in the rising and falling
cadences of a chorus, until the whole had united their voices in one
continuous, tumultuous burst of melody. As the Russian proverb expresses
it, "The forest had found a tongue, and the hounds were burning as with
fire."

My excitement was so great that I nearly swooned where I stood. My lips
parted themselves as though smiling, the perspiration poured from me in
streams, and, in spite of the tickling sensation caused by the drops as
they trickled over my chin, I never thought of wiping them away. I felt
that a crisis was approaching. Yet the tension was too unnatural to
last. Soon the hounds came tearing along the edge of the wood, and
then--behold, they were racing away from me again, and of hares there
was not a sign to be seen! I looked in every direction and Gizana did
the same--pulling at his leash at first and whining. Then he lay down
again by my side, rested his muzzle on my knees, and resigned himself to
disappointment. Among the naked roots of the oak-tree under which I was
sitting. I could see countless ants swarming over the parched grey earth
and winding among the acorns, withered oak-leaves, dry twigs, russet
moss, and slender, scanty blades of grass. In serried files they kept
pressing forward on the level track they had made for themselves--some
carrying burdens, some not. I took a piece of twig and barred their way.
Instantly it was curious to see how they made light of the obstacle.
Some got past it by creeping underneath, and some by climbing over it. A
few, however, there were (especially those weighted with loads) who were
nonplussed what to do. They either halted and searched for a way round,
or returned whence they had come, or climbed the adjacent herbage, with
the evident intention of reaching my hand and going up the sleeve of my
jacket. From this interesting spectacle my attention was distracted by
the yellow wings of a butterfly which was fluttering alluringly before
me. Yet I had scarcely noticed it before it flew away to a little
distance and, circling over some half-faded blossoms of white clover,
settled on one of them. Whether it was the sun's warmth that delighted
it, or whether it was busy sucking nectar from the flower, at all events
it seemed thoroughly comfortable. It scarcely moved its wings at all,
and pressed itself down into the clover until I could hardly see
its body. I sat with my chin on my hands and watched it with intense
interest.

Suddenly Gizana sprang up and gave me such a violent jerk that I nearly
rolled over. I looked round. At the edge of the wood a hare had just
come into view, with one ear bent down and the other one sharply
pricked. The blood rushed to my head, and I forgot everything else as
I shouted, slipped the dog, and rushed towards the spot. Yet all was in
vain. The hare stopped, made a rush, and was lost to view.

How confused I felt when at that moment Turka stepped from the
undergrowth (he had been following the hounds as they ran along the
edges of the wood)! He had seen my mistake (which had consisted in my
not biding my time), and now threw me a contemptuous look as he said,
"Ah, master!" And you should have heard the tone in which he said it! It
would have been a relief to me if he had then and there suspended me to
his saddle instead of the hare. For a while I could only stand miserably
where I was, without attempting to recall the dog, and ejaculate as I
slapped my knees, "Good heavens! What a fool I was!" I could hear the
hounds retreating into the distance, and baying along the further side
of the wood as they pursued the hare, while Turka rallied them with
blasts on his gorgeous horn: yet I did not stir.




VIII -- WE PLAY GAMES

THE hunt was over, a cloth had been spread in the shade of some young
birch-trees, and the whole party was disposed around it. The butler,
Gabriel, had stamped down the surrounding grass, wiped the plates in
readiness, and unpacked from a basket a quantity of plums and peaches
wrapped in leaves.

Through the green branches of the young birch-trees the sun glittered
and threw little glancing balls of light upon the pattern of my napkin,
my legs, and the bald moist head of Gabriel. A soft breeze played in
the leaves of the trees above us, and, breathing softly upon my hair and
heated face, refreshed me beyond measure. When we had finished the
fruit and ices, nothing remained to be done around the empty cloth, so,
despite the oblique, scorching rays of the sun, we rose and proceeded to
play.

"Well, what shall it be?" said Lubotshka, blinking in the sunlight and
skipping about the grass, "Suppose we play Robinson?"

"No, that's a tiresome game," objected Woloda, stretching himself lazily
on the turf and gnawing some leaves, "Always Robinson! If you want to
play at something, play at building a summerhouse."

Woloda was giving himself tremendous airs. Probably he was proud of
having ridden the hunter, and so pretended to be very tired. Perhaps,
also, he had too much hard-headedness and too little imagination
fully to enjoy the game of Robinson. It was a game which consisted of
performing various scenes from The Swiss Family Robinson, a book which
we had recently been reading.

"Well, but be a good boy. Why not try and please us this time?" the
girls answered. "You may be Charles or Ernest or the father, whichever
you like best," added Katenka as she tried to raise him from the ground
by pulling at his sleeve.

"No, I'm not going to; it's a tiresome game," said Woloda again, though
smiling as if secretly pleased.

"It would be better to sit at home than not to play at ANYTHING,"
murmured Lubotshka, with tears in her eyes. She was a great weeper.

"Well, go on, then. Only, DON'T cry; I can't stand that sort of thing."

Woloda's condescension did not please us much. On the contrary, his
lazy, tired expression took away all the fun of the game. When we sat
on the ground and imagined that we were sitting in a boat and either
fishing or rowing with all our might, Woloda persisted in sitting with
folded hands or in anything but a fisherman's posture. I made a remark
about it, but he replied that, whether we moved our hands or not, we
should neither gain nor lose ground--certainly not advance at all, and I
was forced to agree with him. Again, when I pretended to go out hunting,
and, with a stick over my shoulder, set off into the wood, Woloda only
lay down on his back with his hands under his head, and said that he
supposed it was all the same whether he went or not. Such behaviour and
speeches cooled our ardour for the game and were very disagreeable--the
more so since it was impossible not to confess to oneself that Woloda
was right, I myself knew that it was not only impossible to kill birds
with a stick, but to shoot at all with such a weapon. Still, it was
the game, and if we were once to begin reasoning thus, it would become
equally impossible for us to go for drives on chairs. I think that even
Woloda himself cannot at that moment have forgotten how, in the long
winter evenings, we had been used to cover an arm-chair with a shawl
and make a carriage of it--one of us being the coachman, another one the
footman, the two girls the passengers, and three other chairs the trio
of horses abreast. With what ceremony we used to set out, and with what
adventures we used to meet on the way! How gaily and quickly those long
winter evenings used to pass! If we were always to judge from reality,
games would be nonsense; but if games were nonsense, what else would
there be left to do?




IX -- A FIRST ESSAY IN LOVE

PRETENDING to gather some "American fruit" from a tree, Lubotshka
suddenly plucked a leaf upon which was a huge caterpillar, and throwing
the insect with horror to the ground, lifted her hands and sprang away
as though afraid it would spit at her. The game stopped, and we crowded
our heads together as we stooped to look at the curiosity.

I peeped over Katenka's shoulder as she was trying to lift the
caterpillar by placing another leaf in its way. I had observed before
that the girls had a way of shrugging their shoulders whenever they were
trying to put a loose garment straight on their bare necks, as well as
that Mimi always grew angry on witnessing this manoeuvre and declared
it to be a chambermaid's trick. As Katenka bent over the caterpillar she
made that very movement, while at the same instant the breeze lifted the
fichu on her white neck. Her shoulder was close to my lips, I looked at
it and kissed it. She did not turn round, but Woloda remarked without
raising his head, "What spooniness!" I felt the tears rising to my eyes,
and could not take my gaze from Katenka. I had long been used to her
fair, fresh face, and had always been fond of her, but now I looked at
her more closely, and felt more fond of her, than I had ever done or
felt before.

When we returned to the grown-ups, Papa informed us, to our great joy,
that, at Mamma's entreaties, our departure was to be postponed until
the following morning. We rode home beside the carriage--Woloda and
I galloping near it, and vieing with one another in our exhibition of
horsemanship and daring. My shadow looked longer now than it had done
before, and from that I judged that I had grown into a fine rider. Yet
my complacency was soon marred by an unfortunate occurrence. Desiring
to outdo Woloda before the audience in the carriage, I dropped a little
behind. Then with whip and spur I urged my steed forward, and at the
same time assumed a natural, graceful attitude, with the intention of
whooting past the carriage on the side on which Katenka was seated. My
only doubt was whether to halloo or not as I did so. In the event, my
infernal horse stopped so abruptly when just level with the carriage
horses that I was pitched forward on to its neck and cut a very sorry
figure!




X -- THE SORT OF MAN MY FATHER WAS

Papa was a gentleman of the last century, with all the chivalrous
character, self-reliance, and gallantry of the youth of that time. Upon
the men of the present day he looked with a contempt arising partly from
inborn pride and partly from a secret feeling of vexation that, in this
age of ours, he could no longer enjoy the influence and success which
had been his in his youth. His two principal failings were gambling and
gallantry, and he had won or lost, in the course of his career, several
millions of roubles.

Tall and of imposing figure, he walked with a curiously quick, mincing
gait, as well as had a habit of hitching one of his shoulders. His eyes
were small and perpetually twinkling, his nose large and aquiline, his
lips irregular and rather oddly (though pleasantly) compressed, his
articulation slightly defective and lisping, and his head quite bald.
Such was my father's exterior from the days of my earliest recollection.
It was an exterior which not only brought him success and made him a
man a bonnes fortunes but one which pleased people of all ranks and
stations. Especially did it please those whom he desired to please.

At all junctures he knew how to take the lead, for, though not deriving
from the highest circles of society, he had always mixed with them, and
knew how to win their respect. He possessed in the highest degree that
measure of pride and self-confidence which, without giving offence,
maintains a man in the opinion of the world. He had much originality,
as well as the ability to use it in such a way that it benefited him as
much as actual worldly position or fortune could have done. Nothing in
the universe could surprise him, and though not of eminent attainments
in life, he seemed born to have acquired them. He understood so
perfectly how to make both himself and others forget and keep at
a distance the seamy side of life, with all its petty troubles
and vicissitudes, that it was impossible not to envy him. He was a
connoisseur in everything which could give ease and pleasure, as well
as knew how to make use of such knowledge. Likewise he prided himself on
the brilliant connections which he had formed through my mother's family
or through friends of his youth, and was secretly jealous of any one of
a higher rank than himself--any one, that is to say, of a rank higher
than a retired lieutenant of the Guards. Moreover, like all ex-officers,
he refused to dress himself in the prevailing fashion, though he attired
himself both originally and artistically--his invariable wear being
light, loose-fitting suits, very fine shirts, and large collars and
cuffs. Everything seemed to suit his upright figure and quiet, assured
air. He was sensitive to the pitch of sentimentality, and, when reading
a pathetic passage, his voice would begin to tremble and the tears to
come into his eyes, until he had to lay the book aside. Likewise he was
fond of music, and could accompany himself on the piano as he sang the
love songs of his friend A-- or gipsy songs or themes from operas;
but he had no love for serious music, and would frankly flout received
opinion by declaring that, whereas Beethoven's sonatas wearied him and
sent him to sleep, his ideal of beauty was "Do not wake me, youth"
as Semenoff sang it, or "Not one" as the gipsy Taninsha rendered that
ditty. His nature was essentially one of those which follow public
opinion concerning what is good, and consider only that good which the
public declares to be so. [It may be noted that the author has said
earlier in the chapter that his father possessed "much originality."]
God only knows whether he had any moral convictions. His life was so
full of amusement that probably he never had time to form any, and was
too successful ever to feel the lack of them.

As he grew to old age he looked at things always from a fixed point
of view, and cultivated fixed rules--but only so long as that point or
those rules coincided with expediency. The mode of life which offered
some passing degree of interest--that, in his opinion, was the right
one and the only one that men ought to affect. He had great fluency of
argument; and this, I think, increased the adaptability of his morals
and enabled him to speak of one and the same act, now as good, and now,
with abuse, as abominable.




XI -- IN THE DRAWING-ROOM AND THE STUDY

Twilight had set in when we reached home. Mamma sat down to the piano,
and we to a table, there to paint and draw in colours and pencil. Though
I had only one cake of colour, and it was blue, I determined to draw a
picture of the hunt. In exceedingly vivid fashion I painted a blue boy
on a blue horse, and--but here I stopped, for I was uncertain whether
it was possible also to paint a blue HARE. I ran to the study to consult
Papa, and as he was busy reading he never lifted his eyes from his book
when I asked, "Can there be blue hares?" but at once replied, "There
can, my boy, there can." Returning to the table I painted in my blue
hare, but subsequently thought it better to change it into a blue bush.
Yet the blue bush did not wholly please me, so I changed it into a tree,
and then into a rick, until, the whole paper having now become one blur
of blue, I tore it angrily in pieces, and went off to meditate in the
large arm-chair.

Mamma was playing Field's second concerto. Field, it may be said, had
been her master. As I dozed, the music brought up before my imagination
a kind of luminosity, with transparent dream-shapes. Next she played the
"Sonate Pathetique" of Beethoven, and I at once felt heavy, depressed,
and apprehensive. Mamma often played those two pieces, and therefore I
well recollect the feelings they awakened in me. Those feelings were a
reminiscence--of what? Somehow I seemed to remember something which had
never been.

Opposite to me lay the study door, and presently I saw Jakoff enter it,
accompanied by several long-bearded men in kaftans. Then the door shut
again.

"Now they are going to begin some business or other," I thought. I
believed the affairs transacted in that study to be the most important
ones on earth. This opinion was confirmed by the fact that people only
approached the door of that room on tiptoe and speaking in whispers.
Presently Papa's resonant voice sounded within, and I also scented
cigar smoke--always a very attractive thing to me. Next, as I dozed, I
suddenly heard a creaking of boots that I knew, and, sure enough,
saw Karl Ivanitch go on tiptoe, and with a depressed, but resolute,
expression on his face and a written document in his hand, to the study
door and knock softly. It opened, and then shut again behind him.

"I hope nothing is going to happen," I mused. "Karl Ivanitch is
offended, and might be capable of anything--" and again I dozed off.

Nevertheless something DID happen. An hour later I was disturbed by
the same creaking of boots, and saw Karl come out, and disappear up
the stairs, wiping away a few tears from his cheeks with his pocket
handkerchief as he went and muttering something between his teeth. Papa
came out behind him and turned aside into the drawing-room.

"Do you know what I have just decided to do?" he asked gaily as he laid
a hand upon Mamma's shoulder.

"What, my love?"

"To take Karl Ivanitch with the children. There will be room enough for
him in the carriage. They are used to him, and he seems greatly attached
to them. Seven hundred roubles a year cannot make much difference to us,
and the poor devil is not at all a bad sort of a fellow." I could not
understand why Papa should speak of him so disrespectfully.

"I am delighted," said Mamma, "and as much for the children's sake as
his own. He is a worthy old man."

"I wish you could have seen how moved he was when I told him that he
might look upon the 500 roubles as a present! But the most amusing thing
of all is this bill which he has just handed me. It is worth
seeing," and with a smile Papa gave Mamma a paper inscribed in Karl's
handwriting. "Is it not capital?" he concluded.

The contents of the paper were as follows: [The joke of this bill
consists chiefly in its being written in very bad Russian, with
continual mistakes as to plural and singular, prepositions and so
forth.]

"Two book for the children--70 copeck. Coloured paper, gold frames, and
a pop-guns, blockheads [This word has a double meaning in Russian.] for
cutting out several box for presents--6 roubles, 55 copecks. Several
book and a bows, presents for the childrens--8 roubles, 16 copecks. A
gold watches promised to me by Peter Alexandrovitch out of Moscow, in
the years 18-- for 140 roubles. Consequently Karl Mayer have to receive
139 rouble, 79 copecks, beside his wage."

If people were to judge only by this bill (in which Karl Ivanitch
demanded repayment of all the money he had spent on presents, as well as
the value of a present promised to himself), they would take him to have
been a callous, avaricious egotist yet they would be wrong.

It appears that he had entered the study with the paper in his hand and
a set speech in his head, for the purpose of declaiming eloquently to
Papa on the subject of the wrongs which he believed himself to have
suffered in our house, but that, as soon as ever he began to speak in
the vibratory voice and with the expressive intonations which he used in
dictating to us, his eloquence wrought upon himself more than upon Papa;
with the result that, when he came to the point where he had to say,
"however sad it will be for me to part with the children," he lost his
self-command utterly, his articulation became choked, and he was obliged
to draw his coloured pocket-handkerchief from his pocket.

"Yes, Peter Alexandrovitch," he said, weeping (this formed no part of
the prepared speech), "I am grown so used to the children that I cannot
think what I should do without them. I would rather serve you without
salary than not at all," and with one hand he wiped his eyes, while with
the other he presented the bill.

Although I am convinced that at that moment Karl Ivanitch was speaking
with absolute sincerity (for I know how good his heart was), I confess
that never to this day have I been able quite to reconcile his words
with the bill.

"Well, if the idea of leaving us grieves you, you may be sure that the
idea of dismissing you grieves me equally," said Papa, tapping him on
the shoulder. Then, after a pause, he added, "But I have changed my
mind, and you shall not leave us."

Just before supper Grisha entered the room. Ever since he had entered
the house that day he had never ceased to sigh and weep--a portent,
according to those who believed in his prophetic powers, that misfortune
was impending for the household. He had now come to take leave of us,
for to-morrow (so he said) he must be moving on. I nudged Woloda, and we
moved towards the door.

"What is the matter?" he said.

"This--that if we want to see Grisha's chains we must go upstairs at
once to the men-servants' rooms. Grisha is to sleep in the second one,
so we can sit in the store-room and see everything."

"All right. Wait here, and I'll tell the girls."

The girls came at once, and we ascended the stairs, though the question
as to which of us should first enter the store-room gave us some little
trouble. Then we cowered down and waited.




XII -- GRISHA

WE all felt a little uneasy in the thick darkness, so we pressed close
to one another and said nothing. Before long Grisha arrived with his
soft tread, carrying in one hand his staff and in the other a tallow
candle set in a brass candlestick. We scarcely ventured to breathe.

"Our Lord Jesus Christ! Holy Mother of God! Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost!" he kept repeating, with the different intonations and
abbreviations which gradually become peculiar to persons who are
accustomed to pronounce the words with great frequency.

Still praying, he placed his staff in a corner and looked at the bed;
after which he began to undress. Unfastening his old black girdle, he
slowly divested himself of his torn nankeen kaftan, and deposited
it carefully on the back of a chair. His face had now lost its usual
disquietude and idiocy. On the contrary, it had in it something restful,
thoughtful, and even grand, while all his movements were deliberate and
intelligent.

Next, he lay down quietly in his shirt on the bed, made the sign of the
cross towards every side of him, and adjusted his chains beneath his
shirt--an operation which, as we could see from his face, occasioned him
considerable pain. Then he sat up again, looked gravely at his ragged
shirt, and rising and taking the candle, lifted the latter towards the
shrine where the images of the saints stood. That done, he made the sign
of the cross again, and turned the candle upside down, when it went out
with a hissing noise.

Through the window (which overlooked the wood) the moon (nearly full)
was shining in such a way that one side of the tall white figure of the
idiot stood out in the pale, silvery moonlight, while the other side was
lost in the dark shadow which covered the floor, walls, and ceiling. In
the courtyard the watchman was tapping at intervals upon his brass alarm
plate. For a while Grisha stood silently before the images and, with
his large hands pressed to his breast and his head bent forward, gave
occasional sighs. Then with difficulty he knelt down and began to pray.

At first he repeated some well-known prayers, and only accented a word
here and there. Next, he repeated thee same prayers, but louder and
with increased accentuation. Lastly he repeated them again and with even
greater emphasis, as well as with an evident effort to pronounce them in
the old Slavonic Church dialect. Though disconnected, his prayers were
very touching. He prayed for all his benefactors (so he called every one
who had received him hospitably), with, among them, Mamma and ourselves.
Next he prayed for himself, and besought God to forgive him his sins,
at the same time repeating, "God forgive also my enemies!" Then, moaning
with the effort, he rose from his knees--only to fall to the floor again
and repeat his phrases afresh. At last he regained his feet, despite
the weight of the chains, which rattled loudly whenever they struck the
floor.

Woloda pinched me rudely in the leg, but I took no notice of that
(except that I involuntarily touched the place with my hand), as I
observed with a feeling of childish astonishment, pity, and respect
the words and gestures of Grisha. Instead of the laughter and amusement
which I had expected on entering the store-room, I felt my heart beating
and overcome.

Grisha continued for some time in this state of religious ecstasy as he
improvised prayers and repeated again and yet again, "Lord, have mercy
upon me!" Each time that he said, "Pardon me, Lord, and teach me to
do what Thou wouldst have done," he pronounced the words with added
earnestness and emphasis, as though he expected an immediate answer to
his petition, and then fell to sobbing and moaning once more. Finally,
he went down on his knees again, folded his arms upon his breast, and
remained silent. I ventured to put my head round the door (holding my
breath as I did so), but Grisha still made no movement except for the
heavy sighs which heaved his breast. In the moonlight I could see a tear
glistening on the white patch of his blind eye.

"Yes, Thy will be done!" he exclaimed suddenly, with an expression which
I cannot describe, as, prostrating himself with his forehead on the
floor, he fell to sobbing like a child.

Much sand has run out since then, many recollections of the past have
faded from my memory or become blurred in indistinct visions, and poor
Grisha himself has long since reached the end of his pilgrimage; but the
impression which he produced upon me, and the feelings which he aroused
in my breast, will never leave my mind. O truly Christian Grisha, your
faith was so strong that you could feel the actual presence of God; your
love so great that the words fell of themselves from your lips. You had
no reason to prove them, for you did so with your earnest praises of His
majesty as you fell to the ground speechless and in tears!

Nevertheless the sense of awe with which I had listened to Grisha could
not last for ever. I had now satisfied my curiosity, and, being cramped
with sitting in one position so long, desired to join in the tittering
and fun which I could hear going on in the dark store-room behind me.
Some one took my hand and whispered, "Whose hand is this?" Despite the
darkness, I knew by the touch and the low voice in my ear that it was
Katenka. I took her by the arm, but she withdrew it, and, in doing so,
pushed a cane chair which was standing near. Grisha lifted his head
looked quietly about him, and, muttering a prayer, rose and made the
sign of the cross towards each of the four corners of the room.




XIII -- NATALIA SAVISHNA

In days gone by there used to run about the seignorial courtyard of the
country-house at Chabarovska a girl called Natashka. She always wore a
cotton dress, went barefooted, and was rosy, plump, and gay. It was at
the request and entreaties of her father, the clarionet player Savi,
that my grandfather had "taken her upstairs"--that is to say, made
her one of his wife's female servants. As chamber-maid, Natashka so
distinguished herself by her zeal and amiable temper that when Mamma
arrived as a baby and required a nurse Natashka was honoured with the
charge of her. In this new office the girl earned still further praises
and rewards for her activity, trustworthiness, and devotion to her young
mistress. Soon, however, the powdered head and buckled shoes of the
young and active footman Foka (who had frequent opportunities of
courting her, since they were in the same service) captivated her
unsophisticated, but loving, heart. At last she ventured to go and ask
my grandfather if she might marry Foka, but her master took the request
in bad part, flew into a passion, and punished poor Natashka by exiling
her to a farm which he owned in a remote quarter of the Steppes. At
length, when she had been gone six months and nobody could be found to
replace her, she was recalled to her former duties. Returned, and with
her dress in rags, she fell at Grandpapa's feet, and besought him to
restore her his favour and kindness, and to forget the folly of which
she had been guilty--folly which, she assured him, should never recur
again. And she kept her word.

From that time forth she called herself, not Natashka, but Natalia
Savishna, and took to wearing a cap. All the love in her heart was now
bestowed upon her young charge. When Mamma had a governess appointed
for her education, Natalia was awarded the keys as housekeeper, and
henceforth had the linen and provisions under her care. These new duties
she fulfilled with equal fidelity and zeal. She lived only for her
master's advantage. Everything in which she could detect fraud,
extravagance, or waste she endeavoured to remedy to the best of her
power. When Mamma married and wished in some way to reward Natalia
Savishna for her twenty years of care and labour, she sent for her and,
voicing in the tenderest terms her attachment and love, presented
her with a stamped charter of her (Natalia's) freedom, [It will be
remembered that this was in the days of serfdom] telling her at the same
time that, whether she continued to serve in the household or not, she
should always receive an annual pension of 300 roubles. Natalia listened
in silence to this. Then, taking the document in her hands and regarding
it with a frown, she muttered something between her teeth, and darted
from the room, slamming the door behind her. Not understanding the
reason for such strange conduct, Mamma followed her presently to her
room, and found her sitting with streaming eyes on her trunk, crushing
her pocket-handkerchief between her fingers, and looking mournfully
at the remains of the document, which was lying torn to pieces on the
floor.

"What is the matter, dear Natalia Savishna?" said Mamma, taking her
hand.

"Nothing, ma'am," she replied; "only--only I must have displeased you
somehow, since you wish to dismiss me from the house. Well, I will go."

She withdrew her hand and, with difficulty restraining her tears, rose
to leave the room, but Mamma stopped her, and they wept a while in one
another's arms.

Ever since I can remember anything I can remember Natalia Savishna and
her love and tenderness; yet only now have I learnt to appreciate them
at their full value. In early days it never occurred to me to think what
a rare and wonderful being this old domestic was. Not only did she never
talk, but she seemed never even to think, of herself. Her whole life
was compounded of love and self-sacrifice. Yet so used was I to her
affection and singleness of heart that I could not picture things
otherwise. I never thought of thanking her, or of asking myself, "Is she
also happy? Is she also contented?" Often on some pretext or another I
would leave my lessons and run to her room, where, sitting down, I
would begin to muse aloud as though she were not there. She was forever
mending something, or tidying the shelves which lined her room,
or marking linen, so that she took no heed of the nonsense which I
talked--how that I meant to become a general, to marry a beautiful
woman, to buy a chestnut horse, to, build myself a house of glass, to
invite Karl Ivanitch's relatives to come and visit me from Saxony, and
so forth; to all of which she would only reply, "Yes, my love, yes."
Then, on my rising, and preparing to go, she would open a blue trunk
which had pasted on the inside of its lid a coloured picture of a hussar
which had once adorned a pomade bottle and a sketch made by Woloda, and
take from it a fumigation pastille, which she would light and shake for
my benefit, saying:

"These, dear, are the pastilles which your grandfather (now in Heaven)
brought back from Otchakov after fighting against the Turks." Then she
would add with a sigh: "But this is nearly the last one."

The trunks which filled her room seemed to contain almost everything in
the world. Whenever anything was wanted, people said, "Oh, go and ask
Natalia Savishna for it," and, sure enough, it was seldom that she did
not produce the object required and say, "See what comes of taking care
of everything!" Her trunks contained thousands of things which nobody in
the house but herself would have thought of preserving.

Once I lost my temper with her. This was how it happened.

One day after luncheon I poured myself out a glass of kvass, and then
dropped the decanter, and so stained the tablecloth.

"Go and call Natalia, that she may come and see what her darling has
done," said Mamma.

Natalia arrived, and shook her head at me when she saw the damage I had
done; but Mamma whispered something in her car, threw a look at myself,
and then left the room.

I was just skipping away, in the sprightliest mood possible, when
Natalia darted out upon me from behind the door with the tablecloth in
her hand, and, catching hold of me, rubbed my face hard with the stained
part of it, repeating, "Don't thou go and spoil tablecloths any more!"

I struggled hard, and roared with temper.

"What?" I said to myself as I fled to the drawing-room in a mist of
tears, "To think that Natalia Savishna-just plain Natalia-should say
'THOU' to me and rub my face with a wet tablecloth as though I were a
mere servant-boy! It is abominable!"

Seeing my fury, Natalia departed, while I continued to strut about and
plan how to punish the bold woman for her offence. Yet not more than a
few moments had passed when Natalia returned and, stealing to my side,
began to comfort me,

"Hush, then, my love. Do not cry. Forgive me my rudeness. It was wrong
of me. You WILL pardon me, my darling, will you not? There, there,
that's a dear," and she took from her handkerchief a cornet of pink
paper containing two little cakes and a grape, and offered it me with
a trembling hand. I could not look the kind old woman in the face, but,
turning aside, took the paper, while my tears flowed the faster--though
from love and shame now, not from anger.




XIV -- THE PARTING

ON the day after the events described, the carriage and the luggage-cart
drew up to the door at noon. Nicola, dressed for the journey, with his
breeches tucked into his boots and an old overcoat belted tightly about
him with a girdle, got into the cart and arranged cloaks and cushions on
the seats. When he thought that they were piled high enough he sat down
on them, but finding them still unsatisfactory, jumped up and arranged
them once more.

"Nicola Dimitvitch, would you be so good as to take master's
dressing-case with you?" said Papa's valet, suddenly standing up in the
carriage, "It won't take up much room."

"You should have told me before, Michael Ivanitch," answered Nicola
snappishly as he hurled a bundle with all his might to the floor of the
cart. "Good gracious! Why, when my head is going round like a whirlpool,
there you come along with your dressing-case!" and he lifted his cap to
wipe away the drops of perspiration from his sunburnt brow.

The courtyard was full of bareheaded peasants in kaftans or simple
shirts, women clad in the national dress and wearing striped
handkerchiefs, and barefooted little ones--the latter holding their
mothers' hands or crowding round the entrance-steps. All were chattering
among themselves as they stared at the carriage. One of the postillions,
an old man dressed in a winter cap and cloak, took hold of the pole of
the carriage and tried it carefully, while the other postillion (a
young man in a white blouse with pink gussets on the sleeves and a black
lamb's-wool cap which he kept cocking first on one side and then on the
other as he arranged his flaxen hair) laid his overcoat upon the box,
slung the reins over it, and cracked his thonged whip as he looked now
at his boots and now at the other drivers where they stood greasing the
wheels of the cart--one driver lifting up each wheel in turn and the
other driver applying the grease. Tired post-horses of various hues
stood lashing away flies with their tails near the gate--some stamping
their great hairy legs, blinking their eyes, and dozing, some leaning
wearily against their neighbours, and others cropping the leaves and
stalks of dark-green fern which grew near the entrance-steps. Some of
the dogs were lying panting in the sun, while others were slinking under
the vehicles to lick the grease from the wheels. The air was filled with
a sort of dusty mist, and the horizon was lilac-grey in colour, though
no clouds were to be seen, A strong wind from the south was raising
volumes of dust from the roads and fields, shaking the poplars and
birch-trees in the garden, and whirling their yellow leaves away. I
myself was sitting at a window and waiting impatiently for these various
preparations to come to an end.

As we sat together by the drawing-room table, to pass the last few
moments en famille, it never occurred to me that a sad moment was
impending. On the contrary, the most trivial thoughts were filling my
brain. Which driver was going to drive the carriage and which the cart?
Which of us would sit with Papa, and which with Karl Ivanitch? Why must
I be kept forever muffled up in a scarf and padded boots?

"Am I so delicate? Am I likely to be frozen?" I thought to myself.
"I wish it would all come to an end, and we could take our seats and
start."

"To whom shall I give the list of the children's linen?" asked Natalia
Savishna of Mamma as she entered the room with a paper in her hand and
her eyes red with weeping.

"Give it to Nicola, and then return to say good-bye to them," replied
Mamma. The old woman seemed about to say something more, but suddenly
stopped short, covered her face with her handkerchief, and left the
room. Something seemed to prick at my heart when I saw that gesture of
hers, but impatience to be off soon drowned all other feeling, and
I continued to listen indifferently to Papa and Mamma as they talked
together. They were discussing subjects which evidently interested
neither of them. What must be bought for the house? What would Princess
Sophia or Madame Julie say? Would the roads be good?--and so forth.

Foka entered, and in the same tone and with the same air as though he
were announcing luncheon said, "The carriages are ready." I saw Mamma
tremble and turn pale at the announcement, just as though it were
something unexpected.

Next, Foka was ordered to shut all the doors of the room. This amused
me highly. As though we needed to be concealed from some one! When
every one else was seated, Foka took the last remaining chair. Scarcely,
however, had he done so when the door creaked and every one looked that
way. Natalia Savishna entered hastily, and, without raising her eyes,
sat own on the same chair as Foka. I can see them before me now-Foka's
bald head and wrinkled, set face, and, beside him, a bent, kind figure
in a cap from beneath which a few grey hairs were straggling. The pair
settled themselves together on the chair, but neither of them looked
comfortable.

I continued preoccupied and impatient. In fact, the ten minutes during
which we sat there with closed doors seemed to me an hour. At last every
one rose, made the sign of the cross, and began to say good-bye. Papa
embraced Mamma, and kissed her again and again.

"But enough," he said presently. "We are not parting for ever."

"No, but it is-so-so sad!" replied Mamma, her voice trembling with
emotion.

When I heard that faltering voice, and saw those quivering lips and
tear-filled eyes, I forgot everything else in the world. I felt so ill
and miserable that I would gladly have run away rather than bid
her farewell. I felt, too, that when she was embracing Papa she was
embracing us all. She clasped Woloda to her several times, and made the
sign of the cross over him; after which I approached her, thinking that
it was my turn. Nevertheless she took him again and again to her heart,
and blessed him. Finally I caught hold of her, and, clinging to her,
wept--wept, thinking of nothing in the world but my grief.

As we passed out to take our seats, other servants pressed round us in
the hall to say good-bye. Yet their requests to shake hands with
us, their resounding kisses on our shoulders, [The fashion in which
inferiors salute their superiors in Russia.] and the odour of their
greasy heads only excited in me a feeling akin to impatience with these
tiresome people. The same feeling made me bestow nothing more than a
very cross kiss upon Natalia's cap when she approached to take leave of
me. It is strange that I should still retain a perfect recollection of
these servants' faces, and be able to draw them with the most minute
accuracy in my mind, while Mamma's face and attitude escape me entirely.
It may be that it is because at that moment I had not the heart to look
at her closely. I felt that if I did so our mutual grief would burst
forth too unrestrainedly.

I was the first to jump into the carriage and to take one of the hinder
seats. The high back of the carriage prevented me from actually seeing
her, yet I knew by instinct that Mamma was still there.

"Shall I look at her again or not?" I said to myself. "Well, just for
the last time," and I peeped out towards the entrance-steps. Exactly at
that moment Mamma moved by the same impulse, came to the opposite side
of the carriage, and called me by name. Hearing her voice behind me. I
turned round, but so hastily that our heads knocked together. She gave a
sad smile, and kissed me convulsively for the last time.

When we had driven away a few paces I determined to look at her once
more. The wind was lifting the blue handkerchief from her head as, bent
forward and her face buried in her hands, she moved slowly up the steps.
Foka was supporting her. Papa said nothing as he sat beside me. I felt
breathless with tears--felt a sensation in my throat as though I were
going to choke, just as we came out on to the open road I saw a white
handkerchief waving from the terrace. I waved mine in return, and the
action of so doing calmed me a little. I still went on crying, but the
thought that my tears were a proof of my affection helped to soothe and
comfort me.

After a little while I began to recover, and to look with interest at
objects which we passed and at the hind-quarters of the led horse which
was trotting on my side. I watched how it would swish its tail, how it
would lift one hoof after the other, how the driver's thong would fall
upon its back, and how all its legs would then seem to jump together and
the back-band, with the rings on it, to jump too--the whole covered with
the horse's foam. Then I would look at the rolling stretches of ripe
corn, at the dark ploughed fields where ploughs and peasants and horses
with foals were working, at their footprints, and at the box of the
carriage to see who was driving us; until, though my face was still wet
with tears, my thoughts had strayed far from her with whom I had just
parted--parted, perhaps, for ever. Yet ever and again something would
recall her to my memory. I remembered too how, the evening before, I
had found a mushroom under the birch-trees, how Lubotshka had quarrelled
with Katenka as to whose it should be, and how they had both of them
wept when taking leave of us. I felt sorry to be parted from them, and
from Natalia Savishna, and from the birch-tree avenue, and from Foka.
Yes, even the horrid Mimi I longed for. I longed for everything at home.
And poor Mamma!--The tears rushed to my eyes again. Yet even this mood
passed away before long.




XV -- CHILDHOOD

HAPPY, happy, never-returning time of childhood! How can we help loving
and dwelling upon its recollections? They cheer and elevate the soul,
and become to one a source of higher joys.

Sometimes, when dreaming of bygone days, I fancy that, tired out with
running about, I have sat down, as of old, in my high arm-chair by the
tea-table. It is late, and I have long since drunk my cup of milk. My
eyes are heavy with sleep as I sit there and listen. How could I not
listen, seeing that Mamma is speaking to somebody, and that the sound
of her voice is so melodious and kind? How much its echoes recall to
my heart! With my eyes veiled with drowsiness I gaze at her wistfully.
Suddenly she seems to grow smaller and smaller, and her face vanishes
to a point; yet I can still see it--can still see her as she looks at me
and smiles. Somehow it pleases me to see her grown so small. I blink and
blink, yet she looks no larger than a boy reflected in the pupil of an
eye. Then I rouse myself, and the picture fades. Once more I half-close
my eyes, and cast about to try and recall the dream, but it has gone.

I rise to my feet, only to fall back comfortably into the armchair.

"There! You are failing asleep again, little Nicolas," says Mamma. "You
had better go to by-by."

"No, I won't go to sleep, Mamma," I reply, though almost inaudibly, for
pleasant dreams are filling all my soul. The sound sleep of childhood is
weighing my eyelids down, and for a few moments I sink into slumber and
oblivion until awakened by some one. I feel in my sleep as though a
soft hand were caressing me. I know it by the touch, and, though still
dreaming, I seize hold of it and press it to my lips. Every one else has
gone to bed, and only one candle remains burning in the drawing-room.
Mamma has said that she herself will wake me. She sits down on the arm
of the chair in which I am asleep, with her soft hand stroking my hair,
and I hear her beloved, well-known voice say in my ear:

"Get up, my darling. It is time to go by-by."

No envious gaze sees her now. She is not afraid to shed upon me the
whole of her tenderness and love. I do not wake up, yet I kiss and kiss
her hand.

"Get up, then, my angel."

She passes her other arm round my neck, and her fingers tickle me as
they move across it. The room is quiet and in half-darkness, but the
tickling has touched my nerves and I begin to awake. Mamma is sitting
near me--that I can tell--and touching me; I can hear her voice and
feel her presence. This at last rouses me to spring up, to throw my arms
around her neck, to hide my head in her bosom, and to say with a sigh:

"Ah, dear, darling Mamma, how much I love you!"

She smiles her sad, enchanting smile, takes my head between her two
hands, kisses me on the forehead, and lifts me on to her lap.

"Do you love me so much, then?" she says. Then, after a few moments'
silence, she continues: "And you must love me always, and never forget
me. If your Mamma should no longer be here, will you promise never to
forget her--never, Nicolinka? and she kisses me more fondly than ever.

"Oh, but you must not speak so, darling Mamma, my own darling Mamma!"
I exclaim as I clasp her knees, and tears of joy and love fall from my
eyes.

How, after scenes like this, I would go upstairs, and stand before the
ikons, and say with a rapturous feeling, "God bless Papa and Mamma!" and
repeat a prayer for my beloved mother which my childish lips had learnt
to lisp-the love of God and of her blending strangely in a single
emotion!

After saying my prayers I would wrap myself up in the bedclothes. My
heart would feel light, peaceful, and happy, and one dream would follow
another. Dreams of what? They were all of them vague, but all of them
full of pure love and of a sort of expectation of happiness. I remember,
too, that I used to think about Karl Ivanitch and his sad lot. He was
the only unhappy being whom I knew, and so sorry would I feel for him,
and so much did I love him, that tears would fall from my eyes as I
thought, "May God give him happiness, and enable me to help him and to
lessen his sorrow. I could make any sacrifice for him!" Usually, also,
there would be some favourite toy--a china dog or hare--stuck into the
bed-corner behind the pillow, and it would please me to think how warm
and comfortable and well cared-for it was there. Also, I would pray God
to make every one happy, so that every one might be contented, and also
to send fine weather to-morrow for our walk. Then I would turn myself
over on to the other side, and thoughts and dreams would become jumbled
and entangled together until at last I slept soundly and peacefully,
though with a face wet with tears.

Do in after life the freshness and light-heartedness, the craving for
love and for strength of faith, ever return which we experience in our
childhood's years? What better time is there in our lives than when
the two best of virtues--innocent gaiety and a boundless yearning for
affection--are our sole objects of pursuit?

Where now are our ardent prayers? Where now are our best gifts--the pure
tears of emotion which a guardian angel dries with a smile as he sheds
upon us lovely dreams of ineffable childish joy? Can it be that life has
left such heavy traces upon one's heart that those tears and ecstasies
are for ever vanished? Can it be that there remains to us only the
recollection of them?




XVI -- VERSE-MAKING

RATHER less than a month after our arrival in Moscow I was sitting
upstairs in my Grandmamma's house and doing some writing at a large
table. Opposite to me sat the drawing master, who was giving a few
finishing touches to the head of a turbaned Turk, executed in black
pencil. Woloda, with out-stretched neck, was standing behind the drawing
master and looking over his shoulder. The head was Woloda's first
production in pencil and to-day--Grandmamma's name-day--the masterpiece
was to be presented to her.

"Aren't you going to put a little more shadow there?" said Woloda to
the master as he raised himself on tiptoe and pointed to the Turk's
neck.

"No, it is not necessary," the master replied as he put pencil and
drawing-pen into a japanned folding box. "It is just right now, and
you need not do anything more to it. As for you, Nicolinka," he added,
rising and glancing askew at the Turk, "won't you tell us your great
secret at last? What are you going to give your Grandmamma? I think
another head would be your best gift. But good-bye, gentlemen," and
taking his hat and cardboard he departed.

I too had thought that another head than the one at which I had been
working would be a better gift; so, when we were told that Grandmamma's
name-day was soon to come round and that we must each of us have a
present ready for her, I had taken it into my head to write some
verses in honour of the occasion, and had forthwith composed two rhymed
couplets, hoping that the rest would soon materialise. I really do not
know how the idea--one so peculiar for a child--came to occur to me, but
I know that I liked it vastly, and answered all questions on the subject
of my gift by declaring that I should soon have something ready for
Grandmamma, but was not going to say what it was.

Contrary to my expectation, I found that, after the first two couplets
executed in the initial heat of enthusiasm, even my most strenuous
efforts refused to produce another one. I began to read different poems
in our books, but neither Dimitrieff nor Derzhavin could help me. On
the contrary, they only confirmed my sense of incompetence. Knowing,
however, that Karl Ivanitch was fond of writing verses, I stole softly
upstairs to burrow among his papers, and found, among a number of German
verses, some in the Russian language which seemed to have come from his
own pen.

     To L

     Remember near
     Remember far,
     Remember me.
     To-day be faithful, and for ever--
     Aye, still beyond the grave--remember
     That I have well loved thee.

     "KARL MAYER."

These verses (which were written in a fine, round hand on thin
letter-paper) pleased me with the touching sentiment with which they
seemed to be inspired. I learnt them by heart, and decided to take them
as a model. The thing was much easier now. By the time the name-day had
arrived I had completed a twelve-couplet congratulatory ode, and sat
down to the table in our school-room to copy them out on vellum.

Two sheets were soon spoiled--not because I found it necessary to alter
anything (the verses seemed to me perfect), but because, after the third
line, the tail-end of each successive one would go curving upward and
making it plain to all the world that the whole thing had been written
with a want of adherence to the horizontal--a thing which I could not
bear to see.

The third sheet also came out crooked, but I determined to make it do.
In my verses I congratulated Grandmamma, wished her many happy returns,
and concluded thus:

     "Endeavouring you to please and cheer,
      We love you like our Mother dear."

This seemed to me not bad, yet it offended my ear somehow.

"Lo-ve you li-ike our Mo-ther dear," I repeated to myself. "What other
rhyme could I use instead of 'dear'? Fear? Steer? Well, it must go at
that. At least the verses are better than Karl Ivanitch's."

Accordingly I added the last verse to the rest. Then I went into
our bedroom and recited the whole poem aloud with much feeling and
gesticulation. The verses were altogether guiltless of metre, but I
did not stop to consider that. Yet the last one displeased me more than
ever. As I sat on my bed I thought:

"Why on earth did I write 'like our Mother dear'? She is not here, and
therefore she need never have been mentioned. True, I love and respect
Grandmamma, but she is not quite the same as--Why DID I write that?
What did I go and tell a lie for? They may be verses only, yet I needn't
quite have done that."

At that moment the tailor arrived with some new clothes for us.

"Well, so be it!" I said in much vexation as I crammed the verses
hastily under my pillow and ran down to adorn myself in the new Moscow
garments.

They fitted marvellously-both the brown jacket with yellow buttons (a
garment made skin-tight and not "to allow room for growth," as in
the country) and the black trousers (also close-fitting so that they
displayed the figure and lay smoothly over the boots).

"At last I have real trousers on!" I thought as I looked at my legs with
the utmost satisfaction. I concealed from every one the fact that the
new clothes were horribly tight and uncomfortable, but, on the contrary,
said that, if there were a fault, it was that they were not tight
enough. For a long while I stood before the looking-glass as I combed
my elaborately pomaded head, but, try as I would, I could not reduce the
topmost hairs on the crown to order. As soon as ever I left off combing
them, they sprang up again and radiated in different directions, thus
giving my face a ridiculous expression.

Karl Ivanitch was dressing in another room, and I heard some one
bring him his blue frockcoat and under-linen. Then at the door leading
downstairs I heard a maid-servant's voice, and went to see what she
wanted. In her hand she held a well-starched shirt which she said she
had been sitting up all night to get ready. I took it, and asked if
Grandmamma was up yet.

"Oh yes, she has had her coffee, and the priest has come. My word, but
you look a fine little fellow!" added the girl with a smile at my new
clothes.

This observation made me blush, so I whirled round on one leg, snapped
my fingers, and went skipping away, in the hope that by these manoeuvres
I should make her sensible that even yet she had not realised quite what
a fine fellow I was.

However, when I took the shirt to Karl I found that he did not need it,
having taken another one. Standing before a small looking-glass, he tied
his cravat with both hands--trying, by various motions of his head, to
see whether it fitted him comfortably or not--and then took us down to
see Grandmamma. To this day I cannot help laughing when I remember what
a smell of pomade the three of us left behind us on the staircase as we
descended.

Karl was carrying a box which he had made himself, Woloda, his drawing,
and I my verses, while each of us also had a form of words ready with
which to present his gift. Just as Karl opened the door, the priest put
on his vestment and began to say prayers.

During the ceremony Grandmamma stood leaning over the back of a chair,
with her head bent down. Near her stood Papa. He turned and smiled at us
as we hurriedly thrust our presents behind our backs and tried to remain
unobserved by the door. The whole effect of a surprise, upon which we
had been counting, was entirely lost. When at last every one had made
the sign of the cross I became intolerably oppressed with a sudden,
invincible, and deadly attack of shyness, so that the courage to, offer
my present completely failed me. I hid myself behind Karl Ivanitch, who
solemnly congratulated Grandmamma and, transferring his box from his
right hand to his left, presented it to her. Then he withdrew a few
steps to make way for Woloda. Grandmamma seemed highly pleased with
the box (which was adorned with a gold border), and smiled in the most
friendly manner in order to express her gratitude. Yet it was evident
that, she did not know where to set the box down, and this probably
accounts for the fact that she handed it to Papa, at the same time
bidding him observe how beautifully it was made.

His curiosity satisfied, Papa handed the box to the priest, who also
seemed particularly delighted with it, and looked with astonishment,
first at the article itself, and then at the artist who could make
such wonderful things. Then Woloda presented his Turk, and received a
similarly flattering ovation on all sides.

It was my turn now, and Grandmamma turned to me with her kindest smile.
Those who have experienced what embarrassment is know that it is a
feeling which grows in direct proportion to delay, while decision
decreases in similar measure. In other words the longer the condition
lasts, the more invincible does it become, and the smaller does the
power of decision come to be.

My last remnants of nerve and energy had forsaken me while Karl and
Woloda had been offering their presents, and my shyness now reached its
culminating point, I felt the blood rushing from my heart to my head,
one blush succeeding another across my face, and drops of perspiration
beginning to stand out on my brow and nose. My ears were burning, I
trembled from head to foot, and, though I kept changing from one foot to
the other, I remained rooted where I stood.

"Well, Nicolinka, tell us what you have brought?" said Papa. "Is it a
box or a drawing?"

There was nothing else to be done. With a trembling hand held out the
folded, fatal paper, but my voiced failed me completely and I stood
before Grandmamma in silence. I could not get rid of the dreadful idea
that, instead of a display of the expected drawing, some bad verses of
mine were about to be read aloud before every one, and that the words
"our Mother dear" would clearly prove that I had never loved, but had
only forgotten, her. How shall I express my sufferings when Grandmamma
began to read my poetry aloud?--when, unable to decipher it, she stopped
half-way and looked at Papa with a smile (which I took to be one of
ridicule)?--when she did not pronounce it as I had meant it to be
pronounced?--and when her weak sight not allowing her to finish it, she
handed the paper to Papa and requested him to read it all over again
from the beginning? I fancied that she must have done this last because
she did not like to read such a lot of stupid, crookedly written stuff
herself, yet wanted to point out to Papa my utter lack of feeling. I
expected him to slap me in the face with the verses and say, "You bad
boy! So you have forgotten your Mamma! Take that for it!" Yet nothing
of the sort happened. On the contrary, when the whole had been read,
Grandmamma said, "Charming!" and kissed me on the forehead. Then our
presents, together with two cambric pocket-handkerchiefs and a snuff-box
engraved with Mamma's portrait, were laid on the table attached to the
great Voltairian arm-chair in which Grandmamma always sat.

"The Princess Barbara Ilinitsha!" announced one of the two footmen who
used to stand behind Grandmamma's carriage, but Grandmamma was looking
thoughtfully at the portrait on the snuff-box, and returned no answer.

"Shall I show her in, madam?" repeated the footman.




XVII -- THE PRINCESS KORNAKOFF

"Yes, show her in," said Grandmamma, settling herself as far back in
her arm-chair as possible. The Princess was a woman of about
forty-five, small and delicate, with a shrivelled skin and disagreeable,
greyish-green eyes, the expression of which contradicted the unnaturally
suave look of the rest of her face. Underneath her velvet bonnet,
adorned with an ostrich feather, was visible some reddish hair, while
against the unhealthy colour of her skin her eyebrows and eyelashes
looked even lighter and redder that they would other wise have done.
Yet, for all that, her animated movements, small hands, and peculiarly
dry features communicated something aristocratic and energetic to her
general appearance. She talked a great deal, and, to judge from her
eloquence, belonged to that class of persons who always speak as though
some one were contradicting them, even though no one else may be saying
a word. First she would raise her voice, then lower it and then take on
a fresh access of vivacity as she looked at the persons present, but not
participating in the conversation, with an air of endeavouring to draw
them into it.

Although the Princess kissed Grandmamma's hand and repeatedly called her
"my good Aunt," I could see that Grandmamma did not care much about her,
for she kept raising her eyebrows in a peculiar way while listening
to the Princess's excuses why Prince Michael had been prevented from
calling, and congratulating Grandmamma "as he would like so-much to
have done." At length, however, she answered the Princess's French with
Russian, and with a sharp accentuation of certain words.

"I am much obliged to you for your kindness," she said. "As for Prince
Michael's absence, pray do not mention it. He has so much else to do.
Besides, what pleasure could he find in coming to see an old woman like
me?" Then, without allowing the Princess time to reply, she went on:
"How are your children my dear?"

"Well, thank God, Aunt, they grow and do their lessons and
play--particularly my eldest one, Etienne, who is so wild that it
is almost impossible to keep him in order. Still, he is a clever and
promising boy. Would you believe it, cousin," (this last to Papa, since
Grandmamma altogether uninterested in the Princess's children, had
turned to us, taken my verses out from beneath the presentation box, and
unfolded them again), "would you believe it, but one day not long ago--"
and leaning over towards Papa, the Princess related something or other
with great vivacity. Then, her tale concluded, she laughed, and, with a
questioning look at Papa, went on:

"What a boy, cousin! He ought to have been whipped, but the trick was
so spirited and amusing that I let him off." Then the Princess looked at
Grandmamma and laughed again.

"Ah! So you WHIP your children, do you" said Grandmamma, with a
significant lift of her eyebrows, and laying a peculiar stress on the
word "WHIP."

"Alas, my good Aunt," replied the Princess in a sort of tolerant tone
and with another glance at Papa, "I know your views on the subject, but
must beg to be allowed to differ with them. However much I have thought
over and read and talked about the matter, I have always been forced to
come to the conclusion that children must be ruled through FEAR. To make
something of a child, you must make it FEAR something. Is it not so,
cousin? And what, pray, do children fear so much as a rod?"

As she spoke she seemed, to look inquiringly at Woloda and myself, and I
confess that I did not feel altogether comfortable.

"Whatever you may say," she went on, "a boy of twelve, or even of
fourteen, is still a child and should be whipped as such; but with
girls, perhaps, it is another matter."

"How lucky it is that I am not her son!" I thought to myself.

"Oh, very well," said Grandmamma, folding up my verses and replacing
them beneath the box (as though, after that exposition of views, the
Princess was unworthy of the honour of listening to such a production).
"Very well, my dear," she repeated "But please tell me how, in return,
you can look for any delicate sensibility from your children?"

Evidently Grandmamma thought this argument unanswerable, for she cut the
subject short by adding:

"However, it is a point on which people must follow their own opinions."

The Princess did not choose to reply, but smiled condescendingly, and as
though out of indulgence to the strange prejudices of a person whom she
only PRETENDED to revere.

"Oh, by the way, pray introduce me to your young people," she went on
presently as she threw us another gracious smile.

Thereupon we rose and stood looking at the Princess, without in the
least knowing what we ought to do to show that we were being introduced.

"Kiss the Princess's hand," said Papa.

"Well, I hope you will love your old aunt," she said to Woloda, kissing
his hair, "even though we are not near relatives. But I value friendship
far more than I do degrees of relationship," she added to Grandmamma,
who nevertheless, remained hostile, and replied:

"Eh, my dear? Is that what they think of relationships nowadays?"

"Here is my man of the world," put in Papa, indicating Woloda; "and here
is my poet," he added as I kissed the small, dry hand of the Princess,
with a vivid picture in my mind of that same hand holding a rod and
applying it vigorously.

"WHICH one is the poet?" asked the Princess.

"This little one," replied Papa, smiling; "the one with the tuft of hair
on his top-knot."

"Why need he bother about my tuft?" I thought to myself as I retired
into a corner. "Is there nothing else for him to talk about?"

I had strange ideas on manly beauty. I considered Karl Ivanitch one of
the handsomest men in the world, and myself so ugly that I had no need
to deceive myself on that point. Therefore any remark on the subject of
my exterior offended me extremely. I well remember how, one day after
luncheon (I was then six years of age), the talk fell upon my personal
appearance, and how Mamma tried to find good features in my face, and
said that I had clever eyes and a charming smile; how, nevertheless,
when Papa had examined me, and proved the contrary, she was obliged to
confess that I was ugly; and how, when the meal was over and I went
to pay her my respects, she said as she patted my cheek; "You know,
Nicolinka, nobody will ever love you for your face alone, so you must
try all the more to be a good and clever boy."

Although these words of hers confirmed in me my conviction that I was
not handsome, they also confirmed in me an ambition to be just such
a boy as she had indicated. Yet I had my moments of despair at my
ugliness, for I thought that no human being with such a large nose, such
thick lips, and such small grey eyes as mine could ever hope to attain
happiness on this earth. I used to ask God to perform a miracle by
changing me into a beauty, and would have given all that I possessed, or
ever hoped to possess, to have a handsome face.




XVIII -- PRINCE IVAN IVANOVITCH

When the Princess had heard my verses and overwhelmed the writer of them
with praise, Grandmamma softened to her a little. She began to address
her in French and to cease calling her "my dear." Likewise she invited
her to return that evening with her children. This invitation having
been accepted, the Princess took her leave. After that, so many other
callers came to congratulate Grandmamma that the courtyard was crowded
all day long with carriages.

"Good morning, my dear cousin," was the greeting of one guest in
particular as he entered the room and kissed Grandmamma's hand. He was
a man of seventy, with a stately figure clad in a military uniform and
adorned with large epaulettes, an embroidered collar, and a white cross
round the neck. His face, with its quiet and open expression, as well
as the simplicity and ease of his manners, greatly pleased me, for, in
spite of the thin half-circle of hair which was all that was now left
to him, and the want of teeth disclosed by the set of his upper lip, his
face was a remarkably handsome one.

Thanks to his fine character, handsome exterior, remarkable valour,
influential relatives, and, above all, good fortune, Prince, Ivan
Ivanovitch had early made himself a career. As that career progressed,
his ambition had met with a success which left nothing more to be sought
for in that direction. From his earliest youth upward he had prepared
himself to fill the exalted station in the world to which fate actually
called him later; wherefore, although in his prosperous life (as in the
lives of all) there had been failures, misfortunes, and cares, he had
never lost his quietness of character, his elevated tone of thought, or
his peculiarly moral, religious bent of mind. Consequently, though he
had won the universal esteem of his fellows, he had done so less through
his important position than through his perseverance and integrity.
While not of specially distinguished intellect, the eminence of his
station (whence he could afford to look down upon all petty questions)
had caused him to adopt high points of view. Though in reality he was
kind and sympathetic, in manner he appeared cold and haughty--probably
for the reason that he had forever to be on his guard against the
endless claims and petitions of people who wished to profit through
his influence. Yet even then his coldness was mitigated by the polite
condescension of a man well accustomed to move in the highest circles
of society. Well-educated, his culture was that of a youth of the end of
the last century. He had read everything, whether philosophy or belles
lettres, which that age had produced in France, and loved to quote from
Racine, Corneille, Boileau, Moliere, Montaigne, and Fenelon. Likewise he
had gleaned much history from Segur, and much of the old classics from
French translations of them; but for mathematics, natural philosophy, or
contemporary literature he cared nothing whatever. However, he knew how
to be silent in conversation, as well as when to make general remarks
on authors whom he had never read--such as Goethe, Schiller, and Byron.
Moreover, despite his exclusively French education, he was simple in
speech and hated originality (which he called the mark of an untutored
nature). Wherever he lived, society was a necessity to him, and, both in
Moscow and the country he had his reception days, on which practically
"all the town" called upon him. An introduction from him was a passport
to every drawing-room; few young and pretty ladies in society objected
to offering him their rosy cheeks for a paternal salute; and people even
in the highest positions felt flattered by invitations to his parties.

The Prince had few friends left now like Grandmamma--that is to say, few
friends who were of the same standing as himself, who had had the same
sort of education, and who saw things from the same point of view:
wherefore he greatly valued his intimate, long-standing friendship with
her, and always showed her the highest respect.

I hardly dared to look at the Prince, since the honour paid him on all
sides, the huge epaulettes, the peculiar pleasure with which Grandmamma
received him, and the fact that he alone, seemed in no way afraid of
her, but addressed her with perfect freedom (even being so daring as to
call her "cousin"), awakened in me a feeling of reverence for his person
almost equal to that which I felt for Grandmamma herself.

On being shown my verses, he called me to his side, and said:

"Who knows, my cousin, but that he may prove to be a second Derzhavin?"
Nevertheless he pinched my cheek so hard that I was only prevented from
crying by the thought that it must be meant for a caress.

Gradually the other guests dispersed, and with them Papa and Woloda.
Thus only Grandmamma, the Prince, and myself were left in the
drawing-room.

"Why has our dear Natalia Nicolaevna not come to-day" asked the Prince
after a silence.

"Ah, my friend," replied Grandmamma, lowering her voice and laying a
hand upon the sleeve of his uniform, "she would certainly have come if
she had been at liberty to do what she likes. She wrote to me that Peter
had proposed bringing her with him to town, but that she had refused,
since their income had not been good this year, and she could see
no real reason why the whole family need come to Moscow, seeing that
Lubotshka was as yet very young and that the boys were living with me--a
fact, she said, which made her feel as safe about them as though she had
been living with them herself."

"True, it is good for the boys to be here," went on Grandmamma, yet in
a tone which showed clearly that she did not think it was so very good,
"since it was more than time that they should be sent to Moscow to
study, as well as to learn how to comport themselves in society. What
sort of an education could they have got in the country? The eldest boy
will soon be thirteen, and the second one eleven. As yet, my cousin,
they are quite untaught, and do not know even how to enter a room."

"Nevertheless" said the Prince, "I cannot understand these complaints
of ruined fortunes. He has a very handsome income, and Natalia has
Chabarovska, where we used to act plays, and which I know as well as
I do my own hand. It is a splendid property, and ought to bring in an
excellent return."

"Well," said Grandmamma with a sad expression on her face, "I do not
mind telling you, as my most intimate friend, that all this seems to me
a mere pretext on his part for living alone, for strolling about from
club to club, for attending dinner-parties, and for resorting to--well,
who knows what? She suspects nothing; you know her angelic sweetness and
her implicit trust of him in everything. He had only to tell her that
the children must go to Moscow and that she must be left behind in the
country with a stupid governess for company, for her to believe him! I
almost think that if he were to say that the children must be whipped
just as the Princess Barbara whips hers, she would believe even that!"
and Grandmamma leant back in her arm-chair with an expression of
contempt. Then, after a moment of silence, during which she took her
handkerchief out of her pocket to wipe away a few tears which had stolen
down her cheeks, she went, on:

"Yes, my friend, I often think that he cannot value and understand
her properly, and that, for all her goodness and love of him and her
endeavours to conceal her grief (which, however as I know only too well,
exists). She cannot really be happy with him. Mark my words if he does
not--" Here Grandmamma buried her face in the handkerchief.

"Ah, my dear old friend," said the Prince reproachfully. "I think you
are unreasonable. Why grieve and weep over imagined evils? That is
not right. I have known him a long time, and feel sure that he is an
attentive, kind, and excellent husband, as well as (which is the chief
thing of all) a perfectly honourable man."

At this point, having been an involuntary auditor of a conversation
not meant for my ears, I stole on tiptoe out of the room, in a state of
great distress.




XIX -- THE IWINS

"Woloda, Woloda! The Iwins are just coming." I shouted on seeing from
the window three boys in blue overcoats, and followed by a young tutor,
advancing along the pavement opposite our house.

The Iwins were related to us, and of about the same age as ourselves. We
had made their acquaintance soon after our arrival in Moscow. The second
brother, Seriosha, had dark curly hair, a turned-up, strongly pronounced
nose, very bright red lips (which, never being quite shut, showed a
row of white teeth), beautiful dark-blue eyes, and an uncommonly bold
expression of face. He never smiled but was either wholly serious or
laughing a clear, merry, agreeable laugh. His striking good looks had
captivated me from the first, and I felt an irresistible attraction
towards him. Only to see him filled me with pleasure, and at one time my
whole mental faculties used to be concentrated in the wish that I
might do so. If three or four days passed without my seeing him I felt
listless and ready to cry. Awake or asleep, I was forever dreaming of
him. On going to bed I used to see him in my dreams, and when I had
shut my eyes and called up a picture of him I hugged the vision as
my choicest delight. So much store did I set upon this feeling for my
friend that I never mentioned it to any one. Nevertheless, it must have
annoyed him to see my admiring eyes constantly fixed upon him, or else
he must have felt no reciprocal attraction, for he always preferred to
play and talk with Woloda. Still, even with that I felt satisfied, and
wished and asked for nothing better than to be ready at any time to make
any sacrifice for him. Likewise, over and above the strange fascination
which he exercised upon me, I always felt another sensation, namely,
a dread of making him angry, of offending him, of displeasing him. Was
this because his face bore such a haughty expression, or because I,
despising my own exterior, over-rated the beautiful in others, or,
lastly (and most probably), because it is a common sign of affection?
At all events, I felt as much fear, of him as I did love. The first time
that he spoke to me I was so overwhelmed with sudden happiness that I
turned pale, then red, and could not utter a word. He had an ugly habit
of blinking when considering anything seriously, as well as of twitching
his nose and eyebrows. Consequently every one thought that this habit
marred his face. Yet I thought it such a nice one that I involuntarily
adopted it for myself, until, a few days after I had made his
acquaintance, Grandmamma suddenly asked me whether my eyes were hurting
me, since I was winking like an owl! Never a word of affection passed
between us, yet he felt his power over me, and unconsciously but
tyrannically, exercised it in all our childish intercourse. I used to
long to tell him all that was in my heart, yet was too much afraid of
him to be frank in any way, and, while submitting myself to his will,
tried to appear merely careless and indifferent. Although at times his
influence seemed irksome and intolerable, to throw it off was beyond my
strength.

I often think with regret of that fresh, beautiful feeling of boundless,
disinterested love which came to an end without having ever found
self-expression or return. It is strange how, when a child, I always
longed to be like grown-up people, and yet how I have often longed,
since childhood's days, for those days to come back to me! Many times,
in my relations with Seriosha, this wish to resemble grown-up people
put a rude check upon the love that was waiting to expand, and made me
repress it. Not only was I afraid of kissing him, or of taking his hand
and saying how glad I was to see him, but I even dreaded calling him
"Seriosha" and always said "Sergius" as every one else did in our
house. Any expression of affection would have seemed like evidence of
childishness, and any one who indulged in it, a baby. Not having yet
passed through those bitter experiences which enforce upon older years
circumspection and coldness, I deprived myself of the pure delight of
a fresh, childish instinct for the absurd purpose of trying to resemble
grown-up people.

I met the Iwins in the ante-room, welcomed them, and then ran to tell
Grandmamma of their arrival with an expression as happy as though she
were certain to be equally delighted. Then, never taking my eyes off
Seriosha, I conducted the visitors to the drawing-room, and eagerly
followed every movement of my favourite. When Grandmamma spoke to
and fixed her penetrating glance upon him, I experienced that mingled
sensation of pride and solicitude which an artist might feel when
waiting for revered lips to pronounce a judgment upon his work.

With Grandmamma's permission, the Iwins' young tutor, Herr Frost,
accompanied us into the little back garden, where he seated himself
upon a bench, arranged his legs in a tasteful attitude, rested his
brass-knobbed cane between them, lighted a cigar, and assumed the air
of a man well-pleased with himself. He was a German, but of a very
different sort to our good Karl Ivanitch. In the first place, he spoke
both Russian and French correctly, though with a hard accent Indeed,
he enjoyed--especially among the ladies--the reputation of being a very
accomplished fellow. In the second place, he wore a reddish moustache,
a large gold pin set with a ruby, a black satin tie, and a very
fashionable suit. Lastly, he was young, with a handsome, self-satisfied
face and fine muscular legs. It was clear that he set the greatest store
upon the latter, and thought them beyond compare, especially as regards
the favour of the ladies. Consequently, whether sitting or standing, he
always tried to exhibit them in the most favourable light. In short,
he was a type of the young German-Russian whose main desire is to be
thought perfectly gallant and gentlemanly.

In the little garden merriment reigned. In fact, the game of "robbers"
never went better. Yet an incident occurred which came near to spoiling
it. Seriosha was the robber, and in pouncing upon some travellers he
fell down and knocked his leg so badly against a tree that I thought
the leg must be broken. Consequently, though I was the gendarme and
therefore bound to apprehend him, I only asked him anxiously, when I
reached him, if he had hurt himself very much. Nevertheless this threw
him into a passion, and made him exclaim with fists clenched and in a
voice which showed by its faltering what pain he was enduring, "Why,
whatever is the matter? Is this playing the game properly? You ought
to arrest me. Why on earth don't you do so?" This he repeated several
times, and then, seeing Woloda and the elder Iwin (who were taking the
part of the travellers) jumping and running about the path, he suddenly
threw himself upon them with a shout and loud laughter to effect
their capture. I cannot express my wonder and delight at this valiant
behaviour of my hero. In spite of the severe pain, he had not only
refrained from crying, but had repressed the least symptom of suffering
and kept his eye fixed upon the game! Shortly after this occurrence
another boy, Ilinka Grap, joined our party. We went upstairs, and
Seriosha gave me an opportunity of still further appreciating and taking
delight in his manly bravery and fortitude. This was how it was.

Ilinka was the son of a poor foreigner who had been under certain
obligations to my Grandpapa, and now thought it incumbent upon him to
send his son to us as frequently as possible. Yet if he thought that the
acquaintance would procure his son any advancement or pleasure, he was
entirely mistaken, for not only were we anything but friendly to Ilinka,
but it was seldom that we noticed him at all except to laugh at him. He
was a boy of thirteen, tall and thin, with a pale, birdlike face, and
a quiet, good-tempered expression. Though poorly dressed, he always had
his head so thickly pomaded that we used to declare that on warm days
it melted and ran down his neck. When I think of him now, it seems to
me that he was a very quiet, obliging, and good-tempered boy, but at
the time I thought him a creature so contemptible that he was not worth
either attention or pity.

Upstairs we set ourselves to astonish each other with gymnastic tours de
force. Ilinka watched us with a faint smile of admiration, but refused
an invitation to attempt a similar feat, saying that he had no strength.

Seriosha was extremely captivating. His face and eyes glowed with
laughter as he surprised us with tricks which we had never seen before.
He jumped over three chairs put together, turned somersaults right
across the room, and finally stood on his head on a pyramid of
Tatistchev's dictionaries, moving his legs about with such comical
rapidity that it was impossible not to help bursting with merriment.

After this last trick he pondered for a moment (blinking his eyes as
usual), and then went up to Ilinka with a very serious face.

"Try and do that," he said. "It is not really difficult."

Ilinka, observing that the general attention was fixed upon him,
blushed, and said in an almost inaudible voice that he could not do the
feat.

"Well, what does he mean by doing nothing at all? What a girl the fellow
is! He has just GOT to stand on his head," and Seriosha, took him by the
hand.

"Yes, on your head at once! This instant, this instant!" every one
shouted as we ran upon Ilinka and dragged him to the dictionaries,
despite his being visibly pale and frightened.

"Leave me alone! You are tearing my jacket!" cried the unhappy victim,
but his exclamations of despair only encouraged us the more. We were
dying with laughter, while the green jacket was bursting at every seam.

Woloda and the eldest Iwin took his head and placed it on the
dictionaries, while Seriosha, and I seized his poor, thin legs (his
struggles had stripped them upwards to the knees), and with boisterous,
laughter held them uptight--the youngest Iwin superintending his general
equilibrium.

Suddenly a moment of silence occurred amid our boisterous laughter--a
moment during which nothing was to be heard in the room but the panting
of the miserable Ilinka. It occurred to me at that moment that, after
all, there was nothing so very comical and pleasant in all this.

"Now, THAT'S a boy!" cried Seriosha, giving Ilinka a smack with his
hand. Ilinka said nothing, but made such desperate movements with his
legs to free himself that his foot suddenly kicked Seriosha in the
eye: with the result that, letting go of Ilinka's leg and covering the
wounded member with one hand, Seriosha hit out at him with all his might
with the other one. Of course Ilinka's legs slipped down as, sinking
exhausted to the floor and half-suffocated with tears, he stammered out:

"Why should you bully me so?"

The poor fellow's miserable figure, with its streaming tears, ruffled
hair, and crumpled trousers revealing dirty boots, touched us a little,
and we stood silent and trying to smile.

Seriosha was the first to recover himself.

"What a girl! What a gaby!" he said, giving Ilinka a slight kick. "He
can't take things in fun a bit. Well, get up, then."

"You are an utter beast! That's what YOU are!" said Ilinka, turning
miserably away and sobbing.

"Oh, oh! Would it still kick and show temper, then?" cried Seriosha,
seizing a dictionary and throwing it at the unfortunate boy's head.
Apparently it never occurred to Ilinka to take refuge from the missile;
he merely guarded his head with his hands.

"Well, that's enough now," added Seriosha, with a forced laugh. "You
DESERVE to be hurt if you can't take things in fun. Now let's go
downstairs."

I could not help looking with some compassion at the miserable creature
on the floor as, his face buried in the dictionary, he lay there sobbing
almost as though he were in a fit.

"Oh, Sergius!" I said. "Why have you done this?"

"Well, you did it too! Besides, I did not cry this afternoon when I
knocked my leg and nearly broke it."

"True enough," I thought. "Ilinka is a poor whining sort of a chap,
while Seriosha is a boy--a REAL boy."

It never occurred to my mind that possibly poor Ilinka was suffering
far less from bodily pain than from the thought that five companions
for whom he may have felt a genuine liking had, for no reason at all,
combined to hurt and humiliate him.

I cannot explain my cruelty on this occasion. Why did I not step forward
to comfort and protect him? Where was the pitifulness which often made
me burst into tears at the sight of a young bird fallen from its nest,
or of a puppy being thrown over a wall, or of a chicken being killed by
the cook for soup?

Can it be that the better instinct in me was overshadowed by my
affection for Seriosha and the desire to shine before so brave a boy? If
so, how contemptible were both the affection and the desire! They alone
form dark spots on the pages of my youthful recollections.




XX -- PREPARATIONS FOR THE PARTY

To judge from the extraordinary activity in the pantry, the shining
cleanliness which imparted such a new and festal guise to certain
articles in the salon and drawing-room which I had long known as
anything but resplendent, and the arrival of some musicians whom Prince
Ivan would certainly not have sent for nothing, no small amount of
company was to be expected that evening.

At the sound of every vehicle which chanced to pass the house I ran
to the window, leaned my head upon my arms, and peered with impatient
curiosity into the street.

At last a carriage stopped at our door, and, in the full belief that
this must be the Iwins, who had promised to come early, I at once ran
downstairs to meet them in the hall.

But, instead of the Iwins, I beheld from behind the figure of the
footman who opened the door two female figures-one tall and wrapped in a
blue cloak trimmed with marten, and the other one short and wrapped in
a green shawl from beneath which a pair of little feet, stuck into fur
boots, peeped forth.

Without paying any attention to my presence in the hall (although I
thought it my duty, on the appearance of these persons to salute them),
the shorter one moved towards the taller, and stood silently in front of
her. Thereupon the tall lady untied the shawl which enveloped the head
of the little one, and unbuttoned the cloak which hid her form; until,
by the time that the footmen had taken charge of these articles and
removed the fur boots, there stood forth from the amorphous chrysalis
a charming girl of twelve, dressed in a short muslin frock, white
pantaloons, and smart black satin shoes. Around her, white neck she wore
a narrow black velvet ribbon, while her head was covered with flaxen
curls which so perfectly suited her beautiful face in front and her bare
neck and shoulders behind that I, would have believed nobody, not even
Karl Ivanitch, if he, or she had told me that they only hung so nicely
because, ever since the morning, they had been screwed up in fragments
of a Moscow newspaper and then warmed with a hot iron. To me it seemed
as though she must have been born with those curls.

The most prominent feature in her face was a pair of unusually large
half-veiled eyes, which formed a strange, but pleasing, contrast to the
small mouth. Her lips were closed, while her eyes looked so grave that
the general expression of her face gave one the impression that a smile
was never to be looked for from her: wherefore, when a smile did come,
it was all the more pleasing.

Trying to escape notice, I slipped through the door of the salon,
and then thought it necessary to be seen pacing to and fro, seemingly
engaged in thought, as though unconscious of the arrival of guests.

BY the time, however, that the ladies had advanced to the middle of
the salon I seemed suddenly to awake from my reverie and told them that
Grandmamma was in the drawing room, Madame Valakhin, whose face pleased
me extremely (especially since it bore a great resemblance to her
daughter's), stroked my head kindly.

Grandmamma seemed delighted to see Sonetchka. She invited her to come
to her, put back a curl which had fallen over her brow, and looking
earnestly at her said, "What a charming child!"

Sonetchka blushed, smiled, and, indeed, looked so charming that I myself
blushed as I looked at her.

"I hope you are going to enjoy yourself here, my love," said
Grandmamma. "Pray be as merry and dance as much as ever you can. See, we
have two beaux for her already," she added, turning to Madame Valakhin,
and stretching out her hand to me.

This coupling of Sonetchka and myself pleased me so much that I blushed
again.

Feeling, presently, that, my embarrassment was increasing, and hearing
the sound of carriages approaching, I thought it wise to retire. In the
hall I encountered the Princess Kornakoff, her son, and an incredible
number of daughters. They had all of them the same face as their mother,
and were very ugly. None of them arrested my attention. They talked in
shrill tones as they took off their cloaks and boas, and laughed as they
bustled about--probably at the fact that there were so many of them!

Etienne was a boy of fifteen, tall and plump, with a sharp face,
deep-set bluish eyes, and very large hands and feet for his age.
Likewise he was awkward, and had a nervous, unpleasing voice.
Nevertheless he seemed very pleased with himself, and was, in my
opinion, a boy who could well bear being beaten with rods.

For a long time we confronted one another without speaking as we took
stock of each other. When the flood of dresses had swept past I made
shift to begin a conversation by asking him whether it had not been very
close in the carriage.

"I don't know," he answered indifferently. "I never ride inside it, for
it makes me feel sick directly, and Mamma knows that. Whenever we are
driving anywhere at night-time I always sit on the box. I like that, for
then one sees everything. Philip gives me the reins, and sometimes the
whip too, and then the people inside get a regular--well, you know," he
added with a significant gesture "It's splendid then."

"Master Etienne," said a footman, entering the hall, "Philip wishes me
to ask you where you put the whip."

"Where I put it? Why, I gave it back to him."

"But he says that you did not."

"Well, I laid it across the carriage-lamps!"

"No, sir, he says that you did not do that either. You had better
confess that you took it and lashed it to shreds. I suppose poor Philip
will have to make good your mischief out of his own pocket." The footman
(who looked a grave and honest man) seemed much put out by the affair,
and determined to sift it to the bottom on Philip's behalf.

Out of delicacy I pretended to notice nothing and turned aside, but the
other footmen present gathered round and looked approvingly at the old
servant.

"Hm--well, I DID tear it in pieces," at length confessed Etienne,
shrinking from further explanations. "However, I will pay for it. Did
you ever hear anything so absurd?" he added to me as he drew me towards
the drawing-room.

"But excuse me, sir; HOW are you going to pay for it? I know your ways
of paying. You have owed Maria Valericana twenty copecks these eight
months now, and you have owed me something for two years, and Peter
for--"

"Hold your tongue, will you!" shouted the young fellow, pale with rage,
"I shall report you for this."

"Oh, you may do so," said the footman. "Yet it is not fair, your
highness," he added, with a peculiar stress on the title, as he departed
with the ladies' wraps to the cloak-room. We ourselves entered the
salon.

"Quite right, footman," remarked someone approvingly from the ball
behind us.

Grandmamma had a peculiar way of employing, now the second person
singular, now the second person plural, in order to indicate her opinion
of people. When the young Prince Etienne went up to her she addressed
him as "YOU," and altogether looked at him with such an expression
of contempt that, had I been in his place, I should have been utterly
crestfallen. Etienne, however, was evidently not a boy of that sort,
for he not only took no notice of her reception of him, but none of her
person either. In fact, he bowed to the company at large in a way which,
though not graceful, was at least free from embarrassment.

Sonetchka now claimed my whole attention. I remember that, as I stood
in the salon with Etienne and Woloda, at a spot whence we could both
see and be seen by Sonetchka, I took great pleasure in talking very loud
(and all my utterances seemed to me both bold and comical) and glancing
towards the door of the drawing-room, but that, as soon as ever we
happened to move to another spot whence we could neither see nor be seen
by her, I became dumb, and thought the conversation had ceased to be
enjoyable. The rooms were now full of people--among them (as at all
children's parties) a number of elder children who wished to dance and
enjoy themselves very much, but who pretended to do everything merely in
order to give pleasure to the mistress of the house.

When the Iwins arrived I found that, instead of being as delighted as
usual to meet Seriosha, I felt a kind of vexation that he should see and
be seen by Sonetchka.




XXI -- BEFORE THE MAZURKA

"HULLO, Woloda! So we are going to dance to-night," said Seriosha,
issuing from the drawing-room and taking out of his pocket a brand new
pair of gloves. "I suppose it IS necessary to put on gloves?"

"Goodness! What shall I do? We have no gloves," I thought to myself.
"I must go upstairs and search about." Yet though I rummaged in every
drawer, I only found, in one of them, my green travelling mittens, and,
in another, a single lilac-coloured glove, a thing which could be of no
use to me, firstly, because it was very old and dirty, secondly, because
it was much too large for me, and thirdly (and principally), because the
middle finger was wanting--Karl having long ago cut it off to wear over
a sore nail.

However, I put it on--not without some diffident contemplation of the
blank left by the middle finger and of the ink-stained edges round the
vacant space.

"If only Natalia Savishna had been here," I reflected, "we should
certainly have found some gloves. I can't go downstairs in this
condition. Yet, if they ask me why I am not dancing, what am I to say?
However, I can't remain here either, or they will be sending upstairs to
fetch me. What on earth am I to do?" and I wrung my hands.

"What are you up to here?" asked Woloda as he burst into the room. "Go
and engage a partner. The dancing will be beginning directly."

"Woloda," I said despairingly, as I showed him my hand with two fingers
thrust into a single finger of the dirty glove, "Woloda, you, never
thought of this."

"Of what?" he said impatiently. "Oh, of gloves," he added with a
careless glance at my hand. "That's nothing. We can ask Grandmamma what
she thinks about it," and without further ado he departed downstairs. I
felt a trifle relieved by the coolness with which he had met a situation
which seemed to me so grave, and hastened back to the drawing-room,
completely forgetful of the unfortunate glove which still adorned my
left hand.

Cautiously approaching Grandmamma's arm-chair, I asked her in a whisper:

"Grandmamma, what are we to do? We have no gloves."

"What, my love?"

"We have no gloves," I repeated, at the same time bending over towards
her and laying both hands on the arm of her chair.

"But what is that?" she cried as she caught hold of my left hand.
"Look, my dear!" she continued, turning to Madame Valakhin. "See how
smart this young man has made himself to dance with your daughter!"

As Grandmamma persisted in retaining hold of my hand and gazing with a
mock air of gravity and interrogation at all around her, curiosity was
soon aroused, and a general roar of laughter ensued.

I should have been infuriated at the thought that Seriosha was present
to see this, as I scowled with embarrassment and struggled hard to free
my hand, had it not been that somehow Sonetchka's laughter (and she was
laughing to such a degree that the tears were standing in her eyes
and the curls dancing about her lovely face) took away my feeling
of humiliation. I felt that her laughter was not satirical, but only
natural and free; so that, as we laughed together and looked at one
another, there seemed to begin a kind of sympathy between us. Instead
of turning out badly, therefore, the episode of the glove served only
to set me at my ease among the dreaded circle of guests, and to make
me cease to feel oppressed with shyness. The sufferings of shy people
proceed only from the doubts which they feel concerning the opinions
of their fellows. No sooner are those opinions expressed (whether
flattering or the reverse) than the agony disappears.

How lovely Sonetchka looked when she was dancing a quadrille as my
vis-a-vis, with, as her partner, the loutish Prince Etienne! How
charmingly she smiled when, en chaine, she accorded me her hand! How
gracefully the curls, around her head nodded to the rhythm, and how
naively she executed the jete assemble with her little feet!

In the fifth figure, when my partner had to leave me for the other
side and I, counting the beats, was getting ready to dance my solo, she
pursed her lips gravely and looked in another direction; but her fears
for me were groundless. Boldly I performed the chasse en avant and
chasse en arriere glissade, until, when it came to my turn to move
towards her and I, with a comic gesture, showed her the poor glove with
its crumpled fingers, she laughed heartily, and seemed to move her tiny
feet more enchantingly than ever over the parquetted floor.

How well I remember how we formed the circle, and how, without
withdrawing her hand from mine, she scratched her little nose with
her glove! All this I can see before me still. Still can I hear the
quadrille from "The Maids of the Danube" to which we danced that night.

The second quadrille, I danced with Sonetchka herself; yet when we went
to sit down together during the interval, I felt overcome with shyness
and as though I had nothing to say. At last, when my silence had lasted
so long that I began to be afraid that she would think me a stupid boy,
I decided at all hazards to counteract such a notion.

"Vous etes une habitante de Moscou?" I began, and, on receiving an
affirmative answer, continued. "Et moi, je n'ai encore jamais frequente
la capitale" (with a particular emphasis on the word "frequente"). Yet I
felt that, brilliant though this introduction might be as evidence of my
profound knowledge of the French language, I could not long keep up the
conversation in that manner. Our turn for dancing had not yet arrived,
and silence again ensued between us. I kept looking anxiously at her in
the hope both of discerning what impression I had produced and of her
coming to my aid.

"Where did you get that ridiculous glove of yours?" she asked me all of
a sudden, and the question afforded me immense satisfaction and relief.
I replied that the glove belonged to Karl Ivanitch, and then went on
to speak ironically of his appearance, and to describe how comical he
looked in his red cap, and how he and his green coat had once fallen
plump off a horse into a pond.

The quadrille was soon over. Yet why had I spoken ironically of poor
Karl Ivanitch? Should I, forsooth, have sunk in Sonetchka's esteem if,
on the contrary, I had spoken of him with the love and respect which I
undoubtedly bore him?

The quadrille ended, Sonetchka said, "Thank you," with as lovely an
expression on her face as though I had really conferred, upon her a
favour. I was delighted. In fact I hardly knew myself for joy and could
not think whence I derived such case and confidence and even daring.

"Nothing in the world can abash me now," I thought as I wandered
carelessly about the salon. "I am ready for anything."

Just then Seriosha came and requested me to be his vis-a-vis.

"Very well," I said. "I have no partner as yet, but I can soon find
one."

Glancing round the salon with a confident eye, I saw that every lady was
engaged save one--a tall girl standing near the drawing-room door. Yet a
grown-up young man was approaching her-probably for the same purpose as
myself! He was but two steps from her, while I was at the further end
of the salon. Doing a glissade over the polished floor, I covered the
intervening space, and in a brave, firm voice asked the favour of her
hand in the quadrille. Smiling with a protecting air, the young lady
accorded me her hand, and the tall young man was left without a partner.
I felt so conscious of my strength that I paid no attention to his
irritation, though I learnt later that he had asked somebody who the
awkward, untidy boy was who, had taken away his lady from him.




XXII -- THE MAZURKA

AFTERWARDS the same young man formed one of the first couple in a
mazurka. He sprang to his feet, took his partner's hand, and then,
instead of executing the pas de Basques which Mimi had taught us, glided
forward till he arrived at a corner of the room, stopped, divided his
feet, turned on his heels, and, with a spring, glided back again. I, who
had found no partner for this particular dance and was sitting on the
arm of Grandmamma's chair, thought to myself:

"What on earth is he doing? That is not what Mimi taught us. And there
are the Iwins and Etienne all dancing in the same way-without the pas de
Basques! Ah! and there is Woloda too! He too is adopting the new style,
and not so badly either. And there is Sonetchka, the lovely one! Yes,
there she comes!" I felt immensely happy at that moment.

The mazurka came to an end, and already some of the guests were saying
good-bye to Grandmamma. She was evidently tired, yet she assured them
that she felt vexed at their early departure. Servants were gliding
about with plates and trays among the dancers, and the musicians were
carelessly playing the same tune for about the thirteenth time in
succession, when the young lady whom I had danced with before, and who
was just about to join in another mazurka, caught sight of me, and, with
a kindly smile, led me to Sonetchka. And one of the innumerable Kornakoff
princesses, at the same time asking me, "Rose or Hortie?"

"Ah, so it's YOU!" said Grandmamma as she turned round in her armchair.
"Go and dance, then, my boy."

Although I would fain have taken refuge behind the armchair rather than
leave its shelter, I could not refuse; so I got up, said, "Rose," and
looked at Sonetchka. Before I had time to realise it, however, a hand in
a white glove laid itself on mine, and the Kornakoff girl stepped forth
with a pleased smile and evidently no suspicion that I was ignorant of
the steps of the dance. I only knew that the pas de Basques (the only
figure of it which I had been taught) would be out of place. However,
the strains of the mazurka falling upon my ears, and imparting their
usual impulse to my acoustic nerves (which, in their turn, imparted
their usual impulse to my feet), I involuntarily, and to the amazement
of the spectators, began executing on tiptoe the sole (and fatal) pas
which I had been taught.

So long as we went straight ahead I kept fairly right, but when it came
to turning I saw that I must make preparations to arrest my course.
Accordingly, to avoid any appearance of awkwardness, I stopped short,
with the intention of imitating the "wheel about" which I had seen the
young man perform so neatly.

Unfortunately, just as I divided my feet and prepared to make a spring,
the Princess Kornakoff looked sharply round at my legs with such an
expression of stupefied amazement and curiosity that the glance undid
me. Instead of continuing to dance, I remained moving my legs up and
down on the same spot, in a sort of extraordinary fashion which bore
no relation whatever either to form or rhythm. At last I stopped
altogether. Every-one was looking at me--some with curiosity, some with
astonishment, some with disdain, and some with compassion, Grandmamma
alone seemed unmoved.

"You should not dance if you don't know the step," said Papa's angry
voice in my ear as, pushing me gently aside, he took my partner's hand,
completed the figures with her to the admiration of every one, and
finally led her back to, her place. The mazurka was at an end.

Ah me! What had I done to be punished so heavily?

*****

"Every one despises me, and will always despise me," I thought to
myself. "The way is closed for me to friendship, love, and fame! All,
all is lost!"

Why had Woloda made signs to me which every one saw, yet which could in
no way help me? Why had that disgusting princess looked at my legs? Why
had Sonetchka--she was a darling, of course!--yet why, oh why, had she
smiled at that moment?

Why had Papa turned red and taken my hand? Can it be that he was ashamed
of me?

Oh, it was dreadful! Alas, if only Mamma had been there she would never
have blushed for her Nicolinka!

How on the instant that dear image led my imagination captive! I seemed
to see once more the meadow before our house, the tall lime-trees in the
garden, the clear pond where the ducks swain, the blue sky dappled with
white clouds, the sweet-smelling ricks of hay. How those memories--aye,
and many another quiet, beloved recollection--floated through my mind at
that time!




XXIII -- AFTER THE MAZURKA

At supper the young man whom I have mentioned seated himself beside
me at the children's table, and treated me with an amount of attention
which would have flattered my self-esteem had I been able, after the
occurrence just related, to give a thought to anything beyond my failure
in the mazurka. However, the young man seemed determined to cheer me
up. He jested, called me "old boy," and finally (since none of the
elder folks were looking at us) began to help me to wine, first from one
bottle and then from another and to force me to drink it off quickly.

By the time (towards the end of supper) that a servant had poured me out
a quarter of a glass of champagne, and the young man had straightway bid
him fill it up and urged me to drink the beverage off at a draught, I
had begun to feel a grateful warmth diffusing itself through my body.
I also felt well-disposed towards my kind patron, and began to laugh
heartily at everything. Suddenly the music of the Grosvater dance struck
up, and every one rushed from the table. My friendship with the young
man had now outlived its day; so, whereas he joined a group of the older
folks, I approached Madame Valakhin to hear what she and her daughter had
to say to one another.

"Just HALF-an-hour more?" Sonetchka was imploring her.

"Impossible, my dearest."

"Yet, only to please me--just this ONCE?" Sonetchka went on
persuasively.

"Well, what if I should be ill to-morrow through all this dissipation?"
rejoined her mother, and was incautious enough to smile.

"There! You DO consent, and we CAN stay after all!" exclaimed Sonetchka,
jumping for joy.

"What is to be done with such a girl?" said Madame. "Well, run away and
dance. See," she added on perceiving myself, "here is a cavalier ready
waiting for you."

Sonetchka gave me her hand, and we darted off to the salon. The wine,
added to Sonetchka's presence and gaiety, had at once made me forget
all about the unfortunate end of the mazurka. I kept executing the most
splendid feats with my legs--now imitating a horse as he throws out his
hoofs in the trot, now stamping like a sheep infuriated at a dog, and
all the while laughing regardless of appearances.

Sonetchka also laughed unceasingly, whether we were whirling round in
a circle or whether we stood still to watch an old lady whose painful
movements with her feet showed the difficulty she had in walking.
Finally Sonetchka nearly died of merriment when I jumped half-way to the
ceiling in proof of my skill.

As I passed a mirror in Grandmamma's boudoir and glanced at myself
I could see that my face was all in a perspiration and my hair
dishevelled--the top-knot, in particular, being more erect than ever.
Yet my general appearance looked so happy, healthy, and good-tempered
that I felt wholly pleased with myself.

"If I were always as I am now," I thought, "I might yet be able to
please people with my looks." Yet as soon as I glanced at my partner's
face again, and saw there not only the expression of happiness, health,
and good temper which had just pleased me in my own, but also a fresh
and enchanting beauty besides, I felt dissatisfied with myself again.
I understood how silly of me it was to hope to attract the attention
of such a wonderful being as Sonetchka. I could not hope for
reciprocity--could not even think of it, yet my heart was overflowing
with happiness. I could not imagine that the feeling of love which was
filling my soul so pleasantly could require any happiness still greater,
or wish for more than that that happiness should never cease. I felt
perfectly contented. My heart beat like that of a dove, with the blood
constantly flowing back to it, and I almost wept for joy.

As we passed through the hall and peered into a little dark store-room
beneath the staircase I thought: "What bliss it would be if I could pass
the rest of my life with her in that dark corner, and never let anybody
know that we were there!"

"It HAS been a delightful evening, hasn't it?" I asked her in a low,
tremulous voice. Then I quickened my steps--as much out of fear of what
I had said as out of fear of what I had meant to imply.

"Yes, VERY!" she answered, and turned her face to look at me with an
expression so kind that I ceased to be afraid. I went on:

"Particularly since supper. Yet if you could only know how I regret" (I
had nearly said) "how miserable I am at your going, and to think that
we shall see each other no more!"

"But why SHOULDN'T we?" she asked, looking gravely at the corner of
her pocket-handkerchief, and gliding her fingers over a latticed screen
which we were passing. "Every Tuesday and Friday I go with Mamma to the
Iverskoi Prospect. I suppose you go for walks too sometimes?"

"Well, certainly I shall ask to go for one next Tuesday, and, if they
won't take me I shall go by myself--even without my hat, if necessary. I
know the way all right."

"Do you know what I have just thought of?" she went on. "You know, I
call some of the boys who come to see us THOU. Shall you and I call each
other THOU too? Wilt THOU?" she added, bending her head towards me and
looking me straight in the eyes.

At this moment a more lively section of the Grosvater dance began.

"Give me your hand," I said, under the impression that the music and din
would drown my exact words, but she smilingly replied, "THY hand, not
YOUR hand." Yet the dance was over before I had succeeded in saying
THOU, even though I kept conning over phrases in which the pronoun could
be employed--and employed more than once. All that I wanted was the
courage to say it.

"Wilt THOU?" and "THY hand" sounded continually in my ears, and caused
in me a kind of intoxication I could hear and see nothing but Sonetchka.
I watched her mother take her curls, lay them flat behind her ears (thus
disclosing portions of her forehead and temples which I had not yet
seen), and wrap her up so completely in the green shawl that nothing was
left visible but the tip of her nose. Indeed, I could see that, if her
little rosy fingers had not made a small, opening near her mouth, she
would have been unable to breathe. Finally I saw her leave her mother's
arm for an instant on the staircase, and turn and nod to us quickly
before she disappeared through the doorway.

Woloda, the Iwins, the young Prince Etienne, and myself were all of us
in love with Sonetchka and all of us standing on the staircase to follow
her with our eyes. To whom in particular she had nodded I do not know,
but at the moment I firmly believed it to be myself. In taking leave
of the Iwins, I spoke quite unconcernedly, and even coldly, to Seriosha
before I finally shook hands with him. Though he tried to appear
absolutely indifferent, I think that he understood that from that day
forth he had lost both my affection and his power over me, as well as
that he regretted it.




XXIV -- IN BED

"How could I have managed to be so long and so passionately devoted to
Seriosha?" I asked myself as I lay in bed that night. "He never either
understood, appreciated, or deserved my love. But Sonetchka! What a
darling SHE is! 'Wilt THOU?'--'THY hand'!"

I crept closer to the pillows, imagined to myself her lovely face,
covered my head over with the bedclothes, tucked the counterpane in on
all sides, and, thus snugly covered, lay quiet and enjoying the warmth
until I became wholly absorbed in pleasant fancies and reminiscences.

If I stared fixedly at the inside of the sheet above me I found that I
could see her as clearly as I had done an hour ago could talk to her in
my thoughts, and, though it was a conversation of irrational tenor, I
derived the greatest delight from it, seeing that "THOU" and "THINE" and
"for THEE" and "to THEE" occurred in it incessantly. These fancies were
so vivid that I could not sleep for the sweetness of my emotion, and
felt as though I must communicate my superabundant happiness to some
one.

"The darling!" I said, half-aloud, as I turned over; then, "Woloda, are
you asleep?"

"No," he replied in a sleepy voice. "What's the matter?"

"I am in love, Woloda--terribly in love with Sonetchka"

"Well? Anything else?" he replied, stretching himself.

"Oh, but you cannot imagine what I feel just now, as I lay covered over
with the counterpane, I could see her and talk to her so clearly that
it was marvellous! And, do you know, while I was lying thinking about
her--I don't know why it was, but all at once I felt so sad that I could
have cried."

Woloda made a movement of some sort.

"One thing only I wish for," I continued; "and that is that I could
always be with her and always be seeing her. Just that. You are in love
too, I believe. Confess that you are."

It was strange, but somehow I wanted every one to be in love with
Sonetchka, and every one to tell me that they were so.

"So that's how it is with you? " said Woloda, turning round to me.
"Well, I can understand it."

"I can see that you cannot sleep," I remarked, observing by his bright
eyes that he was anything but drowsy. "Well, cover yourself over SO"
(and I pulled the bedclothes over him), "and then let us talk about her.
Isn't she splendid? If she were to say to me, 'Nicolinka, jump out of
the window,' or 'jump into the fire,' I should say, 'Yes, I will do it
at once and rejoice in doing it.' Oh, how glorious she is!"

I went on picturing her again and again to my imagination, and, to enjoy
the vision the better, turned over on my side and buried my head in the
pillows, murmuring, "Oh, I want to cry, Woloda."

"What a fool you are!" he said with a slight laugh. Then, after a
moment's silence he added: "I am not like you. I think I would rather
sit and talk with her."

"Ah! Then you ARE in love with her!" I interrupted.

"And then," went on Woloda, smiling tenderly, "kiss her fingers and eyes
and lips and nose and feet--kiss all of her."

"How absurd!" I exclaimed from beneath the pillows.

"Ah, you don't understand things," said Woloda with contempt.

"I DO understand. It's you who don't understand things, and you talk
rubbish, too," I replied, half-crying.

"Well, there is nothing to cry about," he concluded. "She is only a
girl."




XXV -- THE LETTER

ON the 16th of April, nearly six months after the day just described,
Papa entered our schoolroom and told us that that night we must start
with him for our country house. I felt a pang at my heart when I heard
the news, and my thoughts at once turned to Mamma. The cause of our
unexpected departure was the following letter:

"PETROVSKOE, 12th April.

"Only this moment (i.e. at ten o'clock in the evening) have I received
your dear letter of the 3rd of April, but as usual, I answer it at once.
Fedor brought it yesterday from town, but, as it was late, he did not
give it to Mimi till this morning, and Mimi (since I was unwell) kept
it from me all day. I have been a little feverish. In fact, to tell the
truth, this is the fourth day that I have been in bed.

"Yet do not be uneasy. I feel almost myself again now, and if Ivan
Vassilitch should allow me, I think of getting up to-morrow.

"On Friday last I took the girls for a drive, and, close to the little
bridge by the turning on to the high road (the place which always makes
me nervous), the horses and carriage stuck fast in the mud. Well, the
day being fine, I thought that we would walk a little up the road until
the carriage should be extricated, but no sooner had we reached the
chapel than I felt obliged to sit down, I was so tired, and in this way
half-an-hour passed while help was being sent for to get the carriage
dug out. I felt cold, for I had only thin boots on, and they had been
wet through. After luncheon too, I had alternate cold and hot fits, yet
still continued to follow our ordinary routine.

"When tea was over I sat down to the piano to play a duct with
Lubotshka, (you would be astonished to hear what progress she has
made!), but imagine my surprise when I found that I could not count the
beats! Several times I began to do so, yet always felt confused in
my head, and kept hearing strange noises in my ears. I would begin
'One-two-three--' and then suddenly go on '-eight-fifteen,' and so on,
as though I were talking nonsense and could not help it. At last Mimi
came to my assistance and forced me to retire to bed. That was how my
illness began, and it was all through my own fault. The next day I had
a good deal of fever, and our good Ivan Vassilitch came. He has not left
us since, but promises soon to restore me to the world.

"What a wonderful old man he is! While I was feverish and delirious he
sat the whole night by my bedside without once closing his eyes; and at
this moment (since he knows I am busy writing) he is with the girls in
the divannaia, and I can hear him telling them German stories, and them
laughing as they listen to him.

"'La Belle Flamande,' as you call her, is now spending her second week
here as my guest (her mother having gone to pay a visit somewhere), and
she is most attentive and attached to me. She even tells me her secret
affairs. Under different circumstances her beautiful face, good temper,
and youth might have made a most excellent girl of her, but in the
society in which according to her own account, she moves she will be
wasted. The idea has more than once occurred to me that, had I not had
so many children of my own, it would have been a deed of mercy to have
adopted her.

"Lubotshka had meant to write to you herself, but she has torn up three
sheets of paper, saying: 'I know what a quizzer Papa always is. If he
were to find a single fault in my letter he would show it to everybody.'
Katenka is as charming as usual, and Mimi, too, is good, but tiresome.

"Now let me speak of more serious matters. You write to me that your
affairs are not going well this winter, and that you wish to break into
the revenues of Chabarovska. It seems to me strange that you should
think it necessary to ask my consent. Surely what belongs to me belongs
no less to you? You are so kind-hearted, dear, that, for fear of
worrying me, you conceal the real state of things, but I can guess that
you have lost a great deal at cards, as also that you are afraid of my
being angry at that. Yet, so long as you can tide over this crisis, I
shall not think much of it, and you need not be uneasy, I have grown
accustomed to no longer relying, so far as the children are concerned,
upon your gains at play, nor yet--excuse me for saying so--upon your
income. Therefore your losses cause me as little anxiety as your gains
give me pleasure. What I really grieve over is your unhappy passion
itself for gambling--a passion which bereaves me of part of your tender
affection and obliges me to tell you such bitter truths as (God knows
with what pain) I am now telling you. I never cease to beseech Him that
He may preserve us, not from poverty (for what is poverty?), but from
the terrible juncture which would arise should the interests of the
children, which I am called upon to protect, ever come into collision
with our own. Hitherto God has listened to my prayers. You have never
yet overstepped the limit beyond which we should be obliged either
to sacrifice property which would no longer belong to us, but to the
children, or--It is terrible to think of, but the dreadful misfortune
at which I hint is forever hanging over our heads. Yes, it is the heavy
cross which God has given us both to carry.

"Also, you write about the children, and come back to our old point
of difference by asking my consent to your placing them at a
boarding-school. You know my objection to that kind of education. I
do not know, dear, whether you will accede to my request, but I
nevertheless beseech you, by your love for me, to give me your promise
that never so long as I am alive, nor yet after my death (if God should
see fit to separate us), shall such a thing be done.

"Also you write that our affairs render it indispensable for you to
visit St. Petersburg. The Lord go with you! Go and return as, soon as
possible. Without you we shall all of us be lonely.

"Spring is coming in beautifully. We keep the door on to the terrace
always open now, while the path to the orangery is dry and the
peach-trees are in full blossom. Only here and there is there a little
snow remaining. The swallows are arriving, and to-day Lubotshka brought
me the first flowers. The doctor says that in about three days' time I
shall be well again and able to take the open air and to enjoy the April
sun. Now, au revoir, my dearest one. Do not be alarmed, I beg of you,
either on account of my illness or on account of your losses at play.
End the crisis as soon as possible, and then return here with the
children for the summer. I am making wonderful plans for our passing of
it, and I only need your presence to realise them."

The rest of the letter was written in French, as well as in a strange,
uncertain hand, on another piece of paper. I transcribe it word for
word:

"Do not believe what I have just written to you about my illness. It is
more serious than any one knows. I alone know that I shall never leave
my bed again. Do not, therefore, delay a minute in coming here with the
children. Perhaps it may yet be permitted me to embrace and bless them.
It is my last wish that it should be so. I know what a terrible blow
this will be to you, but you would have had to hear it sooner or
later--if not from me, at least from others. Let us try to, bear the
Calamity with fortitude, and place our trust in the mercy of God. Let
us submit ourselves to His will. Do not think that what I am writing is
some delusion of my sick imagination. On the contrary, I am perfectly
clear at this moment, and absolutely calm. Nor must you comfort yourself
with the false hope that these are the unreal, confused feelings of a
despondent spirit, for I feel indeed, I know, since God has deigned to
reveal it to me--that I have now but a very short time to live. Will my
love for you and the children cease with my life? I know that that can
never be. At this moment I am too full of that love to be capable of
believing that such a feeling (which constitutes a part of my very
existence) can ever, perish. My soul can never lack its love for you;
and I know that that love will exist for ever, since such a feeling
could never have been awakened if it were not to be eternal. I shall no
longer be with you, yet I firmly believe that my love will cleave to
you always, and from that thought I glean such comfort that I await the
approach of death calmly and without fear. Yes, I am calm, and God knows
that I have ever looked, and do look now, upon death as no more than the
passage to a better life. Yet why do tears blind my eyes? Why should the
children lose a mother's love? Why must you, my husband, experience such
a heavy and unlooked-for blow? Why must I die when your love was making
life so inexpressibly happy for me?

"But His holy will be done!

"The tears prevent my writing more. It may be that I shall never see you
again. I thank you, my darling beyond all price, for all the felicity
with which you have surrounded me in this life. Soon I shall appear
before God Himself to pray that He may reward you. Farewell, my dearest!
Remember that, if I am no longer here, my love will none the less NEVER
AND NOWHERE fail you. Farewell, Woloda--farewell, my pet! Farewell, my
Benjamin, my little Nicolinka! Surely they will never forget me?"

With this letter had come also a French note from Mimi, in which the
latter said:

"The sad circumstances of which she has written to you are but too
surely confirmed by the words of the doctor. Yesterday evening she
ordered the letter to be posted at once, but, thinking at she did so in
delirium, I waited until this morning, with the intention of sealing and
sending it then. Hardly had I done so when Natalia Nicolaevna asked
me what I had done with the letter and told me to burn it if not yet
despatched. She is forever speaking of it, and saying that it will kill
you. Do not delay your departure for an instant if you wish to see the
angel before she leaves us. Pray excuse this scribble, but I have not
slept now for three nights. You know how much I love her."

Later I heard from Natalia Savishna (who passed the whole of the night
of the 11th April at Mamma's bedside) that, after writing the first part
of the letter, Mamma laid it down upon the table beside her and went to
sleep for a while.

"I confess," said Natalia Savishna, "that I too fell asleep in the
arm-chair, and let my knitting slip from my hands. Suddenly, towards one
o'clock in the morning, I heard her saying something; whereupon I opened
my eyes and looked at her. My darling was sitting up in bed, with her
hands clasped together and streams of tears gushing from her eyes.

"'It is all over now,' she said, and hid her face in her hands.

"I sprang to my feet, and asked what the matter was.

"'Ah, Natalia Savishna, if you could only know what I have just
seen!' she said; yet, for all my asking, she would say no more,
beyond commanding me to hand her the letter. To that letter she added
something, and then said that it must be sent off directly. From that
moment she grew, rapidly worse."




XXVI -- WHAT AWAITED US AT THE COUNTRY-HOUSE

On the 18th of April we descended from the carriage at the front door
of the house at Petrovskoe. All the way from Moscow Papa had been
preoccupied, and when Woloda had asked him "whether Mamma was ill" he
had looked at him sadly and nodded an affirmative. Nevertheless he had
grown more composed during the journey, and it was only when we were
actually approaching the house that his face again began to grow
anxious, until, as he leaped from the carriage and asked Foka (who
had run breathlessly to meet us), "How is Natalia Nicolaevna now?" his
voice, was trembling, and his eyes had filled with tears. The good, old
Foka looked at us, and then lowered his gaze again. Finally he said as
he opened the hall-door and turned his head aside: "It is the sixth day
since she has not left her bed."

Milka (who, as we afterwards learned, had never ceased to whine from the
day when Mamma was taken ill) came leaping, joyfully to meet Papa, and
barking a welcome as she licked his hands, but Papa put her aside, and
went first to the drawing-room, and then into the divannaia, from which
a door led into the bedroom. The nearer he approached the latter, the
more, did his movements express the agitation that he felt. Entering the
divannaia he crossed it on tiptoe, seeming to hold his breath. Even then
he had to stop and make the sign of the cross before he could summon up
courage to turn the handle. At the same moment Mimi, with dishevelled
hair and eyes red with weeping came hastily out of the corridor.

"Ah, Peter Alexandritch!" she said in a whisper and with a marked
expression of despair. Then, observing that Papa was trying to open the
door, she whispered again:

"Not here. This door is locked. Go round to the door on the other side."

Oh, how terribly all this wrought upon my imagination, racked as it was
by grief and terrible forebodings!

So we went round to the other side. In the corridor we met the gardener,
Akim, who had been wont to amuse us with his grimaces, but at this
moment I could see nothing comical in him. Indeed, the sight of his
thoughtless, indifferent face struck me more painfully than anything
else. In the maidservants' hall, through which we had to pass, two maids
were sitting at their work, but rose to salute us with an expression so
mournful that I felt completely overwhelmed.

Passing also through Mimi's room, Papa opened the door of the bedroom,
and we entered. The two windows on the right were curtained over, and
close to them was seated, Natalia Savishna, spectacles on nose and
engaged in darning stockings. She did not approach us to kiss me as she
had been used to do, but just rose and looked at us, her tears beginning
to flow afresh. Somehow it frightened me to see every one, on beholding
us, begin to cry, although they had been calm enough before.

On the left stood the bed behind a screen, while in the great arm-chair
the doctor lay asleep. Beside the bed a young, fair-haired and
remarkably beautiful girl in a white morning wrapper was applying ice to
Mamma's head, but Mamma herself I could not see. This girl was "La
Belle Flamande" of whom Mamma had written, and who afterwards played so
important a part in our family life. As we entered she disengaged one
of her hands, straightened the pleats of her dress on her bosom, and
whispered, "She is insensible." Though I was in an agony of grief, I
observed at that moment every little detail.

It was almost dark in the room, and very hot, while the air was heavy
with the mingled, scent of mint, eau-de-cologne, camomile, and Hoffman's
pastilles. The latter ingredient caught my attention so strongly that
even now I can never hear of it, or even think of it, without my memory
carrying me back to that dark, close room, and all the details of that
dreadful time.

Mamma's eyes were wide open, but they could not see us. Never shall I
forget the terrible expression in them--the expression of agonies of
suffering!

Then we were taken away.

When, later, I was able to ask Natalia Savishna about Mamma's last
moments she told me the following:

"After you were taken out of the room, my beloved one struggled for a
long time, as though some one were trying to strangle her. Then at last
she laid her head back upon the pillow, and slept softly, peacefully,
like an angel from Heaven. I went away for a moment to see about her
medicine, and just as I entered the room again my darling was throwing
the bedclothes from off her and calling for your Papa. He stooped over
her, but strength failed her to say what she wanted to. All she could
do was to open her lips and gasp, 'My God, my God! The children, the
children!' I would have run to fetch you, but Ivan Vassilitch stopped
me, saying that it would only excite her--it were best not to do so.
Then suddenly she stretched her arms out and dropped them again. What
she meant by that gesture the good God alone knows, but I think that in
it she was blessing you--you the children whom she could not see. God
did not grant her to see her little ones before her death. Then she
raised herself up--did my love, my darling--yes, just so with her hands,
and exclaimed in a voice which I cannot bear to remember, 'Mother of
God, never forsake them!'"

"Then the pain mounted to her heart, and from her eyes it as, plain that
she suffered terribly, my poor one! She sank back upon the pillows, tore
the bedclothes with her teeth, and wept--wept--"

"Yes and what then?" I asked but Natalia Savishna could say no more. She
turned away and cried bitterly.

Mamma had expired in terrible agonies.




XXVII -- GRIEF

LATE the following evening I thought I would like to look at her once
more; so, conquering an involuntary sense of fear, I gently opened the
door of the salon and entered on tiptoe.

In the middle of the room, on a table, lay the coffin, with wax candles
burning all round it on tall silver candelabra. In the further corner
sat the chanter, reading the Psalms in a low, monotonous voice. I
stopped at the door and tried to look, but my eyes were so weak with
crying, and my nerves so terribly on edge, that I could distinguish
nothing. Every object seemed to mingle together in a strange blur--the
candles, the brocade, the velvet, the great candelabra, the pink satin
cushion trimmed with lace, the chaplet of flowers, the ribboned cap, and
something of a transparent, wax-like colour. I mounted a chair to see
her face, yet where it should have been I could see only that wax-like,
transparent something. I could not believe it to be her face. Yet, as
I stood grazing at it, I at last recognised the well-known, beloved
features. I shuddered with horror to realise that it WAS she. Why were
those eyes so sunken? What had laid that dreadful paleness upon her
cheeks, and stamped the black spot beneath the transparent skin on one
of them? Why was the expression of the whole face so cold and severe?
Why were the lips so white, and their outline so beautiful, so majestic,
so expressive of an unnatural calm that, as I looked at them, a chill
shudder ran through my hair and down my back?

Somehow, as I gazed, an irrepressible, incomprehensible power seemed
to compel me to keep my eyes fixed upon that lifeless face. I could not
turn away, and my imagination began to picture before me scenes of her
active life and happiness. I forgot that the corpse lying before me
now--the THING at which I was gazing unconsciously as at an object which
had nothing in common with my dreams--was SHE. I fancied I could
see her--now here, now there, alive, happy, and smiling. Then some
well-known feature in the face at which I was gazing would suddenly
arrest my attention, and in a flash I would recall the terrible reality
and shudder-though still unable to turn my eyes away.

Then again the dreams would replace reality--then again the reality put
to flight the dreams. At last the consciousness of both left me, and for
a while I became insensible.

How long I remained in that condition I do not know, nor yet how it
occurred. I only know that for a time I lost all sense of existence, and
experienced a kind of vague blissfulness which though grand and sweet,
was also sad. It may be that, as it ascended to a better world, her
beautiful soul had looked down with longing at the world in which she
had left us--that it had seen my sorrow, and, pitying me, had returned
to earth on the wings of love to console and bless me with a heavenly
smile of compassion.

The door creaked as the chanter entered who was to relieve his
predecessor. The noise awakened me, and my first thought was that,
seeing me standing on the chair in a posture which had nothing touching
in its aspect, he might take me for an unfeeling boy who had climbed
on to the chair out of mere curiosity: wherefore I hastened to make the
sign of the cross, to bend down my head, and to burst out crying. As I
recall now my impressions of that episode I find that it was only during
my moments of self-forgetfulness that my grief was wholehearted. True,
both before and after the funeral I never ceased to cry and to look
miserable, yet I feel conscience-stricken when I recall that grief
of mine, seeing that always present in it there was an element of
conceit--of a desire to show that I was more grieved than any one else,
of an interest which I took in observing the effect, produced upon
others by my tears, and of an idle curiosity leading me to remark
Mimi's bonnet and the faces of all present. The mere circumstance that
I despised myself for not feeling grief to the exclusion of everything
else, and that I endeavoured to conceal the fact, shows that my sadness
was insincere and unnatural. I took a delight in feeling that I was
unhappy, and in trying to feel more so. Consequently this egotistic
consciousness completely annulled any element of sincerity in my woe.

That night I slept calmly and soundly (as is usual after any great
emotion), and awoke with my tears dried and my nerves restored. At ten
o'clock we were summoned to attend the pre-funeral requiem.

The room was full of weeping servants and peasants who had come to bid
farewell to their late mistress. During the service I myself wept
a great deal, made frequent signs of the cross, and performed many
genuflections, but I did not pray with, my soul, and felt, if anything,
almost indifferent. My thoughts were chiefly centred upon the new coat
which I was wearing (a garment which was tight and uncomfortable) and
upon how to avoid soiling my trousers at the knees. Also I took the most
minute notice of all present.

Papa stood at the head of the coffin. He was as white as snow, and
only with difficulty restrained his tears. His tall figure in its black
frockcoat, his pale, expressive face, the graceful, assured manner in
which, as usual, he made the sign of the cross or bowed until he touched
the floor with his hand [A custom of the Greek funeral rite.] or took
the candle from the priest or went to the coffin--all were exceedingly
effective; yet for some reason or another I felt a grudge against him
for that very ability to appear effective at such a moment. Mimi stood
leaning against the wall as though scarcely able to support herself. Her
dress was all awry and covered with feathers, and her cap cocked to one
side, while her eyes were red with weeping, her legs trembling under
her, and she sobbed incessantly in a heartrending manner as ever and
again she buried her face in her handkerchief or her hands. I imagine
that she did this to check her continual sobbing without being seen by
the spectators. I remember, too, her telling Papa, the evening before,
that Mamma's death had come upon her as a blow from which she could
never hope to recover; that with Mamma she had lost everything; but that
"the angel," as she called my mother, had not forgotten her when at the
point of death, since she had declared her wish to render her (Mimi's)
and Katenka's fortunes secure for ever. Mimi had shed bitter tears
while relating this, and very likely her sorrow, if not wholly pure and
disinterested, was in the main sincere. Lubotshka, in black garments
and suffused with tears, stood with her head bowed upon her breast. She
rarely looked at the coffin, yet whenever she did so her face expressed
a sort of childish fear. Katenka stood near her mother, and, despite
her lengthened face, looked as lovely as ever. Woloda's frank nature
was frank also in grief. He stood looking grave and as though he were
staring at some object with fixed eyes. Then suddenly his lips would
begin to quiver, and he would hastily make the sign of the cross, and
bend his head again.

Such of those present as were strangers I found intolerable. In fact,
the phrases of condolence with which they addressed Papa (such, for
instance, as that "she is better off now" "she was too good for this
world," and so on) awakened in me something like fury. What right had
they to weep over or to talk about her? Some of them, in referring to
ourselves, called us "orphans"--just as though it were not a matter of
common knowledge that children who have lost their mother are known as
orphans! Probably (I thought) they liked to be the first to give us that
name, just as some people find pleasure in being the first to address a
newly-married girl as "Madame."

In a far corner of the room, and almost hidden by the open door, of the
dining-room, stood a grey old woman with bent knees. With hands clasped
together and eyes lifted to heaven, she prayed only--not wept. Her soul
was in the presence of God, and she was asking Him soon to reunite her
to her whom she had loved beyond all beings on this earth, and whom she
steadfastly believed that she would very soon meet again.

"There stands one who SINCERELY loved her," I thought to myself, and
felt ashamed.

The requiem was over. They uncovered the face of the deceased, and all
present except ourselves went to the coffin to give her the kiss of
farewell.

One of the last to take leave of her departed mistress was a peasant
woman who was holding by the hand a pretty little girl of five whom she
had brought with her, God knows for what reason. Just at a moment when
I chanced to drop my wet handkerchief and was stooping to pick it up
again, a loud, piercing scream startled me, and filled me with such
terror that, were I to live a hundred years more, I should never forget
it. Even now the recollection always sends a cold shudder through my
frame. I raised my head. Standing on the chair near the coffin was the
peasant woman, while struggling and fighting in her arms was the
little girl, and it was this same poor child who had screamed with such
dreadful, desperate frenzy as, straining her terrified face away, she
still, continued to gaze with dilated eyes at the face of the corpse.
I too screamed in a voice perhaps more dreadful still, and ran headlong
from the room.

Only now did I understand the source of the strong, oppressive smell
which, mingling with the scent of the incense, filled the chamber, while
the thought that the face which, but a few days ago, had been full of
freshness and beauty--the face which I loved more than anything else in
all the world--was now capable of inspiring horror at length revealed to
me, as though for the first time, the terrible truth, and filled my soul
with despair.




XXVIII -- SAD RECOLLECTIONS

Mamma was no longer with us, but our life went on as usual. We went
to bed and got up at the same times and in the same rooms; breakfast,
luncheon, and supper continued to be at their usual hours; everything
remained standing in its accustomed place; nothing in the house or in
our mode of life was altered: only, she was not there.

Yet it seemed to me as though such a misfortune ought to have changed
everything. Our old mode of life appeared like an insult to her memory.
It recalled too vividly her presence.

The day before the funeral I felt as though I should like to rest a
little after luncheon, and accordingly went to Natalia Savishna's room
with the intention of installing myself comfortably under the warm, soft
down of the quilt on her bed. When I entered I found Natalia herself
lying on the bed and apparently asleep, but, on hearing my footsteps,
she raised herself up, removed the handkerchief which had been
protecting her face from the flies, and, adjusting her cap, sat forward
on the edge of the bed. Since it frequently happened that I came to lie
down in her room, she guessed my errand at once, and said:

"So you have come to rest here a little, have you? Lie down, then, my
dearest."

"Oh, but what is the matter with you, Natalia Savishna?" I exclaimed
as I forced her back again. "I did not come for that. No, you are tired
yourself, so you LIE down."

"I am quite rested now, darling," she said (though I knew that it was
many a night since she had closed her eyes). "Yes, I am indeed, and have
no wish to sleep again," she added with a deep sigh.

I felt as though I wanted to speak to her of our misfortune, since I
knew her sincerity and love, and thought that it would be a consolation
to me to weep with her.

"Natalia Savishna," I said after a pause, as I seated myself upon the
bed, "who would ever have thought of this?"

The old woman looked at me with astonishment, for she did not quite
understand my question.

"Yes, who would ever have thought of it?" I repeated.

"Ah, my darling," she said with a glance of tender compassion, "it is
not only 'Who would ever have thought of it?' but 'Who, even now, would
ever believe it?' I am old, and my bones should long ago have gone to
rest rather than that I should have lived to see the old master, your
Grandpapa, of blessed memory, and Prince Nicola Michaelovitch, and his
two brothers, and your sister Amenka all buried before me, though all
younger than myself--and now my darling, to my never-ending sorrow, gone
home before me! Yet it has been God's will. He took her away because she
was worthy to be taken, and because He has need of the good ones."

This simple thought seemed to me a consolation, and I pressed closer to
Natalia. She laid her hands upon my head as she looked upward with eyes
expressive of a deep, but resigned, sorrow. In her soul was a sure and
certain hope that God would not long separate her from the one upon whom
the whole strength of her love had for many years been concentrated.

"Yes, my dear," she went on, "it is a long time now since I used to
nurse and fondle her, and she used to call me Natasha. She used to come
jumping upon me, and caressing and kissing me, and say, 'MY Nashik, MY
darling, MY ducky,' and I used to answer jokingly, 'Well, my love, I
don't believe that you DO love me. You will be a grown-up young
lady soon, and going away to be married, and will leave your Nashik
forgotten.' Then she would grow thoughtful and say, 'I think I had
better not marry if my Nashik cannot go with me, for I mean never to
leave her.' Yet, alas! She has left me now! Who was there in the world
she did not love? Yes, my dearest, it must never be POSSIBLE for you to
forget your Mamma. She was not a being of earth--she was an angel from
Heaven. When her soul has entered the heavenly kingdom she will continue
to love you and to be proud of you even there."

"But why do you say 'when her soul has entered the heavenly kingdom'?" I
asked. "I believe it is there now."

"No, my dearest," replied Natalia as she lowered her voice and pressed
herself yet closer to me, "her soul is still here," and she pointed
upwards. She spoke in a whisper, but with such an intensity of
conviction that I too involuntarily raised my eyes and looked at the
ceiling, as though expecting to see something there. "Before the souls
of the just enter Paradise they have to undergo forty trials for forty
days, and during that time they hover around their earthly home." [A
Russian popular legend.]

She went on speaking for some time in this strain--speaking with the
same simplicity and conviction as though she were relating common things
which she herself had witnessed, and to doubt which could never enter
into any one's head. I listened almost breathlessly, and though I did
not understand all she said, I never for a moment doubted her word.

"Yes, my darling, she is here now, and perhaps looking at us and
listening to what we are saying," concluded Natalia. Raising her head,
she remained silent for a while. At length she wiped away the tears
which were streaming from her eyes, looked me straight in the face, and
said in a voice trembling with emotion:

"Ah, it is through many trials that God is leading me to Him. Why,
indeed, am I still here? Whom have I to live for? Whom have I to love?"

"Do you not love US, then?" I asked sadly, and half-choking with my
tears.

"Yes, God knows that I love you, my darling; but to love any one as I
loved HER--that I cannot do."

She could say no more, but turned her head aside and wept bitterly. As
for me, I no longer thought of going to sleep, but sat silently with her
and mingled my tears with hers.

Presently Foka entered the room, but, on seeing our emotion and not
wishing to disturb us, stopped short at the door.

"Do you want anything, my good Foka?" asked Natalia as she wiped away
her tears.

"If you please, half-a-pound of currants, four pounds of sugar, and
three pounds of rice for the kutia." [Cakes partaken of by the mourners
at a Russian funeral.]

"Yes, in one moment," said Natalia as she took a pinch of snuff and
hastened to her drawers. All traces of the grief, aroused by our
conversation disappeared on, the instant that she had duties to fulfil,
for she looked upon those duties as of paramount importance.

"But why FOUR pounds?" she objected as she weighed the sugar on a
steelyard. "Three and a half would be sufficient," and she withdrew a
few lumps. "How is it, too, that, though I weighed out eight pounds of
rice yesterday, more is wanted now? No offence to you, Foka, but I am
not going to waste rice like that. I suppose Vanka is glad that there
is confusion in the house just now, for he thinks that nothing will be
looked after, but I am not going to have any careless extravagance with
my master's goods. Did one ever hear of such a thing? Eight pounds!"

"Well, I have nothing to do with it. He says it is all gone, that's
all."

"Hm, hm! Well, there it is. Let him take it."

I was struck by the sudden transition from the touching sensibility
with which she had just been speaking to me to this petty reckoning and
captiousness. Yet, thinking it over afterwards, I recognised that it was
merely because, in spite of what was lying on her heart, she retained
the habit of duty, and that it was the strength of that habit which
enabled her to pursue her functions as of old. Her grief was too strong
and too true to require any pretence of being unable to fulfil trivial
tasks, nor would she have understood that any one could so pretend.
Vanity is a sentiment so entirely at variance with genuine grief, yet
a sentiment so inherent in human nature, that even the most poignant
sorrow does not always drive it wholly forth. Vanity mingled with grief
shows itself in a desire to be recognised as unhappy or resigned;
and this ignoble desire--an aspiration which, for all that we may
not acknowledge it is rarely absent, even in cases of the utmost
affliction--takes off greatly from the force, the dignity, and the
sincerity of grief. Natalia Savishna had been so sorely smitten by her
misfortune that not a single wish of her own remained in her soul--she
went on living purely by habit.

Having handed over the provisions to Foka, and reminded him of the
refreshments which must be ready for the priests, she took up her
knitting and seated herself by my side again. The conversation reverted
to the old topic, and we once more mourned and shed tears together.
These talks with Natalia I repeated every day, for her quiet tears
and words of devotion brought me relief and comfort. Soon, however, a
parting came. Three days after the funeral we returned to Moscow, and I
never saw her again.

Grandmamma received the sad tidings only on our return to her house, and
her grief was extraordinary. At first we were not allowed to see her,
since for a whole week she was out of her mind, and the doctors were
afraid for her life. Not only did she decline all medicine whatsoever,
but she refused to speak to anybody or to take nourishment, and never
closed her eyes in sleep. Sometimes, as she sat alone in the arm-chair in
her room, she would begin laughing and crying at the same time, with a
sort of tearless grief, or else relapse into convulsions, and scream out
dreadful, incoherent words in a horrible voice. It was the first dire
sorrow which she had known in her life, and it reduced her almost
to distraction. She would begin accusing first one person, and then
another, of bringing this misfortune upon her, and rail at and blame
them with the most extraordinary virulence. Finally she would rise from
her arm-chair, pace the room for a while, and end by falling senseless
to the floor.

Once, when I went to her room, she appeared to be sitting quietly in her
chair, yet with an air which struck me as curious. Though her eyes were
wide open, their glance was vacant and meaningless, and she seemed to
gaze in my direction without seeing me. Suddenly her lips parted slowly
in a smile, and she said in a touchingly, tender voice: "Come here,
then, my dearest one; come here, my angel." Thinking that it was myself
she was addressing, I moved towards her, but it was not I whom she was
beholding at that moment. "Oh, my love," she went on, "if only you could
know how distracted I have been, and how delighted I am to see you once
more!" I understood then that she believed herself to be looking
upon Mamma, and halted where I was. "They told me you were gone," she
concluded with a frown; "but what nonsense! As if you could die before
ME!" and she laughed a terrible, hysterical laugh.

Only those who can love strongly can experience an overwhelming grief.
Yet their very need of loving sometimes serves to throw off their grief
from them and to save them. The moral nature of man is more tenacious of
life than the physical, and grief never kills.

After a time Grandmamma's power of weeping came back to her, and she
began to recover. Her first thought when her reason returned was for us
children, and her love for us was greater than ever. We never left her
arm-chair, and she would talk of Mamma, and weep softly, and caress us.

Nobody who saw her grief could say that it was consciously exaggerated,
for its expression was too strong and touching; yet for some reason or
another my sympathy went out more to Natalia Savishna, and to this day
I am convinced that nobody loved and regretted Mamma so purely and
sincerely as did that simple-hearted, affectionate being.

With Mamma's death the happy time of my childhood came to an end, and
a new epoch--the epoch of my boyhood--began; but since my memories of
Natalia Savishna (who exercised such a strong and beneficial influence
upon the bent of my mind and the development of my sensibility) belong
rather to the first period, I will add a few words about her and her
death before closing this portion of my life.

I heard later from people in the village that, after our return to
Moscow, she found time hang very heavy on her hands. Although the
drawers and shelves were still under her charge, and she never ceased
to arrange and rearrange them--to take things out and to dispose of them
afresh--she sadly missed the din and bustle of the seignorial mansion to
which she had been accustomed from her childhood up. Consequently
grief, the alteration in her mode of life, and her lack of activity soon
combined to develop in her a malady to which she had always been more or
less subject.

Scarcely more than a year after Mamma's death dropsy showed itself, and
she took to her bed. I can imagine how sad it must have been for her
to go on living--still more, to die--alone in that great empty house
at Petrovskoe, with no relations or any one near her. Every one there
esteemed and loved her, but she had formed no intimate friendships in
the place, and was rather proud of the fact. That was because, enjoying
her master's confidence as she did, and having so much property
under her care, she considered that intimacies would lead to culpable
indulgence and condescension. Consequently (and perhaps, also, because
she had nothing really in common with the other servants) she kept them
all at a distance, and used to say that she "recognised neither kinsman
nor godfather in the house, and would permit of no exceptions with
regard to her master's property."

Instead, she sought and found consolation in fervent prayers to God. Yet
sometimes, in those moments of weakness to which all of us are
subject, and when man's best solace is the tears and compassion of his
fellow-creatures, she would take her old dog Moska on to her bed, and
talk to it, and weep softly over it as it answered her caresses by
licking her hands, with its yellow eyes fixed upon her. When Moska
began to whine she would say as she quieted it: "Enough, enough! I know
without thy telling me that my time is near." A month before her death
she took out of her chest of drawers some fine white calico, white
cambric, and pink ribbon, and, with the help of the maidservants,
fashioned the garments in which she wished to be buried. Next she put
everything on her shelves in order and handed the bailiff an inventory
which she had made out with scrupulous accuracy. All that she kept
back was a couple of silk gowns, an old shawl, and Grandpapa's military
uniform--things which had been presented to her absolutely, and which,
thanks to her care and orderliness, were in an excellent state of
preservation--particularly the handsome gold embroidery on the uniform.

Just before her death, again, she expressed a wish that one of the gowns
(a pink one) should be made into a robe de chambre for Woloda; that the
other one (a many-coloured gown) should be made into a similar garment
for myself; and that the shawl should go to Lubotshka. As for the
uniform, it was to devolve either to Woloda or to myself, according as
the one or the other of us should first become an officer. All the rest
of her property (save only forty roubles, which she set aside for her
commemorative rites and to defray the costs of her burial) was to pass
to her brother, a person with whom, since he lived a dissipated life
in a distant province, she had had no intercourse during her lifetime.
When, eventually, he arrived to claim the inheritance, and found that
its sum-total only amounted to twenty-five roubles in notes, he refused
to believe it, and declared that it was impossible that his sister-a
woman who for sixty years had had sole charge in a wealthy house, as
well as all her life had been penurious and averse to giving away even
the smallest thing should have left no more: yet it was a fact.

Though Natalia's last illness lasted for two months, she bore her
sufferings with truly Christian fortitude. Never did she fret or
complain, but, as usual, appealed continually to God. An hour before
the end came she made her final confession, received the Sacrament with
quiet joy, and was accorded extreme unction. Then she begged forgiveness
of every one in the house for any wrong she might have done them, and
requested the priest to send us word of the number of times she had
blessed us for our love of her, as well as of how in her last moments
she had implored our forgiveness if, in her ignorance, she had ever at
any time given us offence. "Yet a thief have I never been. Never have I
used so much as a piece of thread that was not my own." Such was the one
quality which she valued in herself.

Dressed in the cap and gown prepared so long beforehand, and with her
head resting, upon the cushion made for the purpose, she conversed with
the priest up to the very last moment, until, suddenly, recollecting
that she had left him nothing for the poor, she took out ten roubles,
and asked him to distribute them in the parish. Lastly she made the sign
of the cross, lay down, and expired--pronouncing with a smile of joy the
name of the Almighty.

She quitted life without a pang, and, so far from fearing death,
welcomed it as a blessing. How often do we hear that said, and how
seldom is it a reality! Natalia Savishna had no reason to fear death
for the simple reason that she died in a sure and certain faith and in
strict obedience to the commands of the Gospel. Her whole life had
been one of pure, disinterested love, of utter self-negation. Had her
convictions been of a more enlightened order, her life directed to a
higher aim, would that pure soul have been the more worthy of love and
reverence? She accomplished the highest and best achievement in this
world: she died without fear and without repining.

They buried her where she had wished to lie--near the little mausoleum
which still covers Mamma's tomb. The little mound beneath which she
sleeps is overgrown with nettles and burdock, and surrounded by a black
railing, but I never forget, when leaving the mausoleum, to approach
that railing, and to salute the plot of earth within by bowing
reverently to the ground.

Sometimes, too, I stand thoughtfully between the railing and the
mausoleum, and sad memories pass through my mind. Once the idea came to
me as I stood there: "Did Providence unite me to those two beings solely
in order to make me regret them my life long?"

========================================
========================================

RESURRECTION

By Leo Tolstoy


Translated by Mrs. Louise Maude



[Transcriber's Note: The following paragraph is on a page of its own, in
cursive writing, apparently in Tolstoy's own hand.]

     This English version
     of "Resurrection" is pub-
     lished by Dodd, Mead and
     Company by my authority.
                 Leo Tolstoy




TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

Opinions about Tolstoy and his work differ, but on one point there
surely might be unanimity. A writer of world-wide reputation should be
at least allowed to know how to spell his own name. Why should any one
insist on spelling it "Tolstoi" (with one, two or three dots over the
"i"), when he himself writes it "Tolstoy"? The only reason I have ever
heard suggested is, that in England and America such outlandish views
are attributed to him, that an outlandish spelling is desirable to match
those views.

This novel, written in the rough by Tolstoy some years ago and founded
upon an actual occurrence, was completely rewritten by him during the
last year and a half, and all the proceeds have been devoted by him
to aiding the Doukhobors, a sect who were persecuted in the Caucasus
(especially from 1895 to 1898) for refusing to learn war. About seven
thousand three hundred of them are settled in Canada, and about a
hundred of the leaders are exiled to the remote parts of Siberia.

Anything I may receive for my work in translating the book will go to
the same cause. "Prevention is better than cure," and I would rather
help people to abstain from killing and wounding each other than devote
the money to patch up their wounds after the battle.

LOUISE MAUDE




RESURRECTION



CHAPTER I.

MASLOVA IN PRISON.

Though hundreds of thousands had done their very best to disfigure the
small piece of land on which they were crowded together, by paving the
ground with stones, scraping away every vestige of vegetation, cutting
down the trees, turning away birds and beasts, and filling the air with
the smoke of naphtha and coal, still spring was spring, even in the
town.

The sun shone warm, the air was balmy; everywhere, where it did not get
scraped away, the grass revived and sprang up between the paving-stones
as well as on the narrow strips of lawn on the boulevards. The birches,
the poplars, and the wild cherry unfolded their gummy and fragrant
leaves, the limes were expanding their opening buds; crows, sparrows,
and pigeons, filled with the joy of spring, were getting their nests
ready; the flies were buzzing along the walls, warmed by the sunshine.
All were glad, the plants, the birds, the insects, and the children. But
men, grown-up men and women, did not leave off cheating and tormenting
themselves and each other. It was not this spring morning men thought
sacred and worthy of consideration not the beauty of God's world, given
for a joy to all creatures, this beauty which inclines the heart to
peace, to harmony, and to love, but only their own devices for enslaving
one another.

Thus, in the prison office of the Government town, it was not the fact
that men and animals had received the grace and gladness of spring that
was considered sacred and important, but that a notice, numbered and
with a superscription, had come the day before, ordering that on this
28th day of April, at 9 a.m., three prisoners at present detained in the
prison, a man and two women (one of these women, as the chief criminal,
to be conducted separately), had to appear at Court. So now, on the 28th
of April, at 8 o'clock, a jailer and soon after him a woman warder with
curly grey hair, dressed in a jacket with sleeves trimmed with gold,
with a blue-edged belt round her waist, and having a look of suffering
on her face, came into the corridor.

"You want Maslova?" she asked, coming up to the cell with the jailer who
was on duty.

The jailer, rattling the iron padlock, opened the door of the cell, from
which there came a whiff of air fouler even than that in the corridor,
and called out, "Maslova! to the Court," and closed the door again.

Even into the prison yard the breeze had brought the fresh vivifying air
from the fields. But in the corridor the air was laden with the germs of
typhoid, the smell of sewage, putrefaction, and tar; every newcomer felt
sad and dejected in it. The woman warder felt this, though she was
used to bad air. She had just come in from outside, and entering the
corridor, she at once became sleepy.

From inside the cell came the sound of bustle and women's voices, and
the patter of bare feet on the floor.

"Now, then, hurry up, Maslova, I say!" called out the jailer, and in a
minute or two a small young woman with a very full bust came briskly out
of the door and went up to the jailer. She had on a grey cloak over a
white jacket and petticoat. On her feet she wore linen stockings and
prison shoes, and round her head was tied a white kerchief, from under
which a few locks of black hair were brushed over the forehead with
evident intent. The face of the woman was of that whiteness peculiar to
people who have lived long in confinement, and which puts one in mind of
shoots of potatoes that spring up in a cellar. Her small broad hands and
full neck, which showed from under the broad collar of her cloak, were
of the same hue. Her black, sparkling eyes, one with a slight squint,
appeared in striking contrast to the dull pallor of her face.

She carried herself very straight, expanding her full bosom.

With her head slightly thrown back, she stood in the corridor, looking
straight into the eyes of the jailer, ready to comply with any order.

The jailer was about to lock the door when a wrinkled and severe-looking
old woman put out her grey head and began speaking to Maslova. But the
jailer closed the door, pushing the old woman's head with it. A woman's
laughter was heard from the cell, and Maslova smiled, turning to the
little grated opening in the cell door. The old woman pressed her face
to the grating from the other side, and said, in a hoarse voice:

"Now mind, and when they begin questioning you, just repeat over the
same thing, and stick to it; tell nothing that is not wanted."

"Well, it could not be worse than it is now, anyhow; I only wish it was
settled one way or another."

"Of course, it will be settled one way or another," said the jailer,
with a superior's self-assured witticism. "Now, then, get along! Take
your places!"

The old woman's eyes vanished from the grating, and Maslova stepped out
into the middle of the corridor. The warder in front, they descended
the stone stairs, past the still fouler, noisy cells of the men's
ward, where they were followed by eyes looking out of every one of the
gratings in the doors, and entered the office, where two soldiers were
waiting to escort her. A clerk who was sitting there gave one of the
soldiers a paper reeking of tobacco, and pointing to the prisoner,
remarked, "Take her."

The soldier, a peasant from Nijni Novgorod, with a red, pock-marked
face, put the paper into the sleeve of his coat, winked to his
companion, a broad-shouldered Tchouvash, and then the prisoner and the
soldiers went to the front entrance, out of the prison yard, and through
the town up the middle of the roughly-paved street.

Isvostchiks [cabmen], tradespeople, cooks, workmen, and government
clerks, stopped and looked curiously at the prisoner; some shook their
heads and thought, "This is what evil conduct, conduct unlike ours,
leads to." The children stopped and gazed at the robber with frightened
looks; but the thought that the soldiers were preventing her from doing
more harm quieted their fears. A peasant, who had sold his charcoal, and
had had some tea in the town, came up, and, after crossing himself, gave
her a copeck. The prisoner blushed and muttered something; she noticed
that she was attracting everybody's attention, and that pleased her. The
comparatively fresh air also gladdened her, but it was painful to step
on the rough stones with the ill-made prison shoes on her feet, which
had become unused to walking. Passing by a corn-dealer's shop, in front
of which a few pigeons were strutting about, unmolested by any one, the
prisoner almost touched a grey-blue bird with her foot; it fluttered up
and flew close to her ear, fanning her with its wings. She smiled, then
sighed deeply as she remembered her present position.



CHAPTER II.

MASLOVA'S EARLY LIFE.

The story of the prisoner Maslova's life was a very common one.

Maslova's mother was the unmarried daughter of a village woman,
employed on a dairy farm, which belonged to two maiden ladies who were
landowners. This unmarried woman had a baby every year, and, as often
happens among the village people, each one of these undesired babies,
after it had been carefully baptised, was neglected by its mother, whom
it hindered at her work, and left to starve. Five children had died in
this way. They had all been baptised and then not sufficiently fed, and
just left to die. The sixth baby, whose father was a gipsy tramp, would
have shared the same fate, had it not so happened that one of the maiden
ladies came into the farmyard to scold the dairymaids for sending up
cream that smelt of the cow. The young woman was lying in the cowshed
with a fine, healthy, new-born baby. The old maiden lady scolded the
maids again for allowing the woman (who had just been confined) to lie
in the cowshed, and was about to go away, but seeing the baby her heart
was touched, and she offered to stand godmother to the little girl, and
pity for her little god-daughter induced her to give milk and a little
money to the mother, so that she should feed the baby; and the little
girl lived. The old ladies spoke of her as "the saved one." When the
child was three years old, her mother fell ill and died, and the maiden
ladies took the child from her old grandmother, to whom she was nothing
but a burden.

The little black-eyed maiden grew to be extremely pretty, and so full of
spirits that the ladies found her very entertaining.

The younger of the ladies, Sophia Ivanovna, who had stood godmother to
the girl, had the kinder heart of the two sisters; Maria Ivanovna, the
elder, was rather hard. Sophia Ivanovna dressed the little girl in nice
clothes, and taught her to read and write, meaning to educate her like a
lady. Maria Ivanovna thought the child should be brought up to work, and
trained her to be a good servant. She was exacting; she punished, and,
when in a bad temper, even struck the little girl. Growing up under
these two different influences, the girl turned out half servant, half
young lady. They called her Katusha, which sounds less refined than
Katinka, but is not quite so common as Katka. She used to sew, tidy up
the rooms, polish the metal cases of the icons and do other light work,
and sometimes she sat and read to the ladies.

Though she had more than one offer, she would not marry. She felt that
life as the wife of any of the working men who were courting her would
be too hard; spoilt as she was by a life of case.

She lived in this manner till she was sixteen, when the nephew of the
old ladies, a rich young prince, and a university student, came to
stay with his aunts, and Katusha, not daring to acknowledge it even to
herself, fell in love with him.

Then two years later this same nephew stayed four days with his aunts
before proceeding to join his regiment, and the night before he left he
betrayed Katusha, and, after giving her a 100-rouble note, went away.
Five months later she knew for certain that she was to be a mother.
After that everything seemed repugnant to her, her only thought being
how to escape from the shame that awaited her. She began not only to
serve the ladies in a half-hearted and negligent way, but once, without
knowing how it happened, was very rude to them, and gave them notice,
a thing she repented of later, and the ladies let her go, noticing
something wrong and very dissatisfied with her. Then she got a
housemaid's place in a police-officer's house, but stayed there only
three months, for the police officer, a man of fifty, began to torment
her, and once, when he was in a specially enterprising mood, she fired
up, called him "a fool and old devil," and gave him such a knock in the
chest that he fell. She was turned out for her rudeness. It was useless
to look for another situation, for the time of her confinement was
drawing near, so she went to the house of a village midwife, who also
sold wine. The confinement was easy; but the midwife, who had a case of
fever in the village, infected Katusha, and her baby boy had to be sent
to the foundlings' hospital, where, according to the words of the old
woman who took him there, he at once died. When Katusha went to the
midwife she had 127 roubles in all, 27 which she had earned and 100
given her by her betrayer. When she left she had but six roubles; she
did not know how to keep money, but spent it on herself, and gave to
all who asked. The midwife took 40 roubles for two months' board and
attendance, 25 went to get the baby into the foundlings' hospital, and
40 the midwife borrowed to buy a cow with. Twenty roubles went just for
clothes and dainties. Having nothing left to live on, Katusha had to
look out for a place again, and found one in the house of a forester.
The forester was a married man, but he, too, began to annoy her from the
first day. He disgusted her, and she tried to avoid him. But he, more
experienced and cunning, besides being her master, who could send her
wherever he liked, managed to accomplish his object. His wife found it
out, and, catching Katusha and her husband in a room all by themselves,
began beating her. Katusha defended herself, and they had a fight, and
Katusha got turned out of the house without being paid her wages.

Then Katusha went to live with her aunt in town. The aunt's husband,
a bookbinder, had once been comfortably off, but had lost all his
customers, and had taken to drink, and spent all he could lay hands
on at the public-house. The aunt kept a little laundry, and managed to
support herself, her children, and her wretched husband. She offered
Katusha the place of an assistant laundress; but seeing what a life of
misery and hardship her aunt's assistants led, Katusha hesitated, and
applied to a registry office for a place. One was found for her with a
lady who lived with her two sons, pupils at a public day school. A
week after Katusha had entered the house the elder, a big fellow with
moustaches, threw up his studies and made love to her, continually
following her about. His mother laid all the blame on Katusha, and gave
her notice.

It so happened that, after many fruitless attempts to find a situation,
Katusha again went to the registry office, and there met a woman with
bracelets on her bare, plump arms and rings on most of her fingers.
Hearing that Katusha was badly in want of a place, the woman gave her
her address, and invited her to come to her house. Katusha went. The
woman received her very kindly, set cake and sweet wine before her,
then wrote a note and gave it to a servant to take to somebody. In the
evening a tall man, with long, grey hair and a white beard, entered the
room, and sat down at once near Katusha, smiling and gazing at her with
glistening eyes. He began joking with her. The hostess called him away
into the next room, and Katusha heard her say, "A fresh one from the
country," Then the hostess called Katusha aside and told her that the
man was an author, and that he had a great deal of money, and that if
he liked her he would not grudge her anything. He did like her, and gave
her 25 roubles, promising to see her often. The 25 roubles soon went;
some she paid to her aunt for board and lodging; the rest was spent on
a hat, ribbons, and such like. A few days later the author sent for her,
and she went. He gave her another 25 roubles, and offered her a separate
lodging.

Next door to the lodging rented for her by the author there lived a
jolly young shopman, with whom Katusha soon fell in love. She told
the author, and moved to a little lodging of her own. The shopman, who
promised to marry her, went to Nijni on business without mentioning it
to her, having evidently thrown her up, and Katusha remained alone. She
meant to continue living in the lodging by herself, but was informed
by the police that in this case she would have to get a license. She
returned to her aunt. Seeing her fine dress, her hat, and mantle, her
aunt no longer offered her laundry work. As she understood things, her
niece had risen above that sort of thing. The question as to whether she
was to become a laundress or not did not occur to Katusha, either. She
looked with pity at the thin, hard-worked laundresses, some already in
consumption, who stood washing or ironing with their thin arms in the
fearfully hot front room, which was always full of soapy steam and
draughts from the windows, and thought with horror that she might have
shared the same fate.

Katusha had begun to smoke some time before, and since the young shopman
had thrown her up she was getting more and more into the habit of
drinking. It was not so much the flavour of wine that tempted her as the
fact that it gave her a chance of forgetting the misery she suffered,
making her feel more unrestrained and more confident of her own worth,
which she was not when quite sober; without wine she felt sad and
ashamed. Just at this time a woman came along who offered to place her
in one of the largest establishments in the city, explaining all the
advantages and benefits of the situation. Katusha had the choice before
her of either going into service or accepting this offer--and she chose
the latter. Besides, it seemed to her as though, in this way, she could
revenge herself on her betrayer and the shopman and all those who had
injured her. One of the things that tempted her, and was the cause
of her decision, was the woman telling her she might order her own
dresses--velvet, silk, satin, low-necked ball dresses, anything she
liked. A mental picture of herself in a bright yellow silk trimmed with
black velvet with low neck and short sleeves conquered her, and she gave
up her passport. On the same evening the procuress took an isvostchik
and drove her to the notorious house kept by Carolina Albertovna
Kitaeva.

From that day a life of chronic sin against human and divine laws
commenced for Katusha Maslova, a life which is led by hundreds of
thousands of women, and which is not merely tolerated but sanctioned by
the Government, anxious for the welfare of its subjects; a life
which for nine women out of ten ends in painful disease, premature
decrepitude, and death.

Katusha Maslova lived this life for seven years. During these years she
twice changed houses, and had once been to the hospital. In the seventh
year of this life, when she was twenty-six years old, happened that for
which she was put in prison and for which she was now being taken to
be tried, after more than three months of confinement with thieves and
murderers in the stifling air of a prison.



CHAPTER III.

NEKHLUDOFF.

When Maslova, wearied out by the long walk, reached the building,
accompanied by two soldiers, Prince Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff, who
had seduced her, was still lying on his high bedstead, with a feather
bed on the top of the spring mattress, in a fine, clean, well-ironed
linen night shirt, smoking a cigarette, and considering what he had to
do to-day, and what had happened yesterday.

Recalling the evening he had spent with the Korchagins, a wealthy and
aristocratic family, whose daughter every one expected he would marry,
he sighed, and, throwing away the end of his cigarette, was going
to take another out of the silver case; but, changing his mind, he
resolutely raised his solid frame, and, putting down his smooth, white
legs, stepped into his slippers, threw his silk dressing gown over his
broad shoulders, and passed into his dressing-room, walking heavily
and quickly. There he carefully cleaned his teeth, many of which were
filled, with tooth powder, and rinsed his mouth with scented elixir.
After that he washed his hands with perfumed soap, cleaned his long
nails with particular care, then, from a tap fixed to his marble
washstand, he let a spray of cold water run over his face and stout
neck. Having finished this part of the business, he went into a third
room, where a shower bath stood ready for him. Having refreshed his
full, white, muscular body, and dried it with a rough bath sheet, he put
on his fine undergarments and his boots, and sat down before the glass
to brush his black beard and his curly hair, that had begun to get thin
above the forehead. Everything he used, everything belonging to his
toilet, his linen, his clothes, boots, necktie, pin, studs, was of the
best quality, very quiet, simple, durable and costly.

Nekhludoff dressed leisurely, and went into the dining-room. A table,
which looked very imposing with its four legs carved in the shape of
lions' paws, and a huge side-board to match, stood in the oblong room,
the floor of which had been polished by three men the day before. On
the table, which was covered with a fine, starched cloth, stood a silver
coffeepot full of aromatic coffee, a sugar basin, a jug of fresh cream,
and a bread basket filled with fresh rolls, rusks, and biscuits; and
beside the plate lay the last number of the _Revue des Deux Mondes_, a
newspaper, and several letters.

Nekhludoff was just going to open his letters, when a stout, middle-aged
woman in mourning, a lace cap covering the widening parting of her hair,
glided into the room. This was Agraphena Petrovna, formerly lady's maid
to Nekhludoff's mother. Her mistress had died quite recently in this
very house, and she remained with the son as his housekeeper. Agraphena
Petrovna had spent nearly ten years, at different times, abroad with
Nekhludoff's mother, and had the appearance and manners of a lady. She
had lived with the Nekhludoffs from the time she was a child, and had
known Dmitri Ivanovitch at the time when he was still little Mitinka.

"Good-morning, Dmitri Ivanovitch."

"Good-morning, Agraphena Petrovna. What is it you want?" Nekhludoff
asked.

"A letter from the princess; either from the mother or the daughter.
The maid brought it some time ago, and is waiting in my room," answered
Agraphena Petrovna, handing him the letter with a significant smile.

"All right! Directly!" said Nekhludoff, taking the letter and frowning
as he noticed Agraphena Petrovna's smile.

That smile meant that the letter was from the younger Princess
Korchagin, whom Agraphena Petrovna expected him to marry. This
supposition of hers annoyed Nekhludoff.

"Then I'll tell her to wait?" and Agraphena Petrovna took a crumb brush
which was not in its place, put it away, and sailed out of the room.

Nekhludoff opened the perfumed note, and began reading it.

The note was written on a sheet of thick grey paper, with rough edges;
the writing looked English. It said:

Having assumed the task of acting as your memory, I take the liberty of
reminding you that on this the 28th day of April you have to appear
at the Law Courts, as juryman, and, in consequence, can on no account
accompany us and Kolosoff to the picture gallery, as, with your habitual
flightiness, you promised yesterday; _a moins que vous ne soyez dispose
a payer la cour d'assise les 300 roubles d'amende que vous vous refusez
pour votre cheval,_ for not appearing in time. I remembered it last
night after you were gone, so do not forget.

                      Princess M. Korchagin.

On the other side was a postscript.

_Maman vous fait dire que votre convert vous attendra jusqu'a la nuit.
Venez absolument a quelle heure que cela soit._

                                    M. K.

Nekhludoff made a grimace. This note was a continuation of that skilful
manoeuvring which the Princess Korchagin had already practised for two
months in order to bind him closer and closer with invisible threads.
And yet, beside the usual hesitation of men past their youth to marry
unless they are very much in love, Nekhludoff had very good reasons why,
even if he did make up his mind to it, he could not propose at once. It
was not that ten years previously he had betrayed and forsaken Maslova;
he had quite forgotten that, and he would not have considered it a
reason for not marrying. No! The reason was that he had a liaison with a
married woman, and, though he considered it broken off, she did not.

Nekhludoff was rather shy with women, and his very shyness awakened in
this married woman, the unprincipled wife of the marechal de noblesse
of a district where Nekhludoff was present at an election, the desire
of vanquishing him. This woman drew him into an intimacy which entangled
him more and more, while it daily became more distasteful to him. Having
succumbed to the temptation, Nekhludoff felt guilty, and had not the
courage to break the tie without her consent. And this was the reason he
did not feel at liberty to propose to Korchagin even if he had wished to
do so. Among the letters on the table was one from this woman's husband.
Seeing his writing and the postmark, Nekhludoff flushed, and felt his
energies awakening, as they always did when he was facing any kind of
danger.

But his excitement passed at once. The marechal do noblesse, of the
district in which his largest estate lay, wrote only to let Nekhludoff
know that there was to be a special meeting towards the end of May, and
that Nekhludoff was to be sure and come to "_donner un coup d'epaule_,"
at the important debates concerning the schools and the roads, as a
strong opposition by the reactionary party was expected.

The marechal was a liberal, and was quite engrossed in this fight, not
even noticing the misfortune that had befallen him.

Nekhludoff remembered the dreadful moments he had lived through; once
when he thought that the husband had found him out and was going to
challenge him, and he was making up his mind to fire into the air; also
the terrible scene he had with her when she ran out into the park, and
in her excitement tried to drown herself in the pond.

"Well, I cannot go now, and can do nothing until I get a reply from
her," thought Nekhludoff. A week ago he had written her a decisive
letter, in which he acknowledged his guilt, and his readiness to atone
for it; but at the same time he pronounced their relations to be at an
end, for her own good, as he expressed it. To this letter he had as yet
received no answer. This might prove a good sign, for if she did not
agree to break off their relations, she would have written at once, or
even come herself, as she had done before. Nekhludoff had heard that
there was some officer who was paying her marked attention, and this
tormented him by awakening jealousy, and at the same time encouraged him
with the hope of escape from the deception that was oppressing him.

The other letter was from his steward. The steward wrote to tell
him that a visit to his estates was necessary in order to enter into
possession, and also to decide about the further management of his
lands; whether it was to continue in the same way as when his mother was
alive, or whether, as he had represented to the late lamented princess,
and now advised the young prince, they had not better increase their
stock and farm all the land now rented by the peasants themselves. The
steward wrote that this would be a far more profitable way of managing
the property; at the same time, he apologised for not having forwarded
the 3,000 roubles income due on the 1st. This money would be sent on by
the next mail. The reason for the delay was that he could not get the
money out of the peasants, who had grown so untrustworthy that he had
to appeal to the authorities. This letter was partly disagreeable, and
partly pleasant. It was pleasant to feel that he had power over so
large a property, and yet disagreeable, because Nekhludoff had been an
enthusiastic admirer of Henry George and Herbert Spencer. Being himself
heir to a large property, he was especially struck by the position
taken up by Spencer in Social Statics, that justice forbids private
landholding, and with the straightforward resoluteness of his age, had
not merely spoken to prove that land could not be looked upon as private
property, and written essays on that subject at the university, but had
acted up to his convictions, and, considering it wrong to hold landed
property, had given the small piece of land he had inherited from his
father to the peasants. Inheriting his mother's large estates, and thus
becoming a landed proprietor, he had to choose one of two things: either
to give up his property, as he had given up his father's land ten years
before, or silently to confess that all his former ideas were mistaken
and false.

He could not choose the former because he had no means but the landed
estates (he did not care to serve); moreover, he had formed luxurious
habits which he could not easily give up. Besides, he had no longer the
same inducements; his strong convictions, the resoluteness of youth, and
the ambitious desire to do something unusual were gone. As to the second
course, that of denying those clear and unanswerable proofs of the
injustice of landholding, which he had drawn from Spencer's Social
Statics, and the brilliant corroboration of which he had at a later
period found in the works of Henry George, such a course was impossible
to him.



CHAPTER IV.

MISSY.

When Nekhludoff had finished his coffee, he went to his study to look
at the summons, and find out what time he was to appear at the court,
before writing his answer to the princess. Passing through his studio,
where a few studies hung on the walls and, facing the easel, stood an
unfinished picture, a feeling of inability to advance in art, a sense of
his incapacity, came over him. He had often had this feeling, of late,
and explained it by his too finely-developed aesthetic taste; still, the
feeling was a very unpleasant one. Seven years before this he had given
up military service, feeling sure that he had a talent for art, and had
looked down with some disdain at all other activity from the height of
his artistic standpoint. And now it turned out that he had no right
to do so, and therefore everything that reminded him of all this was
unpleasant. He looked at the luxurious fittings of the studio with a
heavy heart, and it was in no cheerful mood that he entered his study,
a large, lofty room fitted up with a view to comfort, convenience,
and elegant appearance. He found the summons at once in a pigeon hole,
labelled "immediate," of his large writing table. He had to appear at
the court at 11 o'clock.

Nekhludoff sat down to write a note in reply to the princess, thanking
her for the invitation, and promising to try and come to dinner. Having
written one note, he tore it up, as it seemed too intimate. He wrote
another, but it was too cold; he feared it might give offence, so he
tore it up, too. He pressed the button of an electric bell, and his
servant, an elderly, morose-looking man, with whiskers and shaved chin
and lip, wearing a grey cotton apron, entered at the door.

"Send to fetch an isvostchik, please."

"Yes, sir."

"And tell the person who is waiting that I send thanks for the
invitation, and shall try to come."

"Yes, sir."

"It is not very polite, but I can't write; no matter, I shall see her
today," thought Nekhludoff, and went to get his overcoat.

When he came out of the house, an isvostchik he knew, with india-rubber
tires to his trap, was at the door waiting for him. "You had hardly gone
away from Prince Korchagin's yesterday," he said, turning half round,
"when I drove up, and the Swiss at the door says, 'just gone.'" The
isvostchik knew that Nekhludoff visited at the Korchagins, and called
there on the chance of being engaged by him.

"Even the isvostchiks know of my relations with the Korchagins," thought
Nekhludoff, and again the question whether he should not marry Princess
Korchagin presented itself to him, and he could not decide it either
way, any more than most of the questions that arose in his mind at this
time.

It was in favour of marriage in general, that besides the comforts
of hearth and home, it made a moral life possible, and chiefly that a
family would, so Nekhludoff thought, give an aim to his now empty life.

Against marriage in general was the fear, common to bachelors past
their first youth, of losing freedom, and an unconscious awe before this
mysterious creature, a woman.

In this particular case, in favour of marrying Missy (her name was Mary,
but, as is usual among a certain set, a nickname had been given her)
was that she came of good family, and differed in everything, manner
of speaking, walking, laughing, from the common people, not by anything
exceptional, but by her "good breeding"--he could find no other term
for this quality, though he prized it very highly---and, besides, she
thought more of him than of anybody else, therefore evidently understood
him. This understanding of him, i.e., the recognition of his superior
merits, was to Nekhludoff a proof of her good sense and correct
judgment. Against marrying Missy in particular, was, that in all
likelihood, a girl with even higher qualities could be found, that she
was already 27, and that he was hardly her first love. This last idea
was painful to him. His pride would not reconcile itself with the
thought that she had loved some one else, even in the past. Of course,
she could not have known that she should meet him, but the thought that
she was capable of loving another offended him. So that he had as many
reasons for marrying as against it; at any rate, they weighed equally
with Nekhludoff, who laughed at himself, and called himself the ass of
the fable, remaining like that animal undecided which haycock to turn
to.

"At any rate, before I get an answer from Mary Vasilievna (the
marechal's wife), and finish completely with her, I can do nothing," he
said to himself. And the conviction that he might, and was even obliged,
to delay his decision, was comforting. "Well, I shall consider all that
later on," he said to himself, as the trap drove silently along the
asphalt pavement up to the doors of the Court.

"Now I must fulfil my public duties conscientiously, as I am in the
habit of always doing, and as I consider it right to do. Besides, they
are often interesting." And he entered the hall of the Law Courts, past
the doorkeeper.



CHAPTER V.

THE JURYMEN.

The corridors of the Court were already full of activity. The attendants
hurried, out of breath, dragging their feet along the ground without
lifting them, backwards and forwards, with all sorts of messages and
papers. Ushers, advocates, and law officers passed hither and thither.
Plaintiffs, and those of the accused who were not guarded, wandered
sadly along the walls or sat waiting.

"Where is the Law Court?" Nekhludoff asked of an attendant.

"Which? There is the Civil Court and the Criminal Court."

"I am on the jury."

"The Criminal Court you should have said. Here to the right, then to the
left--the second door."

Nekhludoff followed the direction.

Meanwhile some of the Criminal Court jurymen who were late had hurriedly
passed into a separate room. At the door mentioned two men stood
waiting.

One, a tall, fat merchant, a kind-hearted fellow, had evidently partaken
of some refreshments and a glass of something, and was in most pleasant
spirits. The other was a shopman of Jewish extraction. They were talking
about the price of wool when Nekhludoff came up and asked them if this
was the jurymen's room.

"Yes, my dear sir, this is it. One of us? On the jury, are you?" asked
the merchant, with a merry wink.

"Ah, well, we shall have a go at the work together," he continued, after
Nekhludoff had answered in the affirmative. "My name is Baklasheff,
merchant of the Second Guild," he said, putting out his broad, soft,
flexible hand.

"With whom have I the honour?"

Nekhludoff gave his name and passed into the jurymen's room.

Inside the room were about ten persons of all sorts. They had come but
a short while ago, and some were sitting, others walking up and down,
looking at each other, and making each other's acquaintance. There was a
retired colonel in uniform; some were in frock coats, others in morning
coats, and only one wore a peasant's dress.

Their faces all had a certain look of satisfaction at the prospect of
fulfilling a public duty, although many of them had had to leave their
businesses, and most were complaining of it.

The jurymen talked among themselves about the weather, the early spring,
and the business before them, some having been introduced, others just
guessing who was who. Those who were not acquainted with Nekhludoff made
haste to get introduced, evidently looking upon this as an honour, and
he taking it as his due, as he always did when among strangers. Had he
been asked why he considered himself above the majority of people, he
could not have given an answer; the life he had been living of late was
not particularly meritorious. The fact of his speaking English, French,
and German with a good accent, and of his wearing the best linen,
clothes, ties, and studs, bought from the most expensive dealers in
these goods, he quite knew would not serve as a reason for claiming
superiority. At the same time he did claim superiority, and accepted the
respect paid him as his due, and was hurt if he did not get it. In the
jurymen's room his feelings were hurt by disrespectful treatment. Among
the jury there happened to be a man whom he knew, a former teacher of
his sister's children, Peter Gerasimovitch. Nekhludoff never knew his
surname, and even bragged a bit about this. This man was now a master
at a public school. Nekhludoff could not stand his familiarity, his
self-satisfied laughter, his vulgarity, in short.

"Ah ha! You're also trapped." These were the words, accompanied with
boisterous laughter, with which Peter Gerasimovitch greeted Nekhludoff.
"Have you not managed to get out of it?"

"I never meant to get out of it," replied Nekhludoff, gloomily, and in a
tone of severity.

"Well, I call this being public spirited. But just wait until you get
hungry or sleepy; you'll sing to another tune then."

"This son of a priest will be saying 'thou' [in Russian, as in many
other languages, 'thou' is used generally among people very familiar
with each other, or by superiors to inferiors] to me next," thought
Nekhludoff, and walked away, with such a look of sadness on his face,
as might have been natural if he had just heard of the death of all
his relations. He came up to a group that had formed itself round a
clean-shaven, tall, dignified man, who was recounting something with
great animation. This man was talking about the trial going on in the
Civil Court as of a case well known to himself, mentioning the judges
and a celebrated advocate by name. He was saying that it seemed
wonderful how the celebrated advocate had managed to give such a clever
turn to the affair that an old lady, though she had the right on her
side, would have to pay a large sum to her opponent. "The advocate is a
genius," he said.

The listeners heard it all with respectful attention, and several of
them tried to put in a word, but the man interrupted them, as if he
alone knew all about it.

Though Nekhludoff had arrived late, he had to wait a long time. One
of the members of the Court had not yet come, and everybody was kept
waiting.



CHAPTER VI.

THE JUDGES.

The president, who had to take the chair, had arrived early. The
president was a tall, stout man, with long grey whiskers. Though
married, he led a very loose life, and his wife did the same, so they
did not stand in each other's way. This morning he had received a note
from a Swiss girl, who had formerly been a governess in his house, and
who was now on her way from South Russia to St. Petersburg. She wrote
that she would wait for him between five and six p.m. in the Hotel
Italia. This made him wish to begin and get through the sitting as soon
as possible, so as to have time to call before six p.m. on the little
red-haired Clara Vasilievna, with whom he had begun a romance in the
country last summer. He went into a private room, latched the door, took
a pair of dumb-bells out of a cupboard, moved his arms 20 times upwards,
downwards, forwards, and sideways, then holding the dumb-bells above his
head, lightly bent his knees three times.

"Nothing keeps one going like a cold bath and exercise," he said,
feeling the biceps of his right arm with his left hand, on the third
finger of which he wore a gold ring. He had still to do the moulinee
movement (for he always went through those two exercises before a long
sitting), when there was a pull at the door. The president quickly put
away the dumb-bells and opened the door, saying, "I beg your pardon."

One of the members, a high-shouldered, discontented-looking man, with
gold spectacles, came into the room. "Matthew Nikitich has again not
come," he said, in a dissatisfied tone.

"Not yet?" said the president, putting on his uniform. "He is always
late."

"It is extraordinary. He ought to be ashamed of himself," said the
member, angrily, and taking out a cigarette.

This member, a very precise man, had had an unpleasant encounter with
his wife in the morning, because she had spent her allowance before the
end of the month, and had asked him to give her some money in advance,
but he would not give way to her, and they had a quarrel. The wife told
him that if he were going to behave so, he need not expect any dinner;
there would be no dinner for him at home. At this point he left, fearing
that she might carry out her threat, for anything might be expected from
her. "This comes of living a good, moral life," he thought, looking at
the beaming, healthy, cheerful, and kindly president, who, with elbows
far apart, was smoothing his thick grey whiskers with his fine white
hands over the embroidered collar of his uniform. "He is always
contented and merry while I am suffering."

The secretary came in and brought some document.

"Thanks, very much," said the president, lighting a cigarette. "Which
case shall we take first, then?"

"The poisoning case, I should say," answered the secretary, with
indifference.

"All right; the poisoning case let it be," said the president, thinking
that he could get this case over by four o'clock, and then go away. "And
Matthew Nikitich; has he come?"

"Not yet."

"And Breve?"

"He is here," replied the secretary.

"Then if you see him, please tell him that we begin with the poisoning
case." Breve was the public prosecutor, who was to read the indictment
in this case.

In the corridor the secretary met Breve, who, with up lifted shoulders,
a portfolio under one arm, the other swinging with the palm turned to
the front, was hurrying along the corridor, clattering with his heels.

"Michael Petrovitch wants to know if you are ready?" the secretary
asked.

"Of course; I am always ready," said the public prosecutor. "What are we
taking first?"

"The poisoning case."

"That's quite right," said the public prosecutor, but did not think it
at all right. He had spent the night in a hotel playing cards with a
friend who was giving a farewell party. Up to five in the morning they
played and drank, so he had no time to look at this poisoning case,
and meant to run it through now. The secretary, happening to know this,
advised the president to begin with the poisoning case. The secretary
was a Liberal, even a Radical, in opinion.

Breve was a Conservative; the secretary disliked him, and envied him his
position.

"Well, and how about the Skoptzy?" [a religious sect] asked the
secretary.

"I have already said that I cannot do it without witnesses, and so I
shall say to the Court."

"Dear me, what does it matter?"

"I cannot do it," said Breve; and, waving his arm, he ran into his
private room.

He was putting off the case of the Skoptzy on account of the absence
of a very unimportant witness, his real reason being that if they were
tried by an educated jury they might possibly be acquitted.

By an agreement with the president this case was to be tried in the
coming session at a provincial town, where there would be more peasants,
and, therefore, more chances of conviction.

The movement in the corridor increased. The people crowded most at
the doors of the Civil Court, in which the case that the dignified man
talked about was being heard.

An interval in the proceeding occurred, and the old woman came out of
the court, whose property that genius of an advocate had found means of
getting for his client, a person versed in law who had no right to it
whatever. The judges knew all about the case, and the advocate and his
client knew it better still, but the move they had invented was such
that it was impossible not to take the old woman's property and not to
hand it over to the person versed in law.

The old woman was stout, well dressed, and had enormous flowers on her
bonnet; she stopped as she came out of the door, and spreading out her
short fat arms and turning to her advocate, she kept repeating. "What
does it all mean? just fancy!"

The advocate was looking at the flowers in her bonnet, and evidently not
listening to her, but considering some question or other.

Next to the old woman, out of the door of the Civil Court, his broad,
starched shirt front glistening from under his low-cut waistcoat, with
a self-satisfied look on his face, came the celebrated advocate who had
managed to arrange matters so that the old woman lost all she had, and
the person versed in the law received more than 100,000 roubles. The
advocate passed close to the old woman, and, feeling all eyes directed
towards him, his whole bearing seemed to say: "No expressions of
deference are required."



CHAPTER VII.

THE OFFICIALS OF THE COURT.

At last Matthew Nikitich also arrived, and the usher, a thin man, with a
long neck and a kind of sideways walk, his nether lip protruding to one
side, which made him resemble a turkey, came into the jurymen's room.

This usher was an honest man, and had a university education, but could
not keep a place for any length of time, as he was subject to fits of
drunkenness. Three months before a certain countess, who patronised his
wife, had found him this place, and he was very pleased to have kept it
so long.

"Well, sirs, is everybody here?" he asked, putting his pince-nez on his
nose, and looking round.

"Everybody, I think," said the jolly merchant.

"All right; we'll soon see." And, taking a list from his pocket, he
began calling out the names, looking at the men, sometimes through and
sometimes over his pince-nez.

"Councillor of State, [grades such as this are common in Russia, and
mean very little] J. M. Nikiforoff!"

"I am he," said the dignified-looking man, well versed in the habits of
the law court.

"Ivan Semionovitch Ivanoff, retired colonel!"

"Here!" replied a thin man, in the uniform of a retired officer.

"Merchant of the Second Guild, Peter Baklasheff!"

"Here we are, ready!" said the good-humoured merchant, with a broad
smile.

"Lieutenant of the Guards, Prince Dmitri Nekhludoff!"

"I am he," answered Nekhludoff.

The usher bowed to him, looking over his pince-nez, politely and
pleasantly, as if wishing to distinguish him from the others.

"Captain Youri Demitrievitch-Dantchenko, merchant; Grigori Euphimitch
Kouleshoff," etc. All but two were present.

"Now please to come to the court, gentlemen," said the usher, pointing
to the door, with an amiable wave of his hand.

All moved towards the door, pausing to let each other pass. Then they
went through the corridor into the court.

The court was a large, long room. At one end there was a raised
platform, with three steps leading up to it, on which stood a table,
covered with a green cloth trimmed with a fringe of a darker shade. At
the table were placed three arm-chairs, with high-carved oak backs; on
the wall behind them hung a full-length, brightly-coloured portrait of
the Emperor in uniform and ribbon, with one foot in advance, and holding
a sword. In the right corner hung a case, with an image of Christ
crowned with thorns, and beneath it stood a lectern, and on the same
side the prosecuting attorney's desk. On the left, opposite the desk,
was the secretary's table, and in front of it, nearer the public, an
oak grating, with the prisoners' bench, as yet unoccupied, behind
it. Besides all this, there were on the right side of the platform
high-backed ashwood chairs for the jury, and on the floor below tables
for the advocates. All this was in the front part of the court, divided
from the back by a grating.

The back was all taken up by seats in tiers. Sitting on the front seats
were four women, either servant or factory girls, and two working men,
evidently overawed by the grandeur of the room, and not venturing to
speak above a whisper.

Soon after the jury had come in the usher entered, with his sideward
gait, and stepping to the front, called out in a loud voice, as if he
meant to frighten those present, "The Court is coming!" Every one got
up as the members stepped on to the platform. Among them the president,
with his muscles and fine whiskers. Next came the gloomy member of the
Court, who was now more gloomy than ever, having met his brother-in-law,
who informed him that he had just called in to see his sister (the
member's wife), and that she had told him that there would be no dinner
there.

"So that, evidently, we shall have to call in at a cook shop," the
brother-in-law added, laughing.

"It is not at all funny," said the gloomy member, and became gloomier
still.

Then at last came the third member of the Court, the same Matthew
Nikitich, who was always late. He was a bearded man, with large, round,
kindly eyes. He was suffering from a catarrh of the stomach, and,
according to his doctor's advice, he had begun trying a new treatment,
and this had kept him at home longer than usual. Now, as he was
ascending the platform, he had a pensive air. He was in the habit of
making guesses in answer to all sorts of self-put questions by different
curious means. Just now he had asked whether the new treatment would be
beneficial, and had decided that it would cure his catarrh if the number
of steps from the door to his chair would divide by three. He made 26
steps, but managed to get in a 27th just by his chair.

The figures of the president and the members in their uniforms, with
gold-embroidered collars, looked very imposing. They seemed to feel this
themselves, and, as if overpowered by their own grandeur, hurriedly sat
down on the high backed chairs behind the table with the green cloth,
on which were a triangular article with an eagle at the top, two glass
vases--something like those in which sweetmeats are kept in refreshment
rooms--an inkstand, pens, clean paper, and good, newly-cut pencils of
different kinds.

The public prosecutor came in with the judges. With his portfolio under
one arm, and swinging the other, he hurriedly walked to his seat near
the window, and was instantly absorbed in reading and looking through
the papers, not wasting a single moment, in hope of being ready when the
business commenced. He had been public prosecutor but a short time, and
had only prosecuted four times before this. He was very ambitious,
and had firmly made up his mind to get on, and therefore thought it
necessary to get a conviction whenever he prosecuted. He knew the chief
facts of the poisoning case, and had already formed a plan of action. He
only wanted to copy out a few points which he required.

The secretary sat on the opposite side of the platform, and, having
got ready all the papers he might want, was looking through an article,
prohibited by the censor, which he had procured and read the day before.
He was anxious to have a talk about this article with the bearded
member, who shared his views, but wanted to look through it once more
before doing so.



CHAPTER VIII.

SWEARING IN THE JURY.

The president, having looked through some papers and put a few questions
to the usher and the secretary, gave the order for the prisoners to be
brought in.

The door behind the grating was instantly opened, and two gendarmes,
with caps on their heads, and holding naked swords in their hands,
came in, followed by the prisoners, a red-haired, freckled man, and two
women. The man wore a prison cloak, which was too long and too wide for
him. He stuck out his thumbs, and held his arms close to his sides, thus
keeping the sleeves, which were also too long, from slipping over his
hands. Without looking at the judges he gazed steadfastly at the form,
and passing to the other side of it, he sat down carefully at the very
edge, leaving plenty of room for the others. He fixed his eyes on the
president, and began moving the muscles of his cheeks, as if whispering
something. The woman who came next was also dressed in a prison cloak,
and had a prison kerchief round her head. She had a sallow complexion,
no eyebrows or lashes, and very red eyes. This woman appeared perfectly
calm. Having caught her cloak against something, she detached it
carefully, without any haste, and sat down.

The third prisoner was Maslova.

As soon as she appeared, the eyes of all the men in the court turned
her way, and remained fixed on her white face, her sparklingly-brilliant
black eyes and the swelling bosom under the prison cloak. Even the
gendarme whom she passed on her way to her seat looked at her fixedly
till she sat down, and then, as if feeling guilty, hurriedly turned
away, shook himself, and began staring at the window in front of him.

The president paused until the prisoners had taken their seats, and when
Maslova was seated, turned to the secretary.

Then the usual procedure commenced; the counting of the jury, remarks
about those who had not come, the fixing of the fines to be exacted
from them, the decisions concerning those who claimed exemption, the
appointing of reserve jurymen.

Having folded up some bits of paper and put them in one of the glass
vases, the president turned up the gold-embroidered cuffs of his uniform
a little way, and began drawing the lots, one by one, and opening them.
Nekhludoff was among the jurymen thus drawn. Then, having let down his
sleeves, the president requested the priest to swear in the jury.

The old priest, with his puffy, red face, his brown gown, and his gold
cross and little order, laboriously moving his stiff legs, came up to
the lectern beneath the icon.

The jurymen got up, and crowded towards the lectern.

"Come up, please," said the priest, pulling at the cross on his breast
with his plump hand, and waiting till all the jury had drawn near. When
they had all come up the steps of the platform, the priest passed his
bald, grey head sideways through the greasy opening of the stole, and,
having rearranged his thin hair, he again turned to the jury. "Now,
raise your right arms in this way, and put your fingers together, thus,"
he said, with his tremulous old voice, lifting his fat, dimpled hand,
and putting the thumb and two first fingers together, as if taking a
pinch of something. "Now, repeat after me, 'I promise and swear, by the
Almighty God, by His holy gospels, and by the life-giving cross of
our Lord, that in this work which,'" he said, pausing between each
sentence--"don't let your arm down; hold it like this," he remarked to a
young man who had lowered his arm--"'that in this work which . . . '"

The dignified man with the whiskers, the colonel, the merchant, and
several more held their arms and fingers as the priest required of
them, very high, very exactly, as if they liked doing it; others did it
unwillingly and carelessly. Some repeated the words too loudly, and with
a defiant tone, as if they meant to say, "In spite of all, I will and
shall speak." Others whispered very low, and not fast enough, and
then, as if frightened, hurried to catch up the priest. Some kept their
fingers tightly together, as if fearing to drop the pinch of invisible
something they held; others kept separating and folding theirs. Every
one save the old priest felt awkward, but he was sure he was fulfilling
a very useful and important duty.

After the swearing in, the president requested the jury to choose
a foreman, and the jury, thronging to the door, passed out into
the debating-room, where almost all of them at once began to smoke
cigarettes. Some one proposed the dignified man as foreman, and he was
unanimously accepted. Then the jurymen put out their cigarettes and
threw them away and returned to the court. The dignified man informed
the president that he was chosen foreman, and all sat down again on the
high-backed chairs.

Everything went smoothly, quickly, and not without a certain solemnity.
And this exactitude, order, and solemnity evidently pleased those
who took part in it: it strengthened the impression that they were
fulfilling a serious and valuable public duty. Nekhludoff, too, felt
this.

As soon as the jurymen were seated, the president made a speech on
their rights, obligations, and responsibilities. While speaking he kept
changing his position; now leaning on his right, now on his left hand,
now against the back, then on the arms of his chair, now putting the
papers straight, now handling his pencil and paper-knife.

According to his words, they had the right of interrogating the
prisoners through the president, to use paper and pencils, and to
examine the articles put in as evidence. Their duty was to judge not
falsely, but justly. Their responsibility meant that if the secrecy of
their discussion were violated, or communications were established with
outsiders, they would be liable to punishment. Every one listened with
an expression of respectful attention. The merchant, diffusing a smell
of brandy around him, and restraining loud hiccups, approvingly nodded
his head at every sentence.



CHAPTER IX.

THE TRIAL--THE PRISONERS QUESTIONED.

When he had finished his speech, the president turned to the male
prisoner.

"Simeon Kartinkin, rise."

Simeon jumped up, his lips continuing to move nervously and inaudibly.

"Your name?"

"Simon Petrov Kartinkin," he said, rapidly, with a cracked voice, having
evidently prepared the answer.

"What class do you belong to?"

"Peasant."

"What government, district, and parish?"

"Toula Government, Krapivinskia district, Koupianovski parish, the
village Borki."

"Your age?"

"Thirty-three; born in the year one thousand eight--"

"What religion?"

"Of the Russian religion, orthodox."

"Married?"

"Oh, no, sir."

"Your occupation?"

"I had a place in the Hotel Mauritania."

"Have you ever been tried before?"

"I never got tried before, because, as we used to live formerly--"

"So you never were tried before?"

"God forbid, never."

"Have you received a copy of the indictment?"

"I have."

"Sit down."

"Euphemia Ivanovna Botchkova," said the president, turning to the next
prisoner.

But Simon continued standing in front of Botchkova.

"Kartinkin, sit down!" Kartinkin continued standing.

"Kartinkin, sit down!" But Kartinkin sat down only when the usher, with
his head on one side, and with preternaturally wide-open eyes, ran up,
and said, in a tragic whisper, "Sit down, sit down!"

Kartinkin sat down as hurriedly as he had risen, wrapping his cloak
round him, and again began moving his lips silently.

"Your name?" asked the president, with a weary sigh at being obliged to
repeat the same questions, without looking at the prisoner, but glancing
over a paper that lay before him. The president was so used to his task
that, in order to get quicker through it all, he did two things at a
time.

Botchkova was forty-three years old, and came from the town of Kalomna.
She, too, had been in service at the Hotel Mauritania.

"I have never been tried before, and have received a copy of the
indictment." She gave her answers boldly, in a tone of voice as if she
meant to add to each answer, "And I don't care who knows it, and I won't
stand any nonsense."

She did not wait to be told, but sat down as soon as she had replied to
the last question.

"Your name?" turning abruptly to the third prisoner. "You will have to
rise," he added, softly and gently, seeing that Maslova kept her seat.

Maslova got up and stood, with her chest expanded, looking at the
president with that peculiar expression of readiness in her smiling
black eyes.

"What is your name?"

"Lubov," she said.

Nekhludoff had put on his pince-nez, looking at the prisoners while they
were being questioned.

"No, it is impossible," he thought, not taking his eyes off the
prisoner. "Lubov! How can it be?" he thought to himself, after hearing
her answer. The president was going to continue his questions, but
the member with the spectacles interrupted him, angrily whispering
something. The president nodded, and turned again to the prisoner.

"How is this," he said, "you are not put down here as Lubov?"

The prisoner remained silent.

"I want your real name."

"What is your baptismal name?" asked the angry member.

"Formerly I used to be called Katerina."

"No, it cannot be," said Nekhludoff to himself; and yet he was now
certain that this was she, that same girl, half ward, half servant to
his aunts; that Katusha, with whom he had once been in love, really
in love, but whom he had betrayed and then abandoned, and never again
brought to mind, for the memory would have been too painful, would
have convicted him too clearly, proving that he who was so proud of his
integrity had treated this woman in a revolting, scandalous way.

Yes, this was she. He now clearly saw in her face that strange,
indescribable individuality which distinguishes every face from all
others; something peculiar, all its own, not to be found anywhere else.
In spite of the unhealthy pallor and the fulness of the face, it was
there, this sweet, peculiar individuality; on those lips, in the slight
squint of her eyes, in the voice, particularly in the naive smile, and
in the expression of readiness on the face and figure.

"You should have said so," remarked the president, again in a gentle
tone. "Your patronymic?"

"I am illegitimate."

"Well, were you not called by your godfather's name?"

"Yes, Mikhaelovna."

"And what is it she can be guilty of?" continued Nekhludoff, in his
mind, unable to breathe freely.

"Your family name--your surname, I mean?" the president went on.

"They used to call me by my mother's surname, Maslova."

"What class?"

"Meschanka." [the lowest town class or grade]

"Religion--orthodox?"

"Orthodox."

"Occupation. What was your occupation?"

Maslova remained silent.

"What was your employment?"

"You know yourself," she said, and smiled. Then, casting a hurried look
round the room, again turned her eyes on the president.

There was something so unusual in the expression of her face, so
terrible and piteous in the meaning of the words she had uttered, in
this smile, and in the furtive glance she had cast round the room, that
the president was abashed, and for a few minutes silence reigned in the
court. The silence was broken by some one among the public laughing,
then somebody said "Ssh," and the president looked up and continued:

"Have you ever been tried before?"

"Never," answered Maslova, softly, and sighed.

"Have you received a copy of the indictment?"

"I have," she answered.

"Sit down."

The prisoner leant back to pick up her skirt in the way a fine lady
picks up her train, and sat down, folding her small white hands in the
sleeves of her cloak, her eyes fixed on the president. Her face was calm
again.

The witnesses were called, and some sent away; the doctor who was to act
as expert was chosen and called into the court.

Then the secretary got up and began reading the indictment. He read
distinctly, though he pronounced the "I" and "r" alike, with a loud
voice, but so quickly that the words ran into one another and formed one
uninterrupted, dreary drone.

The judges bent now on one, now on the other arm of their chairs, then
on the table, then back again, shut and opened their eyes, and whispered
to each other. One of the gendarmes several times repressed a yawn.

The prisoner Kartinkin never stopped moving his cheeks. Botchkova sat
quite still and straight, only now and then scratching her head under
the kerchief.

Maslova sat immovable, gazing at the reader; only now and then she gave
a slight start, as if wishing to reply, blushed, sighed heavily, and
changed the position of her hands, looked round, and again fixed her
eyes on the reader.

Nekhludoff sat in the front row on his high-backed chair, without
removing his pince-nez, and looked at Maslova, while a complicated and
fierce struggle was going on in his soul.



CHAPTER X.

THE TRIAL--THE INDICTMENT.

The indictment ran as follows: On the 17th of January, 18--, in the
lodging-house Mauritania, occurred the sudden death of the Second Guild
merchant, Therapont Emilianovich Smelkoff, of Kourgan.

The local police doctor of the fourth district certified that death was
due to rupture of the heart, owing to the excessive use of alcoholic
liquids. The body of the said Smelkoff was interred. After several days
had elapsed, the merchant Timokhin, a fellow-townsman and companion
of the said Smelkoff, returned from St. Petersburg, and hearing the
circumstances that accompanied the death of the latter, notified his
suspicions that the death was caused by poison, given with intent to
rob the said Smelkoff of his money. This suspicion was corroborated on
inquiry, which proved:

1. That shortly before his death the said Smelkoff had received the sum
of 3,800 roubles from the bank. When an inventory of the property of the
deceased was made, only 312 roubles and 16 copecks were found.

2. The whole day and night preceding his death the said Smelkoff spent
with Lubka (alias Katerina Maslova) at her home and in the lodging-house
Mauritania, which she also visited at the said Smelkoff's request during
his absence, to get some money, which she took out of his portmanteau in
the presence of the servants of the lodging-house Mauritania, Euphemia
Botchkova and Simeon Kartinkin, with a key given her by the said
Smelkoff. In the portmanteau opened by the said Maslova, the said
Botchkova and Kartinkin saw packets of 100-rouble bank-notes.

3. On the said Smelkoff's return to the lodging-house Mauritania,
together with Lubka, the latter, in accordance with the attendant
Kartinkin's advice, gave the said Smelkoff some white powder given to
her by the said Kartinkin, dissolved in brandy.

4. The next morning the said Lubka (alias Katerina Maslova) sold to her
mistress, the witness Kitaeva, a brothel-keeper, a diamond ring given to
her, as she alleged, by the said Smelkoff.

5. The housemaid of the lodging-house Mauritania, Euphemia Botchkova,
placed to her account in the local Commercial Bank 1,800 roubles. The
postmortem examination of the body of the said Smelkoff and the chemical
analysis of his intestines proved beyond doubt the presence of poison
in the organism, so that there is reason to believe that the said
Smelkoff's death was caused by poisoning.

When cross-examined, the accused, Maslova, Botchkova, and Kartinkin,
pleaded not guilty, deposing--Maslova, that she had really been sent by
Smelkoff from the brothel, where she "works," as she expresses it, to
the lodging-house Mauritania to get the merchant some money, and that,
having unlocked the portmanteau with a key given her by the merchant,
she took out 40 roubles, as she was told to do, and that she had taken
nothing more; that Botchkova and Kartinkin, in whose presence she
unlocked and locked the portmanteau, could testify to the truth of the
statement.

She gave this further evidence--that when she came to the lodging-house
for the second time she did, at the instigation of Simeon Kartinkin,
give Smelkoff some kind of powder, which she thought was a narcotic,
in a glass of brandy, hoping he would fall asleep and that she would be
able to get away from him; and that Smelkoff, having beaten her, himself
gave her the ring when she cried and threatened to go away.

The accused, Euphemia Botchkova, stated that she knew nothing about the
missing money, that she had not even gone into Smelkoff's room, but
that Lubka had been busy there all by herself; that if anything had
been stolen, it must have been done by Lubka when she came with the
merchant's key to get his money.

At this point Maslova gave a start, opened her mouth, and looked at
Botchkova. "When," continued the secretary, "the receipt for 1,800
roubles from the bank was shown to Botchkova, and she was asked where
she had obtained the money, she said that it was her own earnings for
12 years, and those of Simeon, whom she was going to marry. The accused
Simeon Kartinkin, when first examined, confessed that he and Botchkova,
at the instigation of Maslova, who had come with the key from the
brothel, had stolen the money and divided it equally among themselves
and Maslova." Here Maslova again started, half-rose from her seat, and,
blushing scarlet, began to say something, but was stopped by the usher.
"At last," the secretary continued, reading, "Kartinkin confessed also
that he had supplied the powders in order to get Smelkoff to sleep. When
examined the second time he denied having had anything to do with the
stealing of the money or giving Maslova the powders, accusing her of
having done it alone."

Concerning the money placed in the bank by Botchkova, he said the same
as she, that is, that the money was given to them both by the lodgers in
tips during 12 years' service.

The indictment concluded as follows:

In consequence of the foregoing, the peasant of the village Borki,
Simeon Kartinkin, 33 years of age, the meschanka Euphemia Botchkova, 43
years of age, and the meschanka Katerina Maslova, 27 years of age, are
accused of having on the 17th day of January, 188--, jointly stolen from
the said merchant, Smelkoff, a ring and money, to the value of 2,500
roubles, and of having given the said merchant, Smelkoff, poison to
drink, with intent of depriving him of life, and thereby causing his
death. This crime is provided for in clause 1,455 of the Penal Code,
paragraphs 4 and 5.



CHAPTER XI.

THE TRIAL--MASLOVA CROSS-EXAMINED.

When the reading of the indictment was over, the president, after having
consulted the members, turned to Kartinkin, with an expression that
plainly said: Now we shall find out the whole truth down to the minutest
detail.

"Peasant Simeon Kartinkin," he said, stooping to the left.

Simeon Kartinkin got up, stretched his arms down his sides, and leaning
forward with his whole body, continued moving his cheeks inaudibly.

"You are accused of having on the 17th January, 188--, together with
Euphemia Botchkova and Katerina Maslova, stolen money from a portmanteau
belonging to the merchant Smelkoff, and then, having procured some
arsenic, persuaded Katerina Maslova to give it to the merchant Smelkoff
in a glass of brandy, which was the cause of Smelkoff's death. Do you
plead guilty?" said the president, stooping to the right.

"Not nohow, because our business is to attend on the lodgers, and--"

"You'll tell us that afterwards. Do you plead guilty?"

"Oh, no, sir. I only,--"

"You'll tell us that afterwards. Do you plead guilty?" quietly and
firmly asked the president.

"Can't do such a thing, because that--"

The usher again rushed up to Simeon Kartinkin, and stopped him in a
tragic whisper.

The president moved the hand with which he held the paper and placed the
elbow in a different position with an air that said: "This is finished,"
and turned to Euphemia Botchkova.

"Euphemia Botchkova, you are accused of having, on the 17th of January,
188-, in the lodging-house Mauritania, together with Simeon Kartinkin
and Katerina Maslova, stolen some money and a ring out of the merchant
Smelkoff's portmanteau, and having shared the money among yourselves,
given poison to the merchant Smelkoff, thereby causing his death. Do you
plead guilty?"

"I am not guilty of anything," boldly and firmly replied the prisoner.
"I never went near the room, but when this baggage went in she did the
whole business."

"You will say all this afterwards," the president again said, quietly
and firmly. "So you do not plead guilty?"

"I did not take the money nor give the drink, nor go into the room. Had
I gone in I should have kicked her out."

"So you do not plead guilty?"

"Never."

"Very well."

"Katerina Maslova," the president began, turning to the third prisoner,
"you are accused of having come from the brothel with the key of the
merchant Smelkoff's portmanteau, money, and a ring." He said all this
like a lesson learned by heart, leaning towards the member on his left,
who was whispering into his ear that a bottle mentioned in the list
of the material evidence was missing. "Of having stolen out of the
portmanteau money and a ring," he repeated, "and shared it. Then,
returning to the lodging house Mauritania with Smelkoff, of giving
him poison in his drink, and thereby causing his death. Do you plead
guilty?"

"I am not guilty of anything," she began rapidly. "As I said before
I say again, I did not take it--I did not take it; I did not take
anything, and the ring he gave me himself."

"You do not plead guilty of having stolen 2,500 roubles?" asked the
president.

"I've said I took nothing but the 40 roubles."

"Well, and do you plead guilty of having given the merchant Smelkoff a
powder in his drink?"

"Yes, that I did. Only I believed what they told me, that they were
sleeping powders, and that no harm could come of them. I never thought,
and never wished. . . God is my witness; I say, I never meant this," she
said.

"So you do not plead guilty of having stolen the money and the ring from
the merchant Smelkoff, but confess that you gave him the powder?" said
the president.

"Well, yes, I do confess this, but I thought they were sleeping powders.
I only gave them to make him sleep; I never meant and never thought of
worse."

"Very well," said the president, evidently satisfied with the results
gained. "Now tell us how it all happened," and he leaned back in his
chair and put his folded hands on the table. "Tell us all about it. A
free and full confession will be to your advantage."

Maslova continued to look at the president in silence, and blushing.

"Tell us how it happened."

"How it happened?" Maslova suddenly began, speaking quickly. "I came to
the lodging-house, and was shown into the room. He was there, already
very drunk." She pronounced the word _he_ with a look of horror in her
wide-open eyes. "I wished to go away, but he would not let me." She
stopped, as if having lost the thread, or remembered some thing else.

"Well, and then?"

"Well, what then? I remained a bit, and went home again."

At this moment the public prosecutor raised himself a little, leaning on
one elbow in an awkward manner.

"You would like to put a question?" said the president, and having
received an answer in the affirmative, he made a gesture inviting the
public prosecutor to speak.

"I want to ask, was the prisoner previously acquainted with Simeon
Kartinkin?" said the public prosecutor, without looking at Maslova, and,
having put the question, he compressed his lips and frowned.

The president repeated the question. Maslova stared at the public
prosecutor, with a frightened look.

"With Simeon? Yes," she said.

"I should like to know what the prisoner's acquaintance with Kartinkin
consisted in. Did they meet often?"

"Consisted in? . . . He invited me for the lodgers; it was not an
acquaintance at all," answered Maslova, anxiously moving her eyes from
the president to the public prosecutor and back to the president.

"I should like to know why Kartinkin invited only Maslova, and none
of the other girls, for the lodgers?" said the public prosecutor, with
half-closed eyes and a cunning, Mephistophelian smile.

"I don't know. How should I know?" said Maslova, casting a frightened
look round, and fixing her eyes for a moment on Nekhludoff. "He asked
whom he liked."

"Is it possible that she has recognised me?" thought Nekhludoff, and the
blood rushed to his face. But Maslova turned away without distinguishing
him from the others, and again fixed her eyes anxiously on the public
prosecutor.

"So the prisoner denies having had any intimate relations with
Kartinkin? Very well, I have no more questions to ask."

And the public prosecutor took his elbow off the desk, and began writing
something. He was not really noting anything down, but only going over
the letters of his notes with a pen, having seen the procureur and
leading advocates, after putting a clever question, make a note, with
which, later on, to annihilate their adversaries.

The president did not continue at once, because he was consulting the
member with the spectacles, whether he was agreed that the questions
(which had all been prepared be forehand and written out) should be put.

"Well! What happened next?" he then went on.

"I came home," looking a little more boldly only at the president, "and
went to bed. Hardly had I fallen asleep when one of our girls, Bertha,
woke me. 'Go, your merchant has come again!' He"--she again uttered the
word _he_ with evident horror--"he kept treating our girls, and then
wanted to send for more wine, but his money was all gone, and he sent me
to his lodgings and told me where the money was, and how much to take.
So I went."

The president was whispering to the member on his left, but, in order to
appear as if he had heard, he repeated her last words.

"So you went. Well, what next?"

"I went, and did all he told me; went into his room. I did not go alone,
but called Simeon Kartinkin and her," she said, pointing to Botchkova.

"That's a lie; I never went in," Botchkova began, but was stopped.

"In their presence I took out four notes," continued Maslova, frowning,
without looking at Botchkova.

"Yes, but did the prisoner notice," again asked the prosecutor, "how
much money there was when she was getting out the 40 roubles?"

Maslova shuddered when the prosecutor addressed her; she did not know
why it was, but she felt that he wished her evil.

"I did not count it, but only saw some 100-rouble notes."

"Ah! The prisoner saw 100-rouble notes. That's all?"

"Well, so you brought back the money," continued the president, looking
at the clock.

"I did."

"Well, and then?"

"Then he took me back with him," said Maslova.

"Well, and how did you give him the powder? In his drink?"

"How did I give it? I put them in and gave it him."

"Why did you give it him?"

She did not answer, but sighed deeply and heavily.

"He would not let me go," she said, after a moment's silence, "and I was
quite tired out, and so I went out into the passage and said to Simeon,
'If he would only let me go, I am so tired.' And he said, 'We are also
sick of him; we were thinking of giving him a sleeping draught; he will
fall asleep, and then you can go.' So I said all right. I thought they
were harmless, and he gave me the packet. I went in. He was lying behind
the partition, and at once called for brandy. I took a bottle of 'fine
champagne' from the table, poured out two glasses, one for him and one
for myself, and put the powders into his glass, and gave it him. Had I
known how could I have given them to him?"

"Well, and how did the ring come into your possession?" asked the
president. "When did he give it you?"

"That was when we came back to his lodgings. I wanted to go away, and he
gave me a knock on the head and broke my comb. I got angry and said I'd
go away, and he took the ring off his finger and gave it to me so that I
should not go," she said.

Then the public prosecutor again slightly raised himself, and, putting
on an air of simplicity, asked permission to put a few more questions,
and, having received it, bending his head over his embroidered collar,
he said: "I should like to know how long the prisoner remained in the
merchant Smelkoff's room."

Maslova again seemed frightened, and she again looked anxiously from the
public prosecutor to the president, and said hurriedly:

"I do not remember how long."

"Yes, but does the prisoner remember if she went anywhere else in the
lodging-house after she left Smelkoff?"

Maslova considered for a moment. "Yes, I did go into an empty room next
to his."

"Yes, and why did you go in?" asked the public prosecutor, forgetting
himself, and addressing her directly.

"I went in to rest a bit, and to wait for an isvostchik."

"And was Kartinkin in the room with the prisoner, or not?"

"He came in."

"Why did he come in?"

"There was some of the merchant's brandy left, and we finished it
together."

"Oh, finished it together. Very well! And did the prisoner talk to
Kartinkin, and, if so, what about?"

Maslova suddenly frowned, blushed very red, and said, hurriedly, "What
about? I did not talk about anything, and that's all I know. Do what you
like with me; I am not guilty, and that's all."

"I have nothing more to ask," said the prosecutor, and, drawing up his
shoulders in an unnatural manner, began writing down, as the prisoner's
own evidence, in the notes for his speech, that she had been in the
empty room with Kartinkin.

There was a short silence.

"You have nothing more to say?"

"I have told everything," she said, with a sigh, and sat down.

Then the president noted something down, and, having listened to
something that the member on his left whispered to him, he announced
a ten-minutes' interval, rose hurriedly, and left the court. The
communication he had received from the tall, bearded member with
the kindly eyes was that the member, having felt a slight stomach
derangement, wished to do a little massage and to take some drops. And
this was why an interval was made.

When the judges had risen, the advocates, the jury, and the witnesses
also rose, with the pleasant feeling that part of the business was
finished, and began moving in different directions.

Nekhludoff went into the jury's room, and sat down by the window.



CHAPTER XII.

TWELVE YEARS BEFORE.

"Yes, this was Katusha."

The relations between Nekhludoff and Katusha had been the following:

Nekhludoff first saw Katusha when he was a student in his third year
at the University, and was preparing an essay on land tenure during
the summer vacation, which he passed with his aunts. Until then he had
always lived, in summer, with his mother and sister on his mother's
large estate near Moscow. But that year his sister had married, and his
mother had gone abroad to a watering-place, and he, having his essay to
write, resolved to spend the summer with his aunts. It was very quiet
in their secluded estate and there was nothing to distract his mind; his
aunts loved their nephew and heir very tenderly, and he, too, was fond
of them and of their simple, old-fashioned life.

During that summer on his aunts' estate, Nekhludoff passed through that
blissful state of existence when a young man for the first time, without
guidance from any one outside, realises all the beauty and significance
of life, and the importance of the task allotted in it to man; when he
grasps the possibility of unlimited advance towards perfection for one's
self and for all the world, and gives himself to this task, not only
hopefully, but with full conviction of attaining to the perfection
he imagines. In that year, while still at the University, he had read
Spencer's Social Statics, and Spencer's views on landholding especially
impressed him, as he himself was heir to large estates. His father had
not been rich, but his mother had received 10,000 acres of land for her
dowry. At that time he fully realised all the cruelty and injustice of
private property in land, and being one of those to whom a sacrifice
to the demands of conscience gives the highest spiritual enjoyment, he
decided not to retain property rights, but to give up to the peasant
labourers the land he had inherited from his father. It was on this land
question he wrote his essay.

He arranged his life on his aunts' estate in the following manner. He
got up very early, sometimes at three o'clock, and before sunrise went
through the morning mists to bathe in the river, under the hill.
He returned while the dew still lay on the grass and the flowers.
Sometimes, having finished his coffee, he sat down with his books of
reference and his papers to write his essay, but very often, instead of
reading or writing, he left home again, and wandered through the fields
and the woods. Before dinner he lay down and slept somewhere in the
garden. At dinner he amused and entertained his aunts with his bright
spirits, then he rode on horseback or went for a row on the river, and
in the evening he again worked at his essay, or sat reading or playing
patience with his aunts.

His joy in life was so great that it agitated him, and kept him awake
many a night, especially when it was moonlight, so that instead of
sleeping he wandered about in the garden till dawn, alone with his
dreams and fancies.

And so, peacefully and happily, he lived through the first month of his
stay with his aunts, taking no particular notice of their half-ward,
half-servant, the black-eyed, quick-footed Katusha. Then, at the age
of nineteen, Nekhludoff, brought up under his mother's wing, was still
quite pure. If a woman figured in his dreams at all it was only as a
wife. All the other women, who, according to his ideas he could not
marry, were not women for him, but human beings.

But on Ascension Day that summer, a neighbour of his aunts', and her
family, consisting of two young daughters, a schoolboy, and a young
artist of peasant origin who was staying with them, came to spend the
day. After tea they all went to play in the meadow in front of the
house, where the grass had already been mown. They played at the game
of gorelki, and Katusha joined them. Running about and changing partners
several times, Nekhludoff caught Katusha, and she became his partner.
Up to this time he had liked Katusha's looks, but the possibility of any
nearer relations with her had never entered his mind.

"Impossible to catch those two," said the merry young artist, whose turn
it was to catch, and who could run very fast with his short, muscular
legs.

"You! And not catch us?" said Katusha.

"One, two, three," and the artist clapped his hands. Katusha, hardly
restraining her laughter, changed places with Nekhludoff, behind the
artist's back, and pressing his large hand with her little rough one,
and rustling with her starched petticoat, ran to the left. Nekhludoff
ran fast to the right, trying to escape from the artist, but when he
looked round he saw the artist running after Katusha, who kept well
ahead, her firm young legs moving rapidly. There was a lilac bush in
front of them, and Katusha made a sign with her head to Nekhludoff to
join her behind it, for if they once clasped hands again they were safe
from their pursuer, that being a rule of the game. He understood the
sign, and ran behind the bush, but he did not know that there was a
small ditch overgrown with nettles there. He stumbled and fell into the
nettles, already wet with dew, stinging his bands, but rose immediately,
laughing at his mishap.

Katusha, with her eyes black as sloes, her face radiant with joy, was
flying towards him, and they caught hold of each other's hands.

"Got stung, I daresay?" she said, arranging her hair with her free hand,
breathing fast and looking straight up at him with a glad, pleasant
smile.

"I did not know there was a ditch here," he answered, smiling also, and
keeping her hand in his. She drew nearer to him, and he himself, not
knowing how it happened, stooped towards her. She did not move away, and
he pressed her hand tight and kissed her on the lips.

"There! You've done it!" she said; and, freeing her hand with a swift
movement, ran away from him. Then, breaking two branches of white lilac
from which the blossoms were already falling, she began fanning her hot
face with them; then, with her head turned back to him, she walked away,
swaying her arms briskly in front of her, and joined the other players.

After this there grew up between Nekhludoff and Katusha those peculiar
relations which often exist between a pure young man and girl who are
attracted to each other.

When Katusha came into the room, or even when he saw her white apron
from afar, everything brightened up in Nekhludoff's eyes, as when the
sun appears everything becomes more interesting, more joyful, more
important. The whole of life seemed full of gladness. And she felt the
same. But it was not only Katusha's presence that had this effect on
Nekhludoff. The mere thought that Katusha existed (and for her that
Nekhludoff existed) had this effect.

When he received an unpleasant letter from his mother, or could not get
on with his essay, or felt the unreasoning sadness that young people are
often subject to, he had only to remember Katusha and that he should see
her, and it all vanished. Katusha had much work to do in the house, but
she managed to get a little leisure for reading, and Nekhludoff gave her
Dostoievsky and Tourgeneff (whom he had just read himself) to read. She
liked Tourgeneff's Lull best. They had talks at moments snatched when
meeting in the passage, on the veranda, or the yard, and sometimes
in the room of his aunts' old servant, Matrona Pavlovna, with whom he
sometimes used to drink tea, and where Katusha used to work.

These talks in Matrona Pavlovna's presence were the pleasantest. When
they were alone it was worse. Their eyes at once began to say something
very different and far more important than what their mouths uttered.
Their lips puckered, and they felt a kind of dread of something that
made them part quickly. These relations continued between Nekhludoff
and Katusha during the whole time of his first visit to his aunts'.
They noticed it, and became frightened, and even wrote to Princess
Elena Ivanovna, Nekhludoff's mother. His aunt, Mary Ivanovna, was
afraid Dmitri would form an intimacy with Katusha; but her fears were
groundless, for Nekhludoff, himself hardly conscious of it, loved
Katusha, loved her as the pure love, and therein lay his safety--his and
hers. He not only did not feel any desire to possess her, but the very
thought of it filled him with horror. The fears of the more poetical
Sophia Ivanovna, that Dmitri, with his thoroughgoing, resolute
character, having fallen in love with a girl, might make up his mind to
marry her, without considering either her birth or her station, had more
ground.

Had Nekhludoff at that time been conscious of his love for Katusha, and
especially if he had been told that he could on no account join his life
with that of a girl in her position, it might have easily happened
that, with his usual straight-forwardness, he would have come to the
conclusion that there could be no possible reason for him not to marry
any girl whatever, as long as he loved her. But his aunts did not
mention their fears to him; and, when he left, he was still unconscious
of his love for Katusha. He was sure that what he felt for Katusha was
only one of the manifestations of the joy of life that filled his whole
being, and that this sweet, merry little girl shared this joy with him.
Yet, when he was going away, and Katusha stood with his aunts in the
porch, and looked after him, her dark, slightly-squinting eyes filled
with tears, he felt, after all, that he was leaving something beautiful,
precious, something which would never reoccur. And he grew very sad.

"Good-bye, Katusha," he said, looking across Sophia Ivanovna's cap as he
was getting into the trap. "Thank you for everything."

"Good-bye, Dmitri Ivanovitch," she said, with her pleasant, tender
voice, keeping back the tears that filled her eyes--and ran away into
the hall, where she could cry in peace.



CHAPTER XIII.

LIFE IN THE ARMY.

After that Nekhludoff did not see Katusha for more than three years.
When he saw her again he had just been promoted to the rank of officer
and was going to join his regiment. On the way he came to spend a few
days with his aunts, being now a very different young man from the one
who had spent the summer with them three years before. He then had been
an honest, unselfish lad, ready to sacrifice himself for any good cause;
now he was depraved and selfish, and thought only of his own enjoyment.
Then God's world seemed a mystery which he tried enthusiastically and
joyfully to solve; now everything in life seemed clear and simple,
defined by the conditions of the life he was leading. Then he had felt
the importance of, and had need of intercourse with, nature, and with
those who had lived and thought and felt before him--philosophers
and poets. What he now considered necessary and important were human
institutions and intercourse with his comrades. Then women seemed
mysterious and charming--charming by the very mystery that enveloped
them; now the purpose of women, all women except those of his own family
and the wives of his friends, was a very definite one: women were the
best means towards an already experienced enjoyment. Then money was not
needed, and he did not require even one-third of what his mother allowed
him; but now this allowance of 1,500 roubles a month did not suffice,
and he had already had some unpleasant talks about it with his mother.

Then he had looked on his spirit as the I; now it was his healthy strong
animal I that he looked upon as himself.

And all this terrible change had come about because he had ceased to
believe himself and had taken to believing others. This he had done
because it was too difficult to live believing one's self; believing
one's self, one had to decide every question not in favour of one's own
animal life, which is always seeking for easy gratifications, but almost
in every case against it. Believing others there was nothing to decide;
everything had been decided already, and decided always in favour of the
animal I and against the spiritual. Nor was this all. Believing in his
own self he was always exposing himself to the censure of those around
him; believing others he had their approval. So, when Nekhludoff had
talked of the serious matters of life, of God, truth, riches, and
poverty, all round him thought it out of place and even rather funny,
and his mother and aunts called him, with kindly irony, notre cher
philosophe. But when he read novels, told improper anecdotes, went
to see funny vaudevilles in the French theatre and gaily repeated the
jokes, everybody admired and encouraged him. When he considered it
right to limit his needs, wore an old overcoat, took no wine, everybody
thought it strange and looked upon it as a kind of showing off; but
when he spent large sums on hunting, or on furnishing a peculiar and
luxurious study for himself, everybody admired his taste and gave him
expensive presents to encourage his hobby. While he kept pure and meant
to remain so till he married his friends prayed for his health, and even
his mother was not grieved but rather pleased when she found out that
he had become a real man and had gained over some French woman from his
friend. (As to the episode with Katusha, the princess could not without
horror think that he might possibly have married her.) In the same way,
when Nekhludoff came of age, and gave the small estate he had inherited
from his father to the peasants because he considered the holding
of private property in land wrong, this step filled his mother and
relations with dismay and served as an excuse for making fun of him to
all his relatives. He was continually told that these peasants, after
they had received the land, got no richer, but, on the contrary, poorer,
having opened three public-houses and left off doing any work. But when
Nekhludoff entered the Guards and spent and gambled away so much with
his aristocratic companions that Elena Ivanovna, his mother, had to draw
on her capital, she was hardly pained, considering it quite natural
and even good that wild oats should be sown at an early age and in good
company, as her son was doing. At first Nekhludoff struggled, but all
that he had considered good while he had faith in himself was considered
bad by others, and what he had considered evil was looked upon as good
by those among whom he lived, and the struggle grew too hard. And at
last Nekhludoff gave in, i.e., left off believing himself and began
believing others. At first this giving up of faith in himself was
unpleasant, but it did not long continue to be so. At that time he
acquired the habit of smoking, and drinking wine, and soon got over this
unpleasant feeling and even felt great relief.

Nekhludoff, with his passionate nature, gave himself thoroughly to the
new way of life so approved of by all those around, and he entirely
stifled the inner voice which demanded something different. This began
after he moved to St. Petersburg, and reached its highest point when he
entered the army.

Military life in general depraves men. It places them in conditions of
complete idleness, i.e., absence of all useful work; frees them of their
common human duties, which it replaces by merely conventional ones to
the honour of the regiment, the uniform, the flag; and, while giving
them on the one hand absolute power over other men, also puts them into
conditions of servile obedience to those of higher rank than themselves.

But when, to the usual depraving influence of military service with its
honours, uniforms, flags, its permitted violence and murder, there is
added the depraving influence of riches and nearness to and intercourse
with members of the Imperial family, as is the case in the chosen
regiment of the Guards in which all the officers are rich and of good
family, then this depraving influence creates in the men who succumb
to it a perfect mania of selfishness. And this mania of selfishness
attacked Nekhludoff from the moment he entered the army and began living
in the way his companions lived. He had no occupation whatever except
to dress in a uniform, splendidly made and well brushed by other people,
and, with arms also made and cleaned and handed to him by others, ride
to reviews on a fine horse which had been bred, broken in and fed by
others. There, with other men like himself, he had to wave a sword,
shoot off guns, and teach others to do the same. He had no other work,
and the highly-placed persons, young and old, the Tsar and those near
him, not only sanctioned his occupation but praised and thanked him for
it.

After this was done, it was thought important to eat, and particularly
to drink, in officers' clubs or the salons of the best restaurants,
squandering large sums of money, which came from some invisible source;
then theatres, ballets, women, then again riding on horseback, waving
of swords and shooting, and again the squandering of money, the wine,
cards, and women. This kind of life acts on military men even more
depravingly than on others, because if any other than a military man
lead such a life he cannot help being ashamed of it in the depth of his
heart. A military man is, on the contrary, proud of a life of this kind
especially at war time, and Nekhludoff had entered the army just after
war with the Turks had been declared. "We are prepared to sacrifice
our lives at the wars, and therefore a gay, reckless life is not only
pardonable, but absolutely necessary for us, and so we lead it."

Such were Nekhludoff's confused thoughts at this period of his
existence, and he felt all the time the delight of being free of the
moral barriers he had formerly set himself. And the state he lived in
was that of a chronic mania of selfishness. He was in this state when,
after three years' absence, he came again to visit his aunts.



CHAPTER XIV.

THE SECOND MEETING WITH MASLOVA.

Nekhludoff went to visit his aunts because their estate lay near the
road he had to travel in order to join his regiment, which had gone
forward, because they had very warmly asked him to come, and especially
because he wanted to see Katusha. Perhaps in his heart he had already
formed those evil designs against Katusha which his now uncontrolled
animal self suggested to him, but he did not acknowledge this as his
intention, but only wished to go back to the spot where he had been so
happy, to see his rather funny, but dear, kind-hearted old aunts, who
always, without his noticing it, surrounded him with an atmosphere of
love and admiration, and to see sweet Katusha, of whom he had retained
so pleasant a memory.

He arrived at the end of March, on Good Friday, after the thaw had set
in. It was pouring with rain so that he had not a dry thread on him and
was feeling very cold, but yet vigorous and full of spirits, as always
at that time. "Is she still with them?" he thought, as he drove into the
familiar, old-fashioned courtyard, surrounded by a low brick wall, and
now filled with snow off the roofs.

He expected she would come out when she heard the sledge bells but she
did not. Two bare-footed women with pails and tucked-up skirts, who had
evidently been scrubbing the floors, came out of the side door. She was
not at the front door either, and only Tikhon, the man-servant, with his
apron on, evidently also busy cleaning, came out into the front porch.
His aunt Sophia Ivanovna alone met him in the ante-room; she had a silk
dress on and a cap on her head. Both aunts had been to church and had
received communion.

"Well, this is nice of you to come," said Sophia Ivanovna, kissing him.
"Mary is not well, got tired in church; we have been to communion."

"I congratulate you, Aunt Sophia," [it is usual in Russia to
congratulate those who have received communion] said Nekhludoff, kissing
Sophia Ivanovna's hand. "Oh, I beg your pardon, I have made you wet."

"Go to your room--why you are soaking wet. Dear me, you have got
moustaches! . . . Katusha! Katusha! Get him some coffee; be quick."

"Directly," came the sound of a well-known, pleasant voice from the
passage, and Nekhludoff's heart cried out "She's here!" and it was as if
the sun had come out from behind the clouds.

Nekhludoff, followed by Tikhon, went gaily to his old room to change his
things. He felt inclined to ask Tikhon about Katusha; how she was,
what she was doing, was she not going to be married? But Tikhon was so
respectful and at the same time so severe, insisted so firmly on pouring
the water out of the jug for him, that Nekhludoff could not make up
his mind to ask him about Katusha, but only inquired about Tikhon's
grandsons, about the old so-called "brother's" horse, and about the
dog Polkan. All were alive except Polkan, who had gone mad the summer
before.

When he had taken off all his wet things and just begun to dress again,
Nekhludoff heard quick, familiar footsteps and a knock at the door.
Nekhludoff knew the steps and also the knock. No one but she walked and
knocked like that.

Having thrown his wet greatcoat over his shoulders, he opened the door.

"Come in." It was she, Katusha, the same, only sweeter than before. The
slightly squinting naive black eyes looked up in the same old way. Now
as then, she had on a white apron. She brought him from his aunts
a piece of scented soap, with the wrapper just taken off, and two
towels--one a long Russian embroidered one, the other a bath towel. The
unused soap with the stamped inscription, the towels, and her own self,
all were equally clean, fresh, undefiled and pleasant. The irrepressible
smile of joy at the sight of him made the sweet, firm lips pucker up as
of old.

"How do you do, Dmitri Ivanovitch?" she uttered with difficulty, her
face suffused with a rosy blush.

"Good-morning! How do you do?" he said, also blushing. "Alive and well?"

"Yes, the Lord be thanked. And here is your favorite pink soap and
towels from your aunts," she said, putting the soap on the table and
hanging the towels over the back of a chair.

"There is everything here," said Tikhon, defending the visitor's
independence, and pointing to Nekhludoff's open dressing case filled
with brushes, perfume, fixatoire, a great many bottles with silver lids
and all sorts of toilet appliances.

"Thank my aunts, please. Oh, how glad I am to be here," said Nekhludoff,
his heart filling with light and tenderness as of old.

She only smiled in answer to these words, and went out. The aunts, who
had always loved Nekhludoff, welcomed him this time more warmly than
ever. Dmitri was going to the war, where he might be wounded or killed,
and this touched the old aunts. Nekhludoff had arranged to stay only a
day and night with his aunts, but when he had seen Katusha he agreed to
stay over Easter with them and telegraphed to his friend Schonbock, whom
he was to have joined in Odessa, that he should come and meet him at his
aunts' instead.

As soon as he had seen Katusha Nekhludoff's old feelings toward her
awoke again. Now, just as then, he could not see her white apron without
getting excited; he could not listen to her steps, her voice, her laugh,
without a feeling of joy; he could not look at her eyes, black as sloes,
without a feeling of tenderness, especially when she smiled; and, above
all, he could not notice without agitation how she blushed when they
met. He felt he was in love, but not as before, when this love was a
kind of mystery to him and he would not own, even to himself, that he
loved, and when he was persuaded that one could love only once; now he
knew he was in love and was glad of it, and knew dimly what this love
consisted of and what it might lead to, though he sought to conceal
it even from himself. In Nekhludoff, as in every man, there were two
beings: one the spiritual, seeking only that kind of happiness for him
self which should tend towards the happiness of all; the other, the
animal man, seeking only his own happiness, and ready to sacrifice to it
the happiness of the rest of the world. At this period of his mania of
self-love brought on by life in Petersburg and in the army, this animal
man ruled supreme and completely crushed the spiritual man in him.

But when he saw Katusha and experienced the same feelings as he had had
three years before, the spiritual man in him raised its head once more
and began to assert its rights. And up to Easter, during two whole days,
an unconscious, ceaseless inner struggle went on in him.

He knew in the depths of his soul that he ought to go away, that there
was no real reason for staying on with his aunts, knew that no good
could come of it; and yet it was so pleasant, so delightful, that he did
not honestly acknowledge the facts to himself and stayed on. On Easter
eve, the priest and the deacon who came to the house to say mass had had
(so they said) the greatest difficulty in getting over the three miles
that lay between the church and the old ladies' house, coming across the
puddles and the bare earth in a sledge.

Nekhludoff attended the mass with his aunts and the servants, and kept
looking at Katusha, who was near the door and brought in the censers
for the priests. Then having given the priests and his aunts the Easter
kiss, though it was not midnight and therefore not Easter yet, he was
already going to bed when he heard the old servant Matrona Pavlovna
preparing to go to the church to get the koulitch and paski [Easter
cakes] blest after the midnight service. "I shall go too," he thought.

The road to the church was impassable either in a sledge or on wheels,
so Nekhludoff, who behaved in his aunts' house just as he did at home,
ordered the old horse, "the brother's horse," to be saddled, and instead
of going to bed he put on his gay uniform, a pair of tight-fitting
riding breeches and his overcoat, and got on the old over-fed and heavy
horse, which neighed continually all the way as he rode in the dark
through the puddles and snow to the church.



CHAPTER XV.

THE EARLY MASS.

For Nekhludoff this early mass remained for ever after one of the
brightest and most vivid memories of his life. When he rode out of the
darkness, broken only here and there by patches of white snow, into the
churchyard illuminated by a row of lamps around the church, the service
had already begun.

The peasants, recognising Mary Ivanovna's nephew, led his horse, which
was pricking up its ears at the sight of the lights, to a dry place
where he could get off, put it up for him, and showed him into the
church, which was full of people. On the right stood the peasants; the
old men in home-spun coats, and clean white linen bands [long strips of
linen are worn by the peasants instead of stockings] wrapped round their
legs, the young men in new cloth coats, bright-coloured belts round
their waists, and top-boots.

On the left stood the women, with red silk kerchiefs on their
heads, black velveteen sleeveless jackets, bright red shirt-sleeves,
gay-coloured green, blue, and red skirts, and thick leather boots.
The old women, dressed more quietly, stood behind them, with white
kerchiefs, homespun coats, old-fashioned skirts of dark home-spun
material, and shoes on their feet. Gaily-dressed children, their hair
well oiled, went in and out among them.

The men, making the sign of the cross, bowed down and raised their heads
again, shaking back their hair.

The women, especially the old ones, fixed their eyes on an icon
surrounded with candies and made the sign of the cross, firmly pressing
their folded fingers to the kerchief on their foreheads, to their
shoulders, and their stomachs, and, whispering something, stooped
or knelt down. The children, imitating the grown-up people, prayed
earnestly when they knew that they were being observed. The gilt case
containing the icon glittered, illuminated on all sides by tall candles
ornamented with golden spirals. The candelabra was filled with tapers,
and from the choir sounded most merry tunes sung by amateur choristers,
with bellowing bass and shrill boys' voices among them.

Nekhludoff passed up to the front. In the middle of the church stood
the aristocracy of the place: a landed proprietor, with his wife and
son (the latter dressed in a sailor's suit), the police officer, the
telegraph clerk, a tradesman in top-boots, and the village elder, with
a medal on his breast; and to the right of the ambo, just behind the
landed proprietor's wife, stood Matrona Pavlovna in a lilac dress and
fringed shawl and Katusha in a white dress with a tucked bodice, blue
sash, and red bow in her black hair.

Everything seemed festive, solemn, bright, and beautiful: the priest in
his silver cloth vestments with gold crosses; the deacon, the clerk and
chanter in their silver and gold surplices; the amateur choristers in
their best clothes, with their well-oiled hair; the merry tunes of the
holiday hymns that sounded like dance music; and the continual blessing
of the people by the priests, who held candles decorated with flowers,
and repeated the cry of "Christ is risen!" "Christ is risen!" All was
beautiful; but, above all, Katusha, in her white dress, blue sash, and
the red bow on her black head, her eyes beaming with rapture.

Nekhludoff knew that she felt his presence without looking at him. He
noticed this as he passed her, walking up to the altar. He had nothing
to tell her, but he invented something to say and whispered as he passed
her: "Aunt told me that she would break her fast after the late mass."
The young blood rushed up to Katusha's sweet face, as it always did
when she looked at him. The black eyes, laughing and full of joy, gazed
naively up and remained fixed on Nekhludoff.

"I know," she said, with a smile.

At this moment the clerk was going out with a copper coffee-pot
[coffee-pots are often used for holding holy water in Russia] of holy
water in his hand, and, not noticing Katusha, brushed her with his
surplice. Evidently he brushed against Katusha through wishing to pass
Nekhludoff at a respectful distance, and Nekhludoff was surprised that
he, the clerk, did not understand that everything here, yes, and in
all the world, only existed for Katusha, and that everything else might
remain unheeded, only not she, because she was the centre of all. For
her the gold glittered round the icons; for her all these candles in
candelabra and candlesticks were alight; for her were sung these
joyful hymns, "Behold the Passover of the Lord" "Rejoice, O ye people!"
All--all that was good in the world was for her. And it seemed to him
that Katusha was aware that it was all for her when he looked at her
well-shaped figure, the tucked white dress, the wrapt, joyous expression
of her face, by which he knew that just exactly the same that was
singing in his own soul was also singing in hers.

In the interval between the early and the late mass Nekhludoff left the
church. The people stood aside to let him pass, and bowed. Some knew
him; others asked who he was.

He stopped on the steps. The beggars standing there came clamouring
round him, and he gave them all the change he had in his purse and went
down. It was dawning, but the sun had not yet risen. The people grouped
round the graves in the churchyard. Katusha had remained inside.
Nekhludoff stood waiting for her.

The people continued coming out, clattering with their nailed boots on
the stone steps and dispersing over the churchyard. A very old man with
shaking head, his aunts' cook, stopped Nekhludoff in order to give
him the Easter kiss, his old wife took an egg, dyed yellow, out of her
handkerchief and gave it to Nekhludoff, and a smiling young peasant in a
new coat and green belt also came up.

"Christ is risen," he said, with laughing eyes, and coming close to
Nekhludoff he enveloped him in his peculiar but pleasant peasant smell,
and, tickling him with his curly beard, kissed him three times straight
on the mouth with his firm, fresh lips.

While the peasant was kissing Nekhludoff and giving him a dark brown
egg, the lilac dress of Matrona Pavlovna and the dear black head with
the red bow appeared.

Katusha caught sight of him over the heads of those in front of her, and
he saw how her face brightened up.

She had come out with Matrona Pavlovna on to the porch, and stopped
there distributing alms to the beggars. A beggar with a red scab in
place of a nose came up to Katusha. She gave him something, drew nearer
him, and, evincing no sign of disgust, but her eyes still shining with
joy, kissed him three times. And while she was doing this her eyes met
Nekhludoff's with a look as if she were asking, "Is this that I am doing
right?" "Yes, dear, yes, it is right; everything is right, everything is
beautiful. I love!"

They came down the steps of the porch, and he came up to them.

He did not mean to give them the Easter kiss, but only to be nearer to
her. Matrona Pavlovna bowed her head, and said with a smile, "Christ is
risen!" and her tone implied, "To-day we are all equal." She wiped her
mouth with her handkerchief rolled into a ball and stretched her lips
towards him.

"He is, indeed," answered Nekhludoff, kissing her. Then he looked
at Katusha; she blushed, and drew nearer. "Christ is risen, Dmitri
Ivanovitch."

"He is risen, indeed," answered Nekhludoff, and they kissed twice, then
paused as if considering whether a third kiss were necessary, and,
having decided that it was, kissed a third time and smiled.

"You are going to the priests?" asked Nekhludoff.

"No, we shall sit out here a bit, Dmitri Ivanovitch," said Katusha with
effort, as if she had accomplished some joyous task, and, her whole
chest heaving with a deep sigh, she looked straight in his face with
a look of devotion, virgin purity, and love, in her very slightly
squinting eyes.

In the love between a man and a woman there always comes a moment when
this love has reached its zenith--a moment when it is unconscious,
unreasoning, and with nothing sensual about it. Such a moment had come
for Nekhludoff on that Easter eve. When he brought Katusha back to his
mind, now, this moment veiled all else; the smooth glossy black head,
the white tucked dress closely fitting her graceful maidenly form, her,
as yet, un-developed bosom, the blushing cheeks, the tender shining
black eyes with their slight squint heightened by the sleepless night,
and her whole being stamped with those two marked features, purity and
chaste love, love not only for him (he knew that), but for everybody and
everything, not for the good alone, but for all that is in the world,
even for that beggar whom she had kissed.

He knew she had that love in her because on that night and morning
he was conscious of it in himself, and conscious that in this love he
became one with her. Ah! if it had all stopped there, at the point it
had reached that night. "Yes, all that horrible business had not yet
happened on that Easter eve!" he thought, as he sat by the window of the
jurymen's room.



CHAPTER XVI.

THE FIRST STEP.

When he returned from church Nekhludoff broke the fast with his aunts
and took a glass of spirits and some wine, having got into that habit
while with his regiment, and when he reached his room fell asleep at
once, dressed as he was. He was awakened by a knock at the door. He knew
it was her knock, and got up, rubbing his eyes and stretching himself.

"Katusha, is it you? Come in," said he.

She opened the door.

"Dinner is ready," she said. She still had on the same white dress, but
not the bow in her hair. She looked at him with a smile, as if she had
communicated some very good news to him.

"I am coming," he answered, as he rose, taking his comb to arrange his
hair.

She stood still for a minute, and he, noticing it, threw down his comb
and made a step towards her, but at that very moment she turned suddenly
and went with quick light steps along the strip of carpet in the middle
of the passage.

"Dear me, what a fool I am," thought Nekhludoff. "Why did I not stop
her?" What he wanted her for he did not know himself, but he felt that
when she came into his room something should have been done, something
that is generally done on such occasions, and that he had left it
undone.

"Katusha, wait," he said.

"What do you want?" she said, stopping.

"Nothing, only--" and, with an effort, remembering how men in his
position generally behave, he put his arm round her waist.

She stood still and looked into his eyes.

"Don't, Dmitri Ivanovitch, you must not," she said, blushing to tears
and pushing away his arm with her strong hard hand. Nekhludoff let her
go, and for a moment he felt not only confused and ashamed but disgusted
with himself. He should now have believed himself, and then he would
have known that this confusion and shame were caused by the best
feelings of his soul demanding to be set free; but he thought it was
only his stupidity and that he ought to behave as every one else did. He
caught her up and kissed her on the neck.

This kiss was very different from that first thoughtless kiss behind
the lilac bush, and very different to the kiss this morning in the
churchyard. This was a dreadful kiss, and she felt it.

"Oh, what are you doing?" she cried, in a tone as if he had irreparably
broken something of priceless value, and ran quickly away.

He came into the dining-room. His aunts, elegantly dressed, their family
doctor, and a neighbour were already there. Everything seemed so very
ordinary, but in Nekhludoff a storm was raging. He understood nothing
of what was being said and gave wrong answers, thinking only of Katusha.
The sound of her steps in the passage brought back the thrill of that
last kiss and he could think of nothing else. When she came into the
room he, without looking round, felt her presence with his whole being
and had to force himself not to look at her.

After dinner he at once went into his bedroom and for a long time walked
up and down in great excitement, listening to every sound in the house
and expecting to hear her steps. The animal man inside him had now not
only lifted its head, but had succeeded in trampling under foot the
spiritual man of the days of his first visit, and even of that every
morning. That dreadful animal man alone now ruled over him.

Though he was watching for her all day he could not manage to meet her
alone. She was probably trying to evade him. In the evening, however,
she was obliged to go into the room next to his. The doctor had been
asked to stay the night, and she had to make his bed. When he heard her
go in Nekhludoff followed her, treading softly and holding his breath as
if he were going to commit a crime.

She was putting a clean pillow-case on the pillow, holding it by two of
its corners with her arms inside the pillow-case. She turned round
and smiled, not a happy, joyful smile as before, but in a frightened,
piteous way. The smile seemed to tell him that what he was doing was
wrong. He stopped for a moment. There was still the possibility of a
struggle. The voice of his real love for her, though feebly, was still
speaking of her, her feelings, her life. Another voice was saying,
"Take care I don't let the opportunity for your own happiness, your own
enjoyment, slip by!" And this second voice completely stifled the first.
He went up to her with determination and a terrible, ungovernable animal
passion took possession of him.

With his arm round he made her sit down on the bed; and feeling that
there was something more to be done he sat down beside her.

"Dmitri Ivanovitch, dear! please let me go," she said, with a piteous
voice. "Matrona Pavlovna is coming," she cried, tearing herself away.
Some one was really coming to the door.

"Well, then, I'll come to you in the night," he whispered. "You'll be
alone?"

"What are you thinking of? On no account. No, no!" she said, but only
with her lips; the tremulous confusion of her whole being said something
very different.

It was Matrona Pavlovna who had come to the door. She came in with a
blanket over her arm, looked reproachfully at Nekhludoff, and began
scolding Katusha for having taken the wrong blanket.

Nekhludoff went out in silence, but he did not even feel ashamed. He
could see by Matrona Pavlovna's face that she was blaming him, he knew
that she was blaming him with reason and felt that he was doing wrong,
but this novel, low animal excitement, having freed itself of all the
old feelings of real love for Katusha, ruled supreme, leaving room for
nothing else. He went about as if demented all the evening, now into his
aunts', then back into his own room, then out into the porch, thinking
all the time how he could meet her alone; but she avoided him, and
Matrona Pavlovna watched her closely.



CHAPTER XVII.

NEKHLUDOFF AND KATUSHA.

And so the evening passed and night came. The doctor went to bed.
Nekhludoff's aunts had also retired, and he knew that Matrona Pavlovna
was now with them in their bedroom so that Katusha was sure to be alone
in the maids' sitting-room. He again went out into the porch. It was
dark, damp and warm out of doors, and that white spring mist which
drives away the last snow, or is diffused by the thawing of the last
snow, filled the air. From the river under the hill, about a hundred
steps from the front door, came a strange sound. It was the ice
breaking. Nekhludoff came down the steps and went up to the window of
the maids' room, stepping over the puddles on the bits of glazed snow.
His heart was beating so fiercely in his breast that he seemed to hear
it, his laboured breath came and went in a burst of long-drawn sighs. In
the maids' room a small lamp was burning, and Katusha sat alone by the
table, looking thoughtfully in front of her. Nekhludoff stood a long
time without moving and waited to see what she, not knowing that she
was observed, would do. For a minute or two she did not move; then she
lifted her eyes, smiled and shook her head as if chiding herself, then
changed her pose and dropped both her arms on the table and again began
gazing down in front of her. He stood and looked at her, involuntarily
listening to the beating of his own heart and the strange sounds from
the river. There on the river, beneath the white mist, the unceasing
labour went on, and sounds as of something sobbing, cracking, dropping,
being shattered to pieces mixed with the tinkling of the thin bits of
ice as they broke against each other like glass.

There he stood, looking at Katusha's serious, suffering face, which
betrayed the inner struggle of her soul, and he felt pity for her; but,
strange though it may seem, this pity only confirmed him in his evil
intention.

He knocked at the window. She started as if she had received an electric
shock, her whole body trembled, and a look of horror came into her face.
Then she jumped up, approached the window and brought her face up to the
pane. The look of terror did not leave her face even when, holding her
hands up to her eyes like blinkers and peering through the glass, she
recognised him. Her face was unusually grave; he had never seen it so
before. She returned his smile, but only in submission to him; there was
no smile in her soul, only fear. He beckoned her with his hand to come
out into the yard to him. But she shook her head and remained by the
window. He brought his face close to the pane and was going to call out
to her, but at that moment she turned to the door; evidently some one
inside had called her. Nekhludoff moved away from the window. The fog
was so dense that five steps from the house the windows could not be
seen, but the light from the lamp shone red and huge out of a shapeless
black mass. And on the river the same strange sounds went on, sobbing
and rustling and cracking and tinkling. Somewhere in the fog, not
far off, a cock crowed; another answered, and then others, far in the
village took up the cry till the sound of the crowing blended into one,
while all around was silent excepting the river. It was the second time
the cocks crowed that night.

Nekhludoff walked up and down behind the corner of the house, and once
or twice got into a puddle. Then again came up to the window. The lamp
was still burning, and she was again sitting alone by the table as
if uncertain what to do. He had hardly approached the window when she
looked up. He knocked. Without looking who it was she at once ran out of
the room, and he heard the outside door open with a snap. He waited
for her near the side porch and put his arms round her without saying a
word. She clung to him, put up her face, and met his kiss with her lips.
Then the door again gave the same sort of snap and opened, and the voice
of Matrona Pavlovna called out angrily, "Katusha!"

She tore herself away from him and returned into the maids' room. He
heard the latch click, and then all was quiet. The red light disappeared
and only the mist remained, and the bustle on the river went on.
Nekhludoff went up to the window, nobody was to be seen; he knocked, but
got no answer. He went back into the house by the front door, but could
not sleep. He got up and went with bare feet along the passage to her
door, next to Matrona Pavlovna's room. He heard Matrona Pavlovna snoring
quietly, and was about to go on when she coughed and turned on her
creaking bed, and his heart fell, and he stood immovable for about five
minutes. When all was quiet and she began to snore peacefully again, he
went on, trying to step on the boards that did not creak, and came to
Katusha's door. There was no sound to be heard. She was probably
awake, or else he would have heard her breathing. But as soon as he
had whispered "Katusha" she jumped up and began to persuade him, as if
angrily, to go away.

"Open! Let me in just for a moment! I implore you!" He hardly knew what
he was saying.

                   * * * * * * *

When she left him, trembling and silent, giving no answer to his words,
he again went out into the porch and stood trying to understand the
meaning of what had happened.

It was getting lighter. From the river below the creaking and tinkling
and sobbing of the breaking ice came still louder and a gurgling sound
could now also be heard. The mist had begun to sink, and from above it
the waning moon dimly lighted up something black and weird.

"What was the meaning of it all? Was it a great joy or a great
misfortune that had befallen him?" he asked himself.



CHAPTER XVIII.

AFTERWARDS.

The next day the gay, handsome, and brilliant Schonbock joined
Nekhludoff at his aunts' house, and quite won their hearts by his
refined and amiable manner, his high spirits, his generosity, and his
affection for Dmitri.

But though the old ladies admired his generosity it rather perplexed
them, for it seemed exaggerated. He gave a rouble to some blind beggars
who came to the gate, gave 15 roubles in tips to the servants, and
when Sophia Ivanovna's pet dog hurt his paw and it bled, he tore his
hemstitched cambric handkerchief into strips (Sophia Ivanovna knew that
such handkerchiefs cost at least 15 roubles a dozen) and bandaged the
dog's foot. The old ladies had never met people of this kind, and did
not know that Schonbock owed 200,000 roubles which he was never going to
pay, and that therefore 25 roubles more or less did not matter a bit to
him. Schonbock stayed only one day, and he and Nekhludoff both, left
at night. They could not stay away from their regiment any longer, for
their leave was fully up.

At the stage which Nekhludoff's selfish mania had now reached he could
think of nothing but himself. He was wondering whether his conduct, if
found out, would be blamed much or at all, but he did not consider what
Katusha was now going through, and what was going to happen to her.

He saw that Schonbock guessed his relations to her and this flattered
his vanity.

"Ah, I see how it is you have taken such a sudden fancy to your aunts
that you have been living nearly a week with them," Schonbock remarked
when he had seen Katusha. "Well, I don't wonder--should have done the
same. She's charming." Nekhludoff was also thinking that though it was
a pity to go away before having fully gratified the cravings of his
love for her, yet the absolute necessity of parting had its advantages
because it put a sudden stop to relations it would have been very
difficult for him to continue. Then he thought that he ought to give her
some money, not for her, not because she might need it, but because it
was the thing to do.

So he gave her what seemed to him a liberal amount, considering his and
her station. On the day of his departure, after dinner, he went out and
waited for her at the side entrance. She flushed up when she saw him
and wished to pass by, directing his attention to the open door of the
maids' room by a look, but he stopped her.

"I have come to say good-bye," he said, crumbling in his hand an
envelope with a 100-rouble note inside. "There, I . . . "

She guessed what he meant, knit her brows, and shaking her head pushed
his hand away.

"Take it; oh, you must!" he stammered, and thrust the envelope into the
bib of her apron and ran back to his room, groaning and frowning as if
he had hurt himself. And for a long time he went up and down writhing as
in pain, and even stamping and groaning aloud as he thought of this last
scene. "But what else could I have done? Is it not what happens to every
one? And if every one does the same . . . well I suppose it can't be
helped." In this way he tried to get peace of mind, but in vain. The
recollection of what had passed burned his conscience. In his soul--in
the very depths of his soul--he knew that he had acted in a base, cruel,
cowardly manner, and that the knowledge of this act of his must prevent
him, not only from finding fault with any one else, but even from
looking straight into other people's eyes; not to mention the
impossibility of considering himself a splendid, noble, high-minded
fellow, as he did and had to do to go on living his life boldly and
merrily. There was only one solution of the problem--i.e., not to think
about it. He succeeded in doing so. The life he was now entering upon,
the new surroundings, new friends, the war, all helped him to forget.
And the longer he lived, the less he thought about it, until at last he
forgot it completely.

Once only, when, after the war, he went to see his aunts in hopes of
meeting Katusha, and heard that soon after his last visit she had left,
and that his aunts had heard she had been confined somewhere or other
and had gone quite to the bad, his heart ached. According to the time of
her confinement, the child might or might not have been his. His aunts
said she had gone wrong, that she had inherited her mother's depraved
nature, and he was pleased to hear this opinion of his aunts'. It seemed
to acquit him. At first he thought of trying to find her and her child,
but then, just because in the depths of his soul he felt so ashamed and
pained when thinking about her, he did not make the necessary effort to
find her, but tried to forget his sin again and ceased to think about
it. And now this strange coincidence brought it all back to his memory,
and demanded from him the acknowledgment of the heartless, cruel
cowardice which had made it possible for him to live these nine years
with such a sin on his conscience. But he was still far from such an
acknowledgment, and his only fear was that everything might now be found
out, and that she or her advocate might recount it all and put him to
shame before every one present.



CHAPTER XIX.

THE TRIAL--RESUMPTION.

In this state of mind Nekhludoff left the Court and went into the
jurymen's room. He sat by the window smoking all the while, and hearing
what was being said around him.

The merry merchant seemed with all his heart to sympathise with
Smelkoff's way of spending his time. "There, old fellow, that was
something like! Real Siberian fashion! He knew what he was about, no
fear! That's the sort of wench for me."

The foreman was stating his conviction, that in some way or other the
expert's conclusions were the important thing. Peter Gerasimovitch
was joking about something with the Jewish clerk, and they burst out
laughing. Nekhludoff answered all the questions addressed to him in
monosyllables and longed only to be left in peace.

When the usher, with his sideways gait, called the jury back to the
Court, Nekhludoff was seized with fear, as if he were not going to
judge, but to be judged. In the depth of his soul he felt that he was a
scoundrel, who ought to be ashamed to look people in the face, yet,
by sheer force of habit, he stepped on to the platform in his usual
self-possessed manner, and sat down, crossing his legs and playing with
his pince-nez.

The prisoners had also been led out, and were now brought in again.
There were some new faces in the Court witnesses, and Nekhludoff noticed
that Maslova could not take her eyes off a very fat woman who sat in the
row in front of the grating, very showily dressed in silk and velvet, a
high hat with a large bow on her head, and an elegant little reticule on
her arm, which was bare to the elbow. This was, as he subsequently found
out, one of the witnesses, the mistress of the establishment to which
Maslova had belonged.

The examination of the witnesses commenced: they were asked their names,
religion, etc. Then, after some consultation as to whether the witnesses
were to be sworn in or not, the old priest came in again, dragging
his legs with difficulty, and, again arranging the golden cross on his
breast, swore the witnesses and the expert in the same quiet manner,
and with the same assurance that he was doing something useful and
important.

The witnesses having been sworn, all but Kitaeva, the keeper of the
house, were led out again. She was asked what she knew about this
affair. Kitaeva nodded her head and the big hat at every sentence
and smiled affectedly. She gave a very full and intelligent account,
speaking with a strong German accent. First of all, the hotel servant
Simeon, whom she knew, came to her establishment on behalf of a rich
Siberian merchant, and she sent Lubov back with him. After a time
Lubov returned with the merchant. The merchant was already somewhat
intoxicated--she smiled as she said this--and went on drinking and
treating the girls. He was short of money. He sent this same Lubov to
his lodgings. He had taken a "predilection" to her. She looked at the
prisoner as she said this.

Nekhludoff thought he saw Maslova smile here, and this seemed disgusting
to him. A strange, indefinite feeling of loathing, mingled with
suffering, arose in him.

"And what was your opinion of Maslova?" asked the blushing and confused
applicant for a judicial post, appointed to act as Maslova's advocate.

"Zee ferry pesht," answered Kitaeva. "Zee yoong voman is etucated and
elecant. She was prought up in a coot family and can reat French. She
tid have a trop too moch sometimes, put nefer forcot herself. A ferry
coot girl."

Katusha looked at the woman, then suddenly turned her eyes on the jury
and fixed them on Nekhludoff, and her face grew serious and even severe.
One of her serious eyes squinted, and those two strange eyes for some
time gazed at Nekhludoff, who, in spite of the terrors that seized him,
could not take his look off these squinting eyes, with their bright,
clear whites.

He thought of that dreadful night, with its mist, the ice breaking on
the river below, and when the waning moon, with horns turned upwards,
that had risen towards morning, lit up something black and weird. These
two black eyes now looking at him reminded him of this weird, black
something. "She has recognised me," he thought, and Nekhludoff shrank as
if expecting a blow. But she had not recognised him. She sighed quietly
and again looked at the president. Nekhludoff also sighed. "Oh, if it
would only get on quicker," he thought.

He now felt the same loathing and pity and vexation as when, out
shooting, he was obliged to kill a wounded bird. The wounded bird
struggles in the game bag. One is disgusted and yet feels pity, and one
is in a hurry to kill the bird and forget it.

Such mixed feelings filled Nekhludoff's breast as he sat listening to
the examination of the witnesses.



CHAPTER XX.

THE TRIAL--THE MEDICAL REPORT.

But, as if to spite him, the case dragged out to a great length. After
each witness had been examined separately and the expert last of all,
and a great number of useless questions had been put, with the usual
air of importance, by the public prosecutor and by both advocates, the
president invited the jury to examine the objects offered as material
evidence. They consisted of an enormous diamond ring, which had
evidently been worn on the first finger, and a test tube in which the
poison had been analysed. These things had seals and labels attached to
them.

Just as the witnesses were about to look at these things, the public
prosecutor rose and demanded that before they did this the results of
the doctor's examination of the body should be read. The president, who
was hurrying the business through as fast as he could in order to visit
his Swiss friend, though he knew that the reading of this paper could
have no other effect than that of producing weariness and putting off
the dinner hour, and that the public prosecutor wanted it read simply
because he knew he had a right to demand it, had no option but to
express his consent.

The secretary got out the doctor's report and again began to read in his
weary lisping voice, making no distinction between the "r's" and "l's."

The external examination proved that:

"1. Theropont Smelkoff's height was six feet five inches.

"Not so bad, that. A very good size," whispered the merchant, with
interest, into Nekhludoff's ear.

"2. He looked about 40 years of age.

"3. The body was of a swollen appearance.

"4. The flesh was of a greenish colour, with dark spots in several
places.

"5. The skin was raised in blisters of different sizes and in places had
come off in large pieces.

"6. The hair was chestnut; it was thick, and separated easily from the
skin when touched.

"7. The eye-balls protruded from their sockets and the cornea had grown
dim.

"8. Out of the nostrils, both ears, and the mouth oozed serous liquid;
the mouth was half open.

"9. The neck had almost disappeared, owing to the swelling of the face
and chest."

And so on and so on.

Four pages were covered with the 27 paragraphs describing all the
details of the external examination of the enormous, fat, swollen, and
decomposing body of the merchant who had been making merry in the
town. The indefinite loathing that Nekhludoff felt was increased by the
description of the corpse. Katusha's life, and the scrum oozing from
the nostrils of the corpse, and the eyes that protruded out of their
sockets, and his own treatment of her--all seemed to belong to the same
order of things, and he felt surrounded and wholly absorbed by things of
the same nature.

When the reading of the report of the external examination was ended,
the president heaved a sigh and raised his hand, hoping it was finished;
but the secretary at once went on to the description of the internal
examination. The president's head again dropped into his hand and he
shut his eyes. The merchant next to Nekhludoff could hardly keep awake,
and now and then his body swayed to and fro. The prisoners and the
gendarmes sat perfectly quiet.

The internal examination showed that:

"1. The skin was easily detachable from the bones of the skull, and
there was no coagulated blood.

"2. The bones of the skull were of average thickness and in sound
condition.

"3. On the membrane of the brain there were two discoloured spots about
four inches long, the membrane itself being of a dull white." And so on
for 13 paragraphs more. Then followed the names and signatures of
the assistants, and the doctor's conclusion showing that the changes
observed in the stomach, and to a lesser degree in the bowels and
kidneys, at the postmortem examination, and described in the official
report, gave great probability to the conclusion that Smelkoff's death
was caused by poison which had entered his stomach mixed with alcohol.
To decide from the state of the stomach what poison had been introduced
was difficult; but it was necessary to suppose that the poison entered
the stomach mixed with alcohol, since a great quantity of the latter was
found in Smelkoff's stomach.

"He could drink, and no mistake," again whispered the merchant, who had
just waked up.

The reading of this report had taken a full hour, but it had not
satisfied the public prosecutor, for, when it had been read through and
the president turned to him, saying, "I suppose it is superfluous to
read the report of the examination of the internal organs?" he answered
in a severe tone, without looking at the president, "I shall ask to have
it read."

He raised himself a little, and showed by his manner that he had a right
to have this report read, and would claim this right, and that if that
were not granted it would serve as a cause of appeal.

The member of the Court with the big beard, who suffered from catarrh of
the stomach, feeling quite done up, turned to the president:

"What is the use of reading all this? It is only dragging it out. These
new brooms do not sweep clean; they only take a long while doing it."

The member with the gold spectacles said nothing, but only looked
gloomily in front of him, expecting nothing good, either from his wife
or life in general. The reading of the report commenced.

"In the year 188-, on February 15th, I, the undersigned, commissioned
by the medical department, made an examination, No. 638," the secretary
began again with firmness and raising the pitch of his voice as if to
dispel the sleepiness that had overtaken all present, "in the presence
of the assistant medical inspector, of the internal organs:

"1. The right lung and the heart (contained in a 6-lb. glass jar).

"2. The contents of the stomach (in a 6-lb. glass jar).

"3. The stomach itself (in a 6-lb. glass jar).

"4. The liver, the spleen and the kidneys (in a 9-lb. glass jar).

"5. The intestines (in a 9-lb. earthenware jar)."

The president here whispered to one of the members, then stooped to the
other, and having received their consent, he said: "The Court considers
the reading of this report superfluous." The secretary stopped reading
and folded the paper, and the public prosecutor angrily began to write
down something. "The gentlemen of the jury may now examine the articles
of material evidence," said the president. The foreman and several of
the others rose and went to the table, not quite knowing what to do with
their hands. They looked in turn at the glass, the test tube, and the
ring. The merchant even tried on the ring.

"Ah! that was a finger," he said, returning to his place; "like a
cucumber," he added. Evidently the image he had formed in his mind of
the gigantic merchant amused him.



CHAPTER XXI.

THE TRIAL--THE PROSECUTOR AND THE ADVOCATES.

When the examination of the articles of material evidence was finished,
the president announced that the investigation was now concluded and
immediately called on the prosecutor to proceed, hoping that as the
latter was also a man, he, too, might feel inclined to smoke or dine,
and show some mercy on the rest. But the public prosecutor showed mercy
neither to himself nor to any one else. He was very stupid by nature,
but, besides this, he had had the misfortune of finishing school with a
gold medal and of receiving a reward for his essay on "Servitude" when
studying Roman Law at the University, and was therefore self-confident
and self-satisfied in the highest degree (his success with the ladies
also conducing to this) and his stupidity had become extraordinary.

When the word was given to him, he got up slowly, showing the whole of
his graceful figure in his embroidered uniform. Putting his hand on the
desk he looked round the room, slightly bowing his head, and, avoiding
the eyes of the prisoners, began to read the speech he had prepared
while the reports were being read.

"Gentlemen of the jury! The business that now lies before you is, if I
may so express myself, very characteristic."

The speech of a public prosecutor, according to his views, should always
have a social importance, like the celebrated speeches made by the
advocates who have become distinguished. True, the audience consisted of
three women--a semptress, a cook, and Simeon's sister--and a coachman;
but this did not matter. The celebrities had begun in the same way. To
be always at the height of his position, i.e., to penetrate into the
depths of the psychological significance of crime and to discover the
wounds of society, was one of the prosecutor's principles.

"You see before you, gentlemen of the jury, a crime characteristic, if
I may so express myself, of the end of our century; bearing, so to say,
the specific features of that very painful phenomenon, the corruption to
which those elements of our present-day society, which are, so to say,
particularly exposed to the burning rays of this process, are subject."

The public prosecutor spoke at great length, trying not to forget any of
the notions he had formed in his mind, and, on the other hand, never to
hesitate, and let his speech flow on for an hour and a quarter without a
break.

Only once he stopped and for some time stood swallowing his saliva, but
he soon mastered himself and made up for the interruption by heightened
eloquence. He spoke, now with a tender, insinuating accent, stepping
from foot to foot and looking at the jury, now in quiet, business-like
tones, glancing into his notebook, then with a loud, accusing voice,
looking from the audience to the advocates. But he avoided looking at
the prisoners, who were all three fixedly gazing at him. Every new craze
then in vogue among his set was alluded to in his speech; everything
that then was, and some things that still are, considered to be the last
words of scientific wisdom: the laws of heredity and inborn criminality,
evolution and the struggle for existence, hypnotism and hypnotic
influence.

According to his definition, the merchant Smelkoff was of the genuine
Russian type, and had perished in consequence of his generous, trusting
nature, having fallen into the hands of deeply degraded individuals.

Simeon Kartinkin was the atavistic production of serfdom, a stupefied,
ignorant, unprincipled man, who had not even any religion. Euphemia was
his mistress, and a victim of heredity; all the signs of degeneration
were noticeable in her. The chief wire-puller in this affair was
Maslova, presenting the phenomenon of decadence in its lowest form.
"This woman," he said, looking at her, "has, as we have to-day heard
from her mistress in this court, received an education; she cannot only
read and write, but she knows French; she is illegitimate, and probably
carries in her the germs of criminality. She was educated in an
enlightened, noble family and might have lived by honest work, but she
deserts her benefactress, gives herself up to a life of shame in which
she is distinguished from her companions by her education, and chiefly,
gentlemen of the jury, as you have heard from her mistress, by her power
of acting on the visitors by means of that mysterious capacity lately
investigated by science, especially by the school of Charcot, known by
the name of hypnotic influence. By these means she gets hold of this
Russian, this kind-hearted Sadko, [Sadko, the hero of a legend] the rich
guest, and uses his trust in order first to rob and then pitilessly to
murder him."

"Well, he is piling it on now, isn't he?" said the president with a
smile, bending towards the serious member.

"A fearful blockhead!" said the serious member.

Meanwhile the public prosecutor went on with his speech. "Gentlemen of
the jury," gracefully swaying his body, "the fate of society is to a
certain extent in your power. Your verdict will influence it. Grasp the
full meaning of this crime, the danger that awaits society from those
whom I may perhaps be permitted to call pathological individuals, such
as Maslova. Guard it from infection; guard the innocent and strong
elements of society from contagion or even destruction."

And as if himself overcome by the significance of the expected verdict,
the public prosecutor sank into his chair, highly delighted with his
speech.

The sense of the speech, when divested of all its flowers of rhetoric,
was that Maslova, having gained the merchant's confidence, hypnotised
him and went to his lodgings with his key meaning to take all the money
herself, but having been caught in the act by Simeon and Euphemia had to
share it with them. Then, in order to hide the traces of the crime, she
had returned to the lodgings with the merchant and there poisoned him.

After the prosecutor had spoken, a middle-aged man in swallow-tail coat
and low-cut waistcoat showing a large half-circle of starched white
shirt, rose from the advocates' bench and made a speech in defence of
Kartinkin and Botchkova; this was an advocate engaged by them for 300
roubles. He acquitted them both and put all the blame on Maslova. He
denied the truth of Maslova's statements that Botchkova and Kartinkin
were with her when she took the money, laying great stress on the
point that her evidence could not be accepted, she being charged with
poisoning. "The 2,500 roubles," the advocate said, "could have been
easily earned by two honest people getting from three to five roubles
per day in tips from the lodgers. The merchant's money was stolen by
Maslova and given away, or even lost, as she was not in a normal state."

The poisoning was committed by Maslova alone; therefore he begged the
jury to acquit Kartinkin and Botchkova of stealing the money; or if they
could not acquit them of the theft, at least to admit that it was done
without any participation in the poisoning.

In conclusion the advocate remarked, with a thrust at the public
prosecutor, that "the brilliant observations of that gentleman on
heredity, while explaining scientific facts concerning heredity, were
inapplicable in this case, as Botchkova was of unknown parentage." The
public prosecutor put something down on paper with an angry look, and
shrugged his shoulders in contemptuous surprise.

Then Maslova's advocate rose, and timidly and hesitatingly began his
speech in her defence.

Without denying that she had taken part in the stealing of the money,
he insisted on the fact that she had no intention of poisoning Smelkoff,
but had given him the powder only to make him fall asleep. He tried to
go in for a little eloquence in giving a description of how Maslova was
led into a life of debauchery by a man who had remained unpunished while
she had to bear all the weight of her fall; but this excursion into the
domain of psychology was so unsuccessful that it made everybody feel
uncomfortable. When he muttered something about men's cruelty and
women's helplessness, the president tried to help him by asking him to
keep closer to the facts of the case. When he had finished the public
prosecutor got up to reply. He defended his position against the first
advocate, saying that even if Botchkova was of unknown parentage the
truth of the doctrine of heredity was thereby in no way invalidated,
since the laws of heredity were so far proved by science that we can not
only deduce the crime from heredity, but heredity from the crime. As to
the statement made in defence of Maslova, that she was the victim of an
imaginary (he laid a particularly venomous stress on the word imaginary)
betrayer, he could only say that from the evidence before them it was
much more likely that she had played the part of temptress to many and
many a victim who had fallen into her hands. Having said this he sat
down in triumph. Then the prisoners were offered permission to speak in
their own defence.

Euphemia Botchkova repeated once more that she knew nothing about it and
had taken part in nothing, and firmly laid the whole blame on Maslova.
Simeon Kartinkin only repeated several times: "It is your business, but
I am innocent; it's unjust." Maslova said nothing in her defence. Told
she might do so by the president, she only lifted her eyes to him, cast
a look round the room like a hunted animal, and, dropping her head,
began to cry, sobbing aloud.

"What is the matter?" the merchant asked Nekhludoff, hearing him utter
a strange sound. This was the sound of weeping fiercely kept back.
Nekhludoff had not yet understood the significance of his present
position, and attributed the sobs he could hardly keep back and the
tears that filled his eyes to the weakness of his nerves. He put on his
pince-nez in order to hide the tears, then got out his handkerchief and
began blowing his nose.

Fear of the disgrace that would befall him if every one in the court
knew of his conduct stifled the inner working of his soul. This fear
was, during this first period, stronger than all else.



CHAPTER XXII.

THE TRIAL--THE SUMMING UP.

After the last words of the prisoners had been heard, the form in which
the questions were to be put to the jury was settled, which also took
some time. At last the questions were formulated, and the president
began the summing up.

Before putting the case to the jury, he spoke to them for some time in a
pleasant, homely manner, explaining that burglary was burglary and theft
was theft, and that stealing from a place which was under lock and key
was stealing from a place under lock and key. While he was explaining
this, he looked several times at Nekhludoff as if wishing to impress
upon him these important facts, in hopes that, having understood it,
Nekhludoff would make his fellow-jurymen also understand it. When he
considered that the jury were sufficiently imbued with these facts, he
proceeded to enunciate another truth--namely, that a murder is an
action which has the death of a human being as its consequence, and that
poisoning could therefore also be termed murder. When, according to his
opinion, this truth had also been received by the jury, he went on to
explain that if theft and murder had been committed at the same time,
the combination of the crimes was theft with murder.

Although he was himself anxious to finish as soon as possible, although
he knew that his Swiss friend would be waiting for him, he had grown so
used to his occupation that, having begun to speak, he could not stop
himself, and therefore he went on to impress on the jury with much
detail that if they found the prisoners guilty, they would have the
right to give a verdict of guilty; and if they found them not guilty,
to give a verdict of not guilty; and if they found them guilty of one of
the crimes and not of the other, they might give a verdict of guilty
on the one count and of not guilty on the other. Then he explained that
though this right was given them they should use it with reason.

He was going to add that if they gave an affirmative answer to any
question that was put to them they would thereby affirm everything
included in the question, so that if they did not wish to affirm the
whole of the question they should mention the part of the question they
wished to be excepted. But, glancing at the clock, and seeing it was
already five minutes to three, he resolved to trust to their being
intelligent enough to understand this without further comment.

"The facts of this case are the following," began the president, and
repeated all that had already been said several times by the advocates,
the public prosecutor and the witnesses.

The president spoke, and the members on each side of him listened with
deeply-attentive expressions, but looked from time to time at the clock,
for they considered the speech too long though very good--i.e., such
as it ought to be. The public prosecutor, the lawyers, and, in fact,
everyone in the court, shared the same impression. The president
finished the summing up. Then he found it necessary to tell the jury
what they all knew, or might have found out by reading it up--i.e., how
they were to consider the case, count the votes, in case of a tie to
acquit the prisoners, and so on.

Everything seemed to have been told; but no, the president could not
forego his right of speaking as yet. It was so pleasant to hear the
impressive tones of his own voice, and therefore he found it necessary
to say a few words more about the importance of the rights given to the
jury, how carefully they should use the rights and how they ought not
to abuse them, about their being on their oath, that they were the
conscience of society, that the secrecy of the debating-room should be
considered sacred, etc.

From the time the president commenced his speech, Maslova watched him
without moving her eyes as if afraid of losing a single word; so that
Nekhludoff was not afraid of meeting her eyes and kept looking at her
all the time. And his mind passed through those phases in which a face
which we have not seen for many years first strikes us with the outward
changes brought about during the time of separation, and then gradually
becomes more and more like its old self, when the changes made by
time seem to disappear, and before our spiritual eyes rises only the
principal expression of one exceptional, unique individuality. Yes,
though dressed in a prison cloak, and in spite of the developed figure,
the fulness of the bosom and lower part of the face, in spite of a few
wrinkles on the forehead and temples and the swollen eyes, this was
certainly the same Katusha who, on that Easter eve, had so innocently
looked up to him whom she loved, with her fond, laughing eyes full of
joy and life.

"What a strange coincidence that after ten years, during which I never
saw her, this case should have come up today when I am on the jury, and
that it is in the prisoners' dock that I see her again! And how will it
end? Oh, dear, if they would only get on quicker."

Still he would not give in to the feelings of repentance which began to
arise within him. He tried to consider it all as a coincidence, which
would pass without infringing his manner of life. He felt himself in
the position of a puppy, when its master, taking it by the scruff of
its neck, rubs its nose in the mess it has made. The puppy whines, draws
back and wants to get away as far as possible from the effects of its
misdeed, but the pitiless master does not let go.

And so, Nekhludoff, feeling all the repulsiveness of what he had done,
felt also the powerful hand of the Master, but he did not feel the whole
significance of his action yet and would not recognise the Master's
hand. He did not wish to believe that it was the effect of his deed that
lay before him, but the pitiless hand of the Master held him and he felt
he could not get away. He was still keeping up his courage and sat on
his chair in the first row in his usual self-possessed pose, one leg
carelessly thrown over the other, and playing with his pince-nez. Yet
all the while, in the depths of his soul, he felt the cruelty, cowardice
and baseness, not only of this particular action of his but of his whole
self-willed, depraved, cruel, idle life; and that dreadful veil which
had in some unaccountable manner hidden from him this sin of his and
the whole of his subsequent life was beginning to shake, and he caught
glimpses of what was covered by that veil.



CHAPTER XXIII.

THE TRIAL--THE VERDICT.

At last the president finished his speech, and lifting the list of
questions with a graceful movement of his arm he handed it to the
foreman, who came up to take it. The jury, glad to be able to get
into the debating-court, got up one after the other and left the room,
looking as if a bit ashamed of themselves and again not knowing what
to do with their hands. As soon as the door was closed behind them
a gendarme came up to it, pulled his sword out of the scabbard, and,
holding it up against his shoulder, stood at the door. The judges got up
and went away. The prisoners were also led out. When the jury came
into the debating-room the first thing they did was to take out their
cigarettes, as before, and begin smoking. The sense of the unnaturalness
and falseness of their position, which all of them had experienced
while sitting in their places in the court, passed when they entered the
debating-room and started smoking, and they settled down with a feeling
of relief and at once began an animated conversation.

"'Tisn't the girl's fault. She's got mixed up in it," said the kindly
merchant. "We must recommend her to mercy."

"That's just what we are going to consider," said the foreman. "We must
not give way to our personal impressions."

"The president's summing up was good," remarked the colonel.

"Good? Why, it nearly sent me to sleep!"

"The chief point is that the servants could have known nothing about the
money if Maslova had not been in accord with them," said the clerk of
Jewish extraction.

"Well, do you think that it was she who stole the money?" asked one of
the jury.

"I will never believe it," cried the kindly merchant; "it was all that
red-eyed hag's doing."

"They are a nice lot, all of them," said the colonel.

"But she says she never went into the room."

"Oh, believe her by all means."

"I should not believe that jade, not for the world."

"Whether you believe her or not does not settle the question," said the
clerk.

"The girl had the key," said the colonel.

"What if she had?" retorted the merchant.

"And the ring?"

"But didn't she say all about it?" again cried the merchant. "The fellow
had a temper of his own, and had had a drop too much besides, and gave
the girl a licking; what could be simpler? Well, then he's sorry--quite
naturally. 'There, never mind,' says he; 'take this.' Why, I heard them
say he was six foot five high; I should think he must have weighed about
20 stones."

"That's not the point," said Peter Gerasimovitch. "The question is,
whether she was the instigator and inciter in this affair, or the
servants?"

"It was not possible for the servants to do it alone; she had the key."

This kind of random talk went on for a considerable time. At last the
foreman said: "I beg your pardon, gentlemen, but had we not better take
our places at the table and discuss the matter? Come, please." And he
took the chair.

The questions were expressed in the following manner.

1. Is the peasant of the village Borki, Krapivinskia district, Simeon
Petrov Kartinkin, 33 years of age, guilty of having, in agreement with
other persons, given the merchant Smelkoff, on the 17th January, 188-,
in the town of N-----, with intent to deprive him of life, for the
purpose of robbing him, poisoned brandy, which caused Smelkoff's death,
and of having stolen from him about 2,500 roubles in money and a diamond
ring?

2. Is the meschanka Euphemia Ivanovna Botchkova, 43 years of age, guilty
of the crimes described above?

3. Is the meschanka Katerina Michaelovna Maslova, 27 years of age,
guilty of the crimes described in the first question?

4. If the prisoner Euphemia Botchkova is not guilty according to the
first question, is she not guilty of having, on the 17th January, in the
town of N----, while in service at the hotel Mauritania, stolen from a
locked portmanteau, belonging to the merchant Smelkoff, a lodger in that
hotel, and which was in the room occupied by him, 2,500 roubles, for
which object she unlocked the portmanteau with a key she brought and
fitted to the lock?

The foreman read the first question.

"Well, gentlemen, what do you think?" This question was quickly
answered. All agreed to say "Guilty," as if convinced that Kartinkin
had taken part both in the poisoning and the robbery. An old artelshik,
[member of an artel, an association of workmen, in which the members
share profits and liabilities] whose answers were all in favour of
acquittal, was the only exception.

The foreman thought he did not understand, and began to point out to him
that everything tended to prove Kartinkin's guilt. The old man answered
that he did understand, but still thought it better to have pity on him.
"We are not saints ourselves," and he kept to his opinion.

The answer to the second question concerning Botchkova was, after much
dispute and many exclamations, answered by the words, "Not guilty,"
there being no clear proofs of her having taken part in the poisoning--a
fact her advocate had strongly insisted on. The merchant, anxious to
acquit Maslova, insisted that Botchkova was the chief instigator of it
all. Many of the jury shared this view, but the foreman, wishing to be
in strict accord with the law, declared they had no grounds to consider
her as an accomplice in the poisoning. After much disputing the
foreman's opinion triumphed.

To the fourth question concerning Botchkova the answer was "Guilty." But
on the artelshik's insistence she was recommended to mercy.

The third question, concerning Maslova, raised a fierce dispute. The
foreman maintained she was guilty both of the poisoning and the theft,
to which the merchant would not agree. The colonel, the clerk and the
old artelshik sided with the merchant, the rest seemed shaky, and the
opinion of the foreman began to gain ground, chiefly because all the
jurymen were getting tired, and preferred to take up the view that would
bring them sooner to a decision and thus liberate them.

From all that had passed, and from his former knowledge of Maslova,
Nekhludoff was certain that she was innocent of both the theft and the
poisoning. And he felt sure that all the others would come to the same
conclusion. When he saw that the merchant's awkward defence (evidently
based on his physical admiration for her, which he did not even try
to hide) and the foreman's insistence, and especially everybody's
weariness, were all tending to her condemnation, he longed to state his
objections, yet dared not, lest his relations with Maslova should be
discovered. He felt he could not allow things to go on without stating
his objection; and, blushing and growing pale again, was about to speak
when Peter Gerasimovitch, irritated by the authoritative manner of
the foreman, began to raise his objections and said the very things
Nekhludoff was about to say.

"Allow me one moment," he said. "You seem to think that her having the
key proves she is guilty of the theft; but what could be easier than
for the servants to open the portmanteau with a false key after she was
gone?"

"Of course, of course," said the merchant.

"She could not have taken the money, because in her position she would
hardly know what to do with it."

"That's just what I say," remarked the merchant.

"But it is very likely that her coming put the idea into the servants'
heads and that they grasped the opportunity and shoved all the blame
on her." Peter Gerasimovitch spoke so irritably that the foreman became
irritated too, and went on obstinately defending the opposite views; but
Peter Gerasimovitch spoke so convincingly that the majority agreed with
him, and decided that Maslova was not guilty of stealing the money and
that the ring was given her.

But when the question of her having taken part in the poisoning was
raised, her zealous defender, the merchant, declared that she must
be acquitted, because she could have no reason for the poisoning. The
foreman, however, said that it was impossible to acquit her, because she
herself had pleaded guilty to having given the powder.

"Yes, but thinking it was opium," said the merchant.

"Opium can also deprive one of life," said the colonel, who was fond
of wandering from the subject, and he began telling how his
brother-in-law's wife would have died of an overdose of opium if there
had not been a doctor near at hand to take the necessary measures. The
colonel told his story so impressively, with such self-possession and
dignity, that no one had the courage to interrupt him. Only the clerk,
infected by his example, decided to break in with a story of his own:
"There are some who get so used to it that they can take 40 drops. I
have a relative--," but the colonel would not stand the interruption,
and went on to relate what effects the opium had on his brother-in-law's
wife.

"But, gentlemen, do you know it is getting on towards five o'clock?"
said one of the jury.

"Well, gentlemen, what are we to say, then?" inquired the foreman.
"Shall we say she is guilty, but without intent to rob? And without
stealing any property? Will that do?" Peter Gerasimovitch, pleased with
his victory, agreed.

"But she must be recommended to mercy," said the merchant.

All agreed; only the old artelshik insisted that they should say "Not
guilty."

"It comes to the same thing," explained the foreman; "without intent to
rob, and without stealing any property. Therefore, 'Not guilty,' that's
evident."

"All right; that'll do. And we recommend her to mercy," said the
merchant, gaily.

They were all so tired, so confused by the discussions, that nobody
thought of saying that she was guilty of giving the powder but without
the intent of taking life. Nekhludoff was so excited that he did not
notice this omission, and so the answers were written down in the form
agreed upon and taken to the court.

Rabelais says that a lawyer who was trying a case quoted all sorts of
laws, read 20 pages of judicial senseless Latin, and then proposed to
the judges to throw dice, and if the numbers proved odd the defendant
would be right, if not, the plaintiff.

It was much the same in this case. The resolution was taken, not because
everybody agreed upon it, but because the president, who had been
summing up at such length, omitted to say what he always said on such
occasions, that the answer might be, "Yes, guilty, but without the
intent of taking life;" because the colonel had related the story of his
brother-in-law's wife at such great length; because Nekhludoff was too
excited to notice that the proviso "without intent to take life" had
been omitted, and thought that the words "without intent" nullified the
conviction; because Peter Gerasimovitch had retired from the room while
the questions and answers were being read, and chiefly because, being
tired, and wishing to get away as soon as possible, all were ready to
agree with the decision which would bring matters to an end soonest.

The jurymen rang the bell. The gendarme who had stood outside the door
with his sword drawn put the sword back into the scabbard and stepped
aside. The judges took their seats and the jury came out one by one.

The foreman brought in the paper with an air of solemnity and handed
it to the president, who looked at it, and, spreading out his hands
in astonishment, turned to consult his companions. The president was
surprised that the jury, having put in a proviso--without intent to
rob--did not put in a second proviso--without intent to take life. From
the decision of the jury it followed that Maslova had not stolen, nor
robbed, and yet poisoned a man without any apparent reason.

"Just see what an absurd decision they have come to," he whispered to
the member on his left. "This means penal servitude in Siberia, and she
is innocent."

"Surely you do not mean to say she is innocent?" answered the serious
member.

"Yes, she is positively innocent. I think this is a case for putting
Article 817 into practice (Article 817 states that if the Court
considers the decision of the jury unjust it may set it aside)."

"What do you think?" said the president, turning to the other member.
The kindly member did not answer at once. He looked at the number on a
paper before him and added up the figures; the sum would not divide
by three. He had settled in his mind that if it did divide by three he
would agree to the president's proposal, but though the sum would not so
divide his kindness made him agree all the same.

"I, too, think it should be done," he said.

"And you?" asked the president, turning to the serious member.

"On no account," he answered, firmly. "As it is, the papers accuse the
jury of acquitting prisoners. What will they say if the Court does it?
I, shall not agree to that on any account."

The president looked at his watch. "It is a pity, but what's to be
done?" and handed the questions to the foreman to read out. All got
up, and the foreman, stepping from foot to foot, coughed, and read the
questions and the answers. All the Court, secretary, advocates, and even
the public prosecutor, expressed surprise. The prisoners sat impassive,
evidently not understanding the meaning of the answers. Everybody sat
down again, and the president asked the prosecutor what punishments the
prisoners were to be subjected to.

The prosecutor, glad of his unexpected success in getting Maslova
convicted, and attributing the success entirely to his own eloquence,
looked up the necessary information, rose and said: "With Simeon
Kartinkin I should deal according to Statute 1,452 paragraph 93.
Euphemia Botchkova according to Statute . . ., etc. Katerina Maslova
according to Statute . . ., etc."

All three punishments were the heaviest that could be inflicted.

"The Court will adjourn to consider the sentence," said the president,
rising. Everybody rose after him, and with the pleasant feeling of a
task well done began to leave the room or move about in it.

"D'you know, sirs, we have made a shameful hash of it?" said Peter
Gerasimovitch, approaching Nekhludoff, to whom the foreman was relating
something. "Why, we've got her to Siberia."

"What are you saying?" exclaimed Nekhludoff. This time he did not notice
the teacher's familiarity.

"Why, we did not put in our answer 'Guilty, but without intent of
causing death.' The secretary just told me the public prosecutor is for
condemning her to 15 years' penal servitude."

"Well, but it was decided so," said the foreman.

Peter Gerasimovitch began to dispute this, saying that since she did
not take the money it followed naturally that she could not have had any
intention of committing murder.

"But I read the answer before going out," said the foreman, defending
himself, "and nobody objected."

"I had just then gone out of the room," said Peter Gerasimovitch,
turning to Nekhludoff, "and your thoughts must have been wool-gathering
to let the thing pass."

"I never imagined this," Nekhludoff replied.

"Oh, you didn't?"

"Oh, well, we can get it put right," said Nekhludoff.

"Oh, dear no; it's finished."

Nekhludoff looked at the prisoners. They whose fate was being decided
still sat motionless behind the grating in front of the soldiers.
Maslova was smiling. Another feeling stirred in Nekhludoff's soul. Up to
now, expecting her acquittal and thinking she would remain in the town,
he was uncertain how to act towards her. Any kind of relations with her
would be so very difficult. But Siberia and penal servitude at once cut
off every possibility of any kind of relations with her. The wounded
bird would stop struggling in the game-bag, and no longer remind him of
its existence.



CHAPTER XXIV.

THE TRIAL--THE SENTENCE.

Peter Gerasimovitch's assumption was correct. The president came back
from the debating room with a paper, and read as follows:--"April 28th,
188-. By His Imperial Majesty's ukase No. ----- The Criminal Court, on
the strength of the decision of the jury, in accordance with Section
3 of Statute 771, Section 3 of Statutes 770 and 777, decrees that the
peasant, Simeon Kartinkin, 33 years of age, and the meschanka Katerina
Maslova, 27 years of age, are to be deprived of all property rights and
to be sent to penal servitude in Siberia, Kartinkin for eight, Maslova
for four years, with the consequences stated in Statute 25 of the code.
The meschanka Botchkova, 43 years of age, to be deprived of all special
personal and acquired rights, and to be imprisoned for three years with
consequences in accord with Statute 48 of the code. The costs of the
case to be borne equally by the prisoners; and, in the case of their
being without sufficient property, the costs to be transferred to the
Treasury. Articles of material evidence to be sold, the ring to be
returned, the phials destroyed." Botchkova was condemned to prison,
Simeon Kartinken and Katerina Maslova to the loss of all special rights
and privileges and to penal servitude in Siberia, he for eight and she
for four years.

Kartinkin stood holding his arms close to his sides and moving his lips.
Botchkova seemed perfectly calm. Maslova, when she heard the sentence,
blushed scarlet. "I'm not guilty, not guilty!" she suddenly cried, so
that it resounded through the room. "It is a sin! I am not guilty! I
never wished--I never thought! It is the truth I am saying--the truth!"
and sinking on the bench she burst into tears and sobbed aloud. When
Kartinkin and Botchkova went out she still sat crying, so that a
gendarme had to touch the sleeve of her cloak.

"No; it is impossible to leave it as it is," said Nekhludoff to himself,
utterly forgetting his bad thoughts. He did not know why he wished to
look at her once more, but hurried out into the corridor. There was
quite a crowd at the door. The advocates and jury were going out,
pleased to have finished the business, and he was obliged to wait a few
seconds, and when he at last got out into the corridor she was far
in front. He hurried along the corridor after her, regardless of the
attention he was arousing, caught her up, passed her, and stopped. She
had ceased crying and only sobbed, wiping her red, discoloured face with
the end of the kerchief on her head. She passed without noticing him.
Then he hurried back to see the president. The latter had already left
the court, and Nekhludoff followed him into the lobby and went up to
him just as he had put on his light grey overcoat and was taking the
silver-mounted walking-stick which an attendant was handing him.

"Sir, may I have a few words with you concerning some business I have
just decided upon?" said Nekhludoff. "I am one of the jury."

"Oh, certainly, Prince Nekhludoff. I shall be delighted. I think we
have met before," said the president, pressing Nekhludoff's hand and
recalling with pleasure the evening when he first met Nekhludoff, and
when he had danced so gaily, better than all the young people. "What can
I do for you?"

"There is a mistake in the answer concerning Maslova. She is not guilty
of the poisoning and yet she is condemned to penal servitude," said
Nekhludoff, with a preoccupied and gloomy air.

"The Court passed the sentence in accordance with the answers you
yourselves gave," said the president, moving towards the front door;
"though they did not seem to be quite in accord." And he remembered
that he had been going to explain to the jury that a verdict of "guilty"
meant guilty of intentional murder unless the words "without intent to
take life" were added, but had, in his hurry to get the business over,
omitted to do so.

"Yes, but could not the mistake be rectified?"

"A reason for an appeal can always be found. You will have to speak to
an advocate," said the president, putting on his hat a little to one
side and continuing to move towards the door.

"But this is terrible."

"Well, you see, there were two possibilities before Maslova," said the
president, evidently wishing to be as polite and pleasant to Nekhludoff
as he could. Then, having arranged his whiskers over his coat collar, he
put his hand lightly under Nekhludoff's elbow, and, still directing his
steps towards the front door, he said, "You are going, too?"

"Yes," said Nekhludoff, quickly getting his coat, and following him.

They went out into the bright, merry sunlight, and had to raise their
voices because of the rattling of the wheels on the pavement.

"The situation is a curious one, you see," said the president; "what lay
before this Maslova was one of two things: either to be almost acquitted
and only imprisoned for a short time, or, taking the preliminary
confinement into consideration, perhaps not at all--or Siberia. There is
nothing between. Had you but added the words, 'without intent to cause
death,' she would have been acquitted."

"Yes, it was inexcusable of me to omit that," said Nekhludoff.

"That's where the whole matter lies," said the president, with a smile,
and looked at his watch. He had only three-quarters of an hour left
before the time appointed by his Clara would elapse.

"Now, if you like to speak to the advocates you'll have to find a reason
for an appeal; that can be easily done." Then, turning to an isvostchik,
he called out, "To the Dvoryanskaya 30 copecks; I never give more."

"All right, your honour; here you are."

"Good-afternoon. If I can be of any use, my address is House Dvornikoff,
on the Dvoryanskaya; it's easy to remember." And he bowed in a friendly
manner as he got into the trap and drove off.



CHAPTER XXV.

NEKHLUDOFF CONSULTS AN ADVOCATE.

His conversation with the president and the fresh air quieted Nekhludoff
a little. He now thought that the feelings experienced by him had been
exaggerated by the unusual surroundings in which he had spent the whole
of the morning, and by that wonderful and startling coincidence. Still,
it was absolutely necessary to take some steps to lighten Maslova's
fate, and to take them quickly. "Yes, at once! It will be best to find
out here in the court where the advocate Fanarin or Mikishin lives."
These were two well-known advocates whom Nekhludoff called to mind. He
returned to the court, took off his overcoat, and went upstairs. In the
first corridor he met Fanarin himself. He stopped him, and told him that
he was just going to look him up on a matter of business.

Fanarin knew Nekhludoff by sight and name, and said he would be very
glad to be of service to him.

"Though I am rather tired, still, if your business will not take very
long, perhaps you might tell me what it is now. Will you step in here?"
And he led Nekhludoff into a room, probably some judge's cabinet. They
sat down by the table.

"Well, and what is your business?"

"First of all, I must ask you to keep the business private. I do not
want it known that I take an interest in the affair."

"Oh, that of course. Well?"

"I was on the jury to-day, and we have condemned a woman to Siberia,
an innocent woman. This bothers me very much." Nekhludoff, to his own
surprise, blushed and became confused. Fanarin glanced at him rapidly,
and looked down again, listening.

"Well?"

"We have condemned a woman, and I should like to appeal to a higher
court."

"To the Senate, you mean," said Fanarin, correcting him.

"Yes, and I should like to ask you to take the case in hand." Nekhludoff
wanted to get the most difficult part over, and added, "I shall take the
costs of the case on myself, whatever they may be."

"Oh, we shall settle all that," said the advocate, smiling with
condescension at Nekhludoff's inexperience in these matters. "What is
the case?"

Nekhludoff stated what had happened.

"All right. I shall look the case through to-morrow or the day
after--no--better on Thursday. If you will come to me at six o'clock I
will give you an answer. Well, and now let us go; I have to make a few
inquiries here."

Nekhludoff took leave of him and went out. This talk with the advocate,
and the fact that he had taken measures for Maslova's defence, quieted
him still further. He went out into the street. The weather was
beautiful, and he joyfully drew in a long breath of spring air. He was
at once surrounded by isvostchiks offering their services, but he went
on foot. A whole swarm of pictures and memories of Katusha and his
conduct to her began whirling in his brain, and he felt depressed and
everything appeared gloomy. "No, I shall consider all this later on; I
must now get rid of all these disagreeable impressions," he thought to
himself.

He remembered the Korchagin's dinner and looked at his watch. It was
not yet too late to get there in time. He heard the ring of a passing
tramcar, ran to catch it, and jumped on. He jumped off again when they
got to the market-place, took a good isvostchik, and ten minutes later
was at the entrance of the Korchagins' big house.



CHAPTER XXVI.

THE HOUSE OF KORCHAGIN.

"Please to walk in, your excellency," said the friendly, fat doorkeeper
of the Korchagins' big house, opening the door, which moved noiselessly
on its patent English hinges; "you are expected. They are at dinner.
My orders were to admit only you." The doorkeeper went as far as the
staircase and rang.

"Are there any strangers?" asked Nekhludoff, taking off his overcoat.

"Mr. Kolosoff and Michael Sergeivitch only, besides the family."

A very handsome footman with whiskers, in a swallow-tail coat and white
gloves, looked down from the landing.

"Please to walk up, your excellency," he said. "You are expected."

Nekhludoff went up and passed through the splendid large dancing-room,
which he knew so well, into the dining-room. There the whole Korchagin
family--except the mother, Sophia Vasilievna, who never left her
cabinet--were sitting round the table. At the head of the table sat old
Korchagin; on his left the doctor, and on his right, a visitor, Ivan
Ivanovitch Kolosoff, a former Marechal de Noblesse, now a bank director,
Korchagin's friend and a Liberal. Next on the left side sat Miss Rayner,
the governess of Missy's little sister, and the four-year-old girl
herself. Opposite them, Missy's brother, Petia, the only son of the
Korchagins, a public-school boy of the Sixth Class. It was because of
his examinations that the whole family were still in town. Next to
him sat a University student who was coaching him, and Missy's cousin,
Michael Sergeivitch Telegin, generally called Misha; opposite him,
Katerina Alexeevna, a 40-year-old maiden lady, a Slavophil; and at the
foot of the table sat Missy herself, with an empty place by her side.

"Ah! that's right! Sit down. We are still at the fish," said old
Korchagin with difficulty, chewing carefully with his false teeth,
and lifting his bloodshot eyes (which had no visible lids to them) to
Nekhludoff.

"Stephen!" he said, with his mouth full, addressing the stout, dignified
butler, and pointing with his eyes to the empty place. Though Nekhludoff
knew Korchagin very well, and had often seen him at dinner, to-day this
red face with the sensual smacking lips, the fat neck above the napkin
stuck into his waistcoat, and the whole over-fed military figure, struck
him very disagreeably. Then Nekhludoff remembered, without wishing to,
what he knew of the cruelty of this man, who, when in command, used
to have men flogged, and even hanged, without rhyme or reason, simply
because he was rich and had no need to curry favour.

"Immediately, your excellency," said Stephen, getting a large soup ladle
out of the sideboard, which was decorated with a number of silver vases.
He made a sign with his head to the handsome footman, who began at once
to arrange the untouched knives and forks and the napkin, elaborately
folded with the embroidered family crest uppermost, in front of the
empty place next to Missy. Nekhludoff went round shaking hands with
every one, and all, except old Korchagin and the ladies, rose when he
approached. And this walk round the table, this shaking the hands of
people, with many of whom he never talked, seemed unpleasant and odd. He
excused himself for being late, and was about to sit down between Missy
and Katerina Alexeevna, but old Korchagin insisted that if he would not
take a glass of vodka he should at least take a bit of something to whet
his appetite, at the side table, on which stood small dishes of lobster,
caviare, cheese, and salt herrings. Nekhludoff did not know how hungry
he was until he began to eat, and then, having taken some bread and
cheese, he went on eating eagerly.

"Well, have you succeeded in undermining the basis of society?"
asked Kolosoff, ironically quoting an expression used by a retrograde
newspaper in attacking trial by jury. "Acquitted the culprits and
condemned the innocent, have you?"

"Undermining the basis--undermining the basis," repeated Prince
Korchagin, laughing. He had a firm faith in the wisdom and learning of
his chosen friend and companion.

At the risk of seeming rude, Nekhludoff left Kolosoff's question
unanswered, and sitting down to his steaming soup, went on eating.

"Do let him eat," said Missy, with a smile. The pronoun him she used as
a reminder of her intimacy with Nekhludoff. Kolosoff went on in a loud
voice and lively manner to give the contents of the article against
trial by jury which had aroused his indignation. Missy's cousin, Michael
Sergeivitch, endorsed all his statements, and related the contents of
another article in the same paper. Missy was, as usual, very distinguee,
and well, unobtrusively well, dressed.

"You must be terribly tired," she said, after waiting until Nekhludoff
had swallowed what was in his mouth.

"Not particularly. And you? Have you been to look at the pictures?" he
asked.

"No, we put that off. We have been playing tennis at the Salamatoffs'.
It is quite true, Mr. Crooks plays remarkably well."

Nekhludoff had come here in order to distract his thoughts, for he
used to like being in this house, both because its refined luxury had a
pleasant effect on him and because of the atmosphere of tender flattery
that unobtrusively surrounded him. But to-day everything in the house
was repulsive to him--everything: beginning with the doorkeeper, the
broad staircase, the flowers, the footman, the table decorations, up to
Missy herself, who to-day seemed unattractive and affected. Kolosoff's
self-assured, trivial tone of liberalism was unpleasant, as was also the
sensual, self-satisfied, bull-like appearance of old Korchagin, and the
French phrases of Katerina Alexeevna, the Slavophil. The constrained
looks of the governess and the student were unpleasant, too, but most
unpleasant of all was the pronoun _him_ that Missy had used. Nekhludoff
had long been wavering between two ways of regarding Missy; sometimes he
looked at her as if by moonlight, and could see in her nothing but what
was beautiful, fresh, pretty, clever and natural; then suddenly, as
if the bright sun shone on her, he saw her defects and could not help
seeing them. This was such a day for him. To-day he saw all the wrinkles
of her face, knew which of her teeth were false, saw the way her hair
was crimped, the sharpness of her elbows, and, above all, how large her
thumb-nail was and how like her father's.

"Tennis is a dull game," said Kolosoff; "we used to play lapta when we
were children. That was much more amusing."

"Oh, no, you never tried it; it's awfully interesting," said Missy,
laying, it seemed to Nekhludoff, a very affected stress on the word
"awfully." Then a dispute arose in which Michael Sergeivitch, Katerina
Alexeevna and all the others took part, except the governess, the
student and the children, who sat silent and wearied.

"Oh, these everlasting disputes!" said old Korchagin, laughing, and he
pulled the napkin out of his waistcoat, noisily pushed back his chair,
which the footman instantly caught hold of, and left the table.

Everybody rose after him, and went up to another table on which stood
glasses of scented water. They rinsed their mouths, then resumed the
conversation, interesting to no one.

"Don't you think so?" said Missy to Nekhludoff, calling for a
confirmation of the statement that nothing shows up a man's character
like a game. She noticed that preoccupied and, as it seemed to her,
dissatisfied look which she feared, and she wanted to find out what had
caused it.

"Really, I can't tell; I have never thought about it," Nekhludoff
answered.

"Will you come to mamma?" asked Missy.

"Yes, yes," he said, in a tone which plainly proved that he did not want
to go, and took out a cigarette.

She looked at him in silence, with a questioning look, and he felt
ashamed. "To come into a house and give the people the dumps," he
thought about himself; then, trying to be amiable, said that he would go
with pleasure if the princess would admit him.

"Oh, yes! Mamma will be pleased. You may smoke there; and Ivan
Ivanovitch is also there."

The mistress of the house, Princess Sophia Vasilievna, was a recumbent
lady. It was the eighth year that, when visitors were present, she lay
in lace and ribbons, surrounded with velvet, gilding, ivory, bronze,
lacquer and flowers, never going out, and only, as she put it, receiving
intimate friends, i.e., those who according to her idea stood out from
the common herd.

Nekhludoff was admitted into the number of these friends because he was
considered clever, because his mother had been an intimate friend of the
family, and because it was desirable that Missy should marry him.

Sophia Vasilievna's room lay beyond the large and the small
drawing-rooms. In the large drawing-room, Missy, who was in front of
Nekhludoff, stopped resolutely, and taking hold of the back of a small
green chair, faced him.

Missy was very anxious to get married, and as he was a suitable match
and she also liked him, she had accustomed herself to the thought that
he should be hers (not she his). To lose him would be very mortifying.
She now began talking to him in order to get him to explain his
intentions.

"I see something has happened," she said. "Tell me, what is the matter
with you?"

He remembered the meeting in the law court, and frowned and blushed.

"Yes, something has happened," he said, wishing to be truthful; "a very
unusual and serious event."

"What is it, then? Can you not tell me what it is?" She was pursuing her
aim with that unconscious yet obstinate cunning often observable in the
mentally diseased.

"Not now. Please do not ask me to tell you. I have not yet had time
fully to consider it," and he blushed still more.

"And so you will not tell me?" A muscle twitched in her face and she
pushed back the chair she was holding. "Well then, come!" She shook her
head as if to expel useless thoughts, and, faster than usual, went on in
front of him.

He fancied that her mouth was unnaturally compressed in order to keep
back the tears. He was ashamed of having hurt her, and yet he knew that
the least weakness on his part would mean disaster, i.e., would bind
him to her. And to-day he feared this more than anything, and silently
followed her to the princess's cabinet.



CHAPTER XXVII.

MISSY'S MOTHER.

Princess Sophia Vasilievna, Missy's mother, had finished her very
elaborate and nourishing dinner. (She had it always alone, that no one
should see her performing this unpoetical function.) By her couch stood
a small table with her coffee, and she was smoking a pachitos. Princess
Sophia Vasilievna was a long, thin woman, with dark hair, large black
eyes and long teeth, and still pretended to be young.

Her intimacy with the doctor was being talked about. Nekhludoff had
known that for some time; but when he saw the doctor sitting by her
couch, his oily, glistening beard parted in the middle, he not only
remembered the rumours about them, but felt greatly disgusted. By
the table, on a low, soft, easy chair, next to Sophia Vasilievna, sat
Kolosoff, stirring his coffee. A glass of liqueur stood on the table.
Missy came in with Nekhludoff, but did not remain in the room.

"When mamma gets tired of you and drives you away, then come to me,"
she said, turning to Kolosoff and Nekhludoff, speaking as if nothing had
occurred; then she went away, smiling merrily and stepping noiselessly
on the thick carpet.

"How do you do, dear friend? Sit down and talk," said Princess Sophia
Vasilievna, with her affected but very naturally-acted smile, showing
her fine, long teeth--a splendid imitation of what her own had
once been. "I hear that you have come from the Law Courts very much
depressed. I think it must be very trying to a person with a heart," she
added in French.

"Yes, that is so," said Nekhludoff. "One often feels one's own de--one
feels one has no right to judge."

"Comme, c'est vrai," she cried, as if struck by the truth of this
remark. She was in the habit of artfully flattering all those with whom
she conversed. "Well, and what of your picture? It does interest me so.
If I were not such a sad invalid I should have been to see it long ago,"
she said.

"I have quite given it up," Nekhludoff replied drily. The falseness of
her flattery seemed as evident to him to-day as her age, which she was
trying to conceal, and he could not put himself into the right state to
behave politely.

"Oh, that _is_ a pity! Why, he has a real talent for art; I have it from
Repin's own lips," she added, turning to Kolosoff.

"Why is it she is not ashamed of lying so?" Nekhludoff thought, and
frowned.

When she had convinced herself that Nekhludoff was in a bad temper and
that one could not get him into an agreeable and clever conversation,
Sophia Vasilievna turned to Kolosoff, asking his opinion of a new play.
She asked it in a tone as if Kolosoff's opinion would decide all doubts,
and each word of this opinion be worthy of being immortalised. Kolosoff
found fault both with the play and its author, and that led him to
express his views on art. Princess Sophia Vasilievna, while trying at
the same time to defend the play, seemed impressed by the truth of his
arguments, either giving in at once, or at least modifying her opinion.
Nekhludoff looked and listened, but neither saw nor heard what was going
on before him.

Listening now to Sophia Vasilievna, now to Kolosoff, Nekhludoff noticed
that neither he nor she cared anything about the play or each other, and
that if they talked it was only to gratify the physical desire to
move the muscles of the throat and tongue after having eaten; and that
Kolosoff, having drunk vodka, wine and liqueur, was a little tipsy.
Not tipsy like the peasants who drink seldom, but like people to
whom drinking wine has become a habit. He did not reel about or talk
nonsense, but he was in a state that was not normal; excited and
self-satisfied. Nekhludoff also noticed that during the conversation
Princess Sophia Vasilievna kept glancing uneasily at the window, through
which a slanting ray of sunshine, which might vividly light up her aged
face, was beginning to creep up.

"How true," she said in reference to some remark of Kolosoff's, touching
the button of an electric bell by the side of her couch. The doctor
rose, and, like one who is at home, left the room without saying
anything. Sophia Vasilievna followed him with her eyes and continued the
conversation.

"Please, Philip, draw these curtains," she said, pointing to the window,
when the handsome footman came in answer to the bell. "No; whatever you
may say, there is some mysticism in him; without mysticism there can be
no poetry," she said, with one of her black eyes angrily following the
footman's movements as he was drawing the curtains. "Without poetry,
mysticism is superstition; without mysticism, poetry is--prose," she
continued, with a sorrowful smile, still not losing sight of the footman
and the curtains. "Philip, not that curtain; the one on the large
window," she exclaimed, in a suffering tone. Sophia Vasilievna was
evidently pitying herself for having to make the effort of saying these
words; and, to soothe her feelings, she raised to her lips a scented,
smoking cigarette with her jewel-bedecked fingers.

The broad-chested, muscular, handsome Philip bowed slightly, as
if begging pardon; and stepping lightly across the carpet with his
broad-calved, strong, legs, obediently and silently went to the other
window, and, looking at the princess, carefully began to arrange the
curtain so that not a single ray dared fall on her. But again he did
not satisfy her, and again she had to interrupt the conversation about
mysticism, and correct in a martyred tone the unintelligent Philip,
who was tormenting her so pitilessly. For a moment a light flashed in
Philip's eyes.

"'The devil take you! What do you want?' was probably what he said to
himself," thought Nekhludoff, who had been observing all this scene. But
the strong, handsome Philip at once managed to conceal the signs of his
impatience, and went on quietly carrying out the orders of the worn,
weak, false Sophia Vasilievna.

"Of course, there is a good deal of truth in Lombroso's teaching," said
Kolosoff, lolling back in the low chair and looking at Sophia Vasilievna
with sleepy eyes; "but he over-stepped the mark. Oh, yes."

"And you? Do you believe in heredity?" asked Sophia Vasilievna, turning
to Nekhludoff, whose silence annoyed her. "In heredity?" he asked. "No,
I don't." At this moment his whole mind was taken up by strange images
that in some unaccountable way rose up in his imagination. By the side
of this strong and handsome Philip he seemed at this minute to see the
nude figure of Kolosoff as an artist's model; with his stomach like a
melon, his bald head, and his arms without muscle, like pestles. In the
same dim way the limbs of Sophia Vasilievna, now covered with silks and
velvets, rose up in his mind as they must be in reality; but this mental
picture was too horrid and he tried to drive it away.

"Well, you know Missy is waiting for you," she said. "Go and find her.
She wants to play a new piece by Grieg to you; it is most interesting."

"She did not mean to play anything; the woman is simply lying, for
some reason or other," thought Nekhludoff, rising and pressing Sophia
Vasilievna's transparent and bony, ringed hand.

Katerina Alexeevna met him in the drawing-room, and at once began, in
French, as usual:

"I see the duties of a juryman act depressingly upon you."

"Yes; pardon me, I am in low spirits to-day, and have no right to weary
others by my presence," said Nekhludoff.

"Why are you in low spirits?"

"Allow me not to speak about that," he said, looking round for his hat.

"Don't you remember how you used to say that we must always tell the
truth? And what cruel truths you used to tell us all! Why do you not
wish to speak out now? Don't you remember, Missy?" she said, turning to
Missy, who had just come in.

"We were playing a game then," said Nekhludoff, seriously; "one may
tell the truth in a game, but in reality we are so bad--I mean I am so
bad--that I, at least, cannot tell the truth."

"Oh, do not correct yourself, but rather tell us why _we_ are so bad,"
said Katerina Alexeevna, playing with her words and pretending not to
notice how serious Nekhludoff was.

"Nothing is worse than to confess to being in low spirits," said Missy.
"I never do it, and therefore am always in good spirits."

Nekhludoff felt as a horse must feel when it is being caressed to make
it submit to having the bit put in its mouth and be harnessed, and
to-day he felt less than ever inclined to draw.

"Well, are you coming into my room? We will try to cheer you up."

He excused himself, saying he had to be at home, and began taking leave.
Missy kept his hand longer than usual.

"Remember that what is important to you is important to your friends,"
she said. "Are you coming tomorrow?"

"I hardly expect to," said Nekhludoff; and feeling ashamed, without
knowing whether for her or for himself, he blushed and went away.

"What is it? _Comme cela m'intrigue_," said Katerina Alexeevna. "I must
find it out. I suppose it is some _affaire d'amour propre; il est tres
susceptible, notre cher Mitia_."

"_Plutot une affaire d'amour sale_," Missy was going to say, but stopped
and looked down with a face from which all the light had gone--a very
different face from the one with which she had looked at him. She would
not mention to Katerina Alexeevna even, so vulgar a pun, but only said,
"We all have our good and our bad days."

"Is it possible that he, too, will deceive?" she thought; "after all
that has happened it would be very bad of him."

If Missy had had to explain what she meant by "after all that has
happened," she could have said nothing definite, and yet she knew that
he had not only excited her hopes but had almost given her a promise. No
definite words had passed between them--only looks and smiles and hints;
and yet she considered him as her own, and to lose him would be very
hard.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE AWAKENING.

"Shameful and stupid, horrid and shameful!" Nekhludoff kept saying to
himself, as he walked home along the familiar streets. The depression
he had felt whilst speaking to Missy would not leave him. He felt that,
looking at it externally, as it were, he was in the right, for he had
never said anything to her that could be considered binding, never made
her an offer; but he knew that in reality he had bound himself to her,
had promised to be hers. And yet to-day he felt with his whole being
that he could not marry her.

"Shameful and horrid, horrid and shameful!" he repeated to himself, with
reference not only to his relations with Missy but also to the rest.
"Everything is horrid and shameful," he muttered, as he stepped into the
porch of his house. "I am not going to have any supper," he said to
his manservant Corney, who followed him into the dining-room, where the
cloth was laid for supper and tea. "You may go."

"Yes, sir," said Corney, yet he did not go, but began clearing the
supper off the table. Nekhludoff looked at Corney with a feeling
of ill-will. He wished to be left alone, and it seemed to him that
everybody was bothering him in order to spite him. When Corney had gone
away with the supper things, Nekhludoff moved to the tea urn and
was about to make himself some tea, but hearing Agraphena Petrovna's
footsteps, he went hurriedly into the drawing-room, to avoid being seen
by her, and shut the door after him. In this drawing-room his mother had
died three months before. On entering the room, in which two lamps with
reflectors were burning, one lighting up his father's and the other his
mother's portrait, he remembered what his last relations with his mother
had been. And they also seemed shameful and horrid. He remembered how,
during the latter period of her illness, he had simply wished her to
die. He had said to himself that he wished it for her sake, that she
might be released from her suffering, but in reality he wished to be
released from the sight of her sufferings for his own sake.

Trying to recall a pleasant image of her, he went up to look at her
portrait, painted by a celebrated artist for 800 roubles. She was
depicted in a very low-necked black velvet dress. There was something
very revolting and blasphemous in this representation of his mother as
a half-nude beauty. It was all the more disgusting because three months
ago, in this very room, lay this same woman, dried up to a mummy. And he
remembered how a few days before her death she clasped his hand with her
bony, discoloured fingers, looked into his eyes, and said: "Do not judge
me, Mitia, if I have not done what I should," and how the tears came
into her eyes, grown pale with suffering.

"Ah, how horrid!" he said to himself, looking up once more at the
half-naked woman, with the splendid marble shoulders and arms, and the
triumphant smile on her lips. "Oh, how horrid!" The bared shoulders of
the portrait reminded him of another, a young woman, whom he had seen
exposed in the same way a few days before. It was Missy, who had devised
an excuse for calling him into her room just as she was ready to go to
a ball, so that he should see her in her ball dress. It was with disgust
that he remembered her fine shoulders and arms. "And that father of
hers, with his doubtful past and his cruelties, and the bel-esprit her
mother, with her doubtful reputation." All this disgusted him, and also
made him feel ashamed. "Shameful and horrid; horrid and shameful!"

"No, no," he thought; "freedom from all these false relations with the
Korchagins and Mary Vasilievna and the inheritance and from all the rest
must be got. Oh, to breathe freely, to go abroad, to Rome and work at
my picture!" He remembered the doubts he had about his talent for art.
"Well, never mind; only just to breathe freely. First Constantinople,
then Rome. Only just to get through with this jury business, and arrange
with the advocate first."

Then suddenly there arose in his mind an extremely vivid picture of a
prisoner with black, slightly-squinting eyes, and how she began to cry
when the last words of the prisoners had been heard; and he hurriedly
put out his cigarette, pressing it into the ash-pan, lit another, and
began pacing up and down the room. One after another the scenes he had
lived through with her rose in his mind. He recalled that last interview
with her. He remembered the white dress and blue sash, the early mass.
"Why, I loved her, really loved her with a good, pure love, that night;
I loved her even before: yes, I loved her when I lived with my aunts the
first time and was writing my composition." And he remembered himself as
he had been then. A breath of that freshness, youth and fulness of life
seemed to touch him, and he grew painfully sad. The difference between
what he had been then and what he was now, was enormous--just as great,
if not greater than the difference between Katusha in church that night,
and the prostitute who had been carousing with the merchant and whom
they judged this morning. Then he was free and fearless, and innumerable
possibilities lay ready to open before him; now he felt himself caught
in the meshes of a stupid, empty, valueless, frivolous life, out of
which he saw no means of extricating himself even if he wished to,
which he hardly did. He remembered how proud he was at one time of
his straightforwardness, how he had made a rule of always speaking the
truth, and really had been truthful; and how he was now sunk deep in
lies: in the most dreadful of lies--lies considered as the truth by all
who surrounded him. And, as far as he could see, there was no way out of
these lies. He had sunk in the mire, got used to it, indulged himself in
it.

How was he to break off his relations with Mary Vasilievna and her
husband in such a way as to be able to look him and his children in the
eyes? How disentangle himself from Missy? How choose between the two
opposites--the recognition that holding land was unjust and the heritage
from his mother? How atone for his sin against Katusha? This last, at
any rate, could not be left as it was. He could not abandon a woman he
had loved, and satisfy himself by paying money to an advocate to save
her from hard labour in Siberia. She had not even deserved hard labour.
Atone for a fault by paying money? Had he not then, when he gave her the
money, thought he was atoning for his fault?

And he clearly recalled to mind that moment when, having caught her up
in the passage, he thrust the money into her bib and ran away. "Oh, that
money!" he thought with the same horror and disgust he had then felt.
"Oh, dear! oh, dear! how disgusting," he cried aloud as he had done
then. "Only a scoundrel, a knave, could do such a thing. And I am that
knave, that scoundrel!" He went on aloud: "But is it possible?"--he
stopped and stood still--"is it possible that I am really a scoundrel?
. . . Well, who but I?" he answered himself. "And then, is this the only
thing?" he went on, convicting himself. "Was not my conduct towards Mary
Vasilievna and her husband base and disgusting? And my position with
regard to money? To use riches considered by me unlawful on the plea
that they are inherited from my mother? And the whole of my idle,
detestable life? And my conduct towards Katusha to crown all? Knave and
scoundrel! Let men judge me as they like, I can deceive them; but myself
I cannot deceive."

And, suddenly, he understood that the aversion he had lately, and
particularly to-day, felt for everybody--the Prince and Sophia
Vasilievna and Corney and Missy--was an aversion for himself. And,
strange to say, in this acknowledgement of his baseness there was
something painful yet joyful and quieting.

More than once in Nekhludoff's life there had been what he called a
"cleansing of the soul." By "cleansing of the soul" he meant a state
of mind in which, after a long period of sluggish inner life, a total
cessation of its activity, he began to clear out all the rubbish that
had accumulated in his soul, and was the cause of the cessation of the
true life. His soul needed cleansing as a watch does. After such an
awakening Nekhludoff always made some rules for himself which he meant
to follow forever after, wrote his diary, and began afresh a life which
he hoped never to change again. "Turning over a new leaf," he called
it to himself in English. But each time the temptations of the world
entrapped him, and without noticing it he fell again, often lower than
before.

Thus he had several times in his life raised and cleansed himself. The
first time this happened was during the summer he spent with his aunts;
that was his most vital and rapturous awakening, and its effects had
lasted some time. Another awakening was when he gave up civil service
and joined the army at war time, ready to sacrifice his life. But here
the choking-up process was soon accomplished. Then an awakening came
when he left the army and went abroad, devoting himself to art.

From that time until this day a long period had elapsed without
any cleansing, and therefore the discord between the demands of his
conscience and the life he was leading was greater than it had ever been
before. He was horror-struck when he saw how great the divergence was.
It was so great and the defilement so complete that he despaired of the
possibility of getting cleansed. "Have you not tried before to perfect
yourself and become better, and nothing has come of it?" whispered the
voice of the tempter within. "What is the use of trying any more? Are
you the only one?--All are alike, such is life," whispered the voice.
But the free spiritual being, which alone is true, alone powerful,
alone eternal, had already awakened in Nekhludoff, and he could not but
believe it. Enormous though the distance was between what he wished
to be and what he was, nothing appeared insurmountable to the
newly-awakened spiritual being.

"At any cost I will break this lie which binds me and confess
everything, and will tell everybody the truth, and act the truth," he
said resolutely, aloud. "I shall tell Missy the truth, tell her I am a
profligate and cannot marry her, and have only uselessly upset her.
I shall tell Mary Vasilievna. . . Oh, there is nothing to tell her. I
shall tell her husband that I, scoundrel that I am, have been deceiving
him. I shall dispose of the inheritance in such a way as to acknowledge
the truth. I shall tell her, Katusha, that I am a scoundrel and have
sinned towards her, and will do all I can to ease her lot. Yes, I will
see her, and will ask her to forgive me.

"Yes, I will beg her pardon, as children do." . . . He stopped---"will
marry her if necessary." He stopped again, folded his hands in front of
his breast as he used to do when a little child, lifted his eyes, and
said, addressing some one: "Lord, help me, teach me, come enter within
me and purify me of all this abomination."

He prayed, asking God to help him, to enter into him and cleanse him;
and what he was praying for had happened already: the God within him had
awakened his consciousness. He felt himself one with Him, and therefore
felt not only the freedom, fulness and joy of life, but all the power of
righteousness. All, all the best that a man could do he felt capable of
doing.

His eyes filled with tears as he was saying all this to himself, good
and bad tears: good because they were tears of joy at the awakening
of the spiritual being within him, the being which had been asleep all
these years; and bad tears because they were tears of tenderness to
himself at his own goodness.

He felt hot, and went to the window and opened it. The window opened
into a garden. It was a moonlit, quiet, fresh night; a vehicle rattled
past, and then all was still. The shadow of a tall poplar fell on the
ground just opposite the window, and all the intricate pattern of its
bare branches was clearly defined on the clean swept gravel. To the left
the roof of a coach-house shone white in the moonlight, in front the
black shadow of the garden wall was visible through the tangled branches
of the trees.

Nekhludoff gazed at the roof, the moonlit garden, and the shadows of the
poplar, and drank in the fresh, invigorating air.

"How delightful, how delightful; oh, God, how delightful," he said,
meaning that which was going on in his soul.



CHAPTER XXIX.

MASLOVA IN PRISON.

Maslova reached her cell only at six in the evening, tired and footsore,
having, unaccustomed as she was to walking, gone 10 miles on the stony
road that day. She was crushed by the unexpectedly severe sentence and
tormented by hunger. During the first interval of her trial, when the
soldiers were eating bread and hard-boiled eggs in her presence, her
mouth watered and she realised she was hungry, but considered it beneath
her dignity to beg of them. Three hours later the desire to eat had
passed, and she felt only weak. It was then she received the unexpected
sentence. At first she thought she had made a mistake; she could not
imagine herself as a convict in Siberia, and could not believe what she
heard. But seeing the quiet, business-like faces of judges and jury, who
heard this news as if it were perfectly natural and expected, she grew
indignant, and proclaimed loudly to the whole Court that she was not
guilty. Finding that her cry was also taken as something natural
and expected, and feeling incapable of altering matters, she was
horror-struck and began to weep in despair, knowing that she must submit
to the cruel and surprising injustice that had been done her. What
astonished her most was that young men--or, at any rate, not old
men--the same men who always looked so approvingly at her (one of them,
the public prosecutor, she had seen in quite a different humour) had
condemned her. While she was sitting in the prisoners' room before the
trial and during the intervals, she saw these men looking in at the open
door pretending they had to pass there on some business, or enter the
room and gaze on her with approval. And then, for some unknown reason,
these same men had condemned her to hard labour, though she was innocent
of the charge laid against her. At first she cried, but then quieted
down and sat perfectly stunned in the prisoners' room, waiting to be led
back. She wanted only two things now--tobacco and strong drink. In this
state Botchkova and Kartinkin found her when they were led into the same
room after being sentenced. Botchkova began at once to scold her, and
call her a "convict."

"Well! What have you gained? justified yourself, have you? What you have
deserved, that you've got. Out in Siberia you'll give up your finery, no
fear!"

Maslova sat with her hands inside her sleeves, hanging her head and
looking in front of her at the dirty floor without moving, only saying:
"I don't bother you, so don't you bother me. I don't bother you, do I?"
she repeated this several times, and was silent again. She did brighten
up a little when Botchkova and Kartinkin were led away and an attendant
brought her three roubles.

"Are you Maslova?" he asked. "Here you are; a lady sent it you," he
said, giving her the money.

"A lady--what lady?"

"You just take it. I'm not going to talk to you."

This money was sent by Kitaeva, the keeper of the house in which she
used to live. As she was leaving the court she turned to the usher with
the question whether she might give Maslova a little money. The usher
said she might. Having got permission, she removed the three-buttoned
Swedish kid glove from her plump, white hand, and from an elegant purse
brought from the back folds of her silk skirt took a pile of coupons,
[in Russia coupons cut off interest-bearing papers are often used as
money] just cut off from the interest-bearing papers which she had
earned in her establishment, chose one worth 2 roubles and 50 copecks,
added two 20 and one 10-copeck coins, and gave all this to the usher.
The usher called an attendant, and in his presence gave the money.

"Belease to giff it accurately," said Carolina Albertovna Kitaeva.

The attendant was hurt by her want of confidence, and that was why he
treated Maslova so brusquely. Maslova was glad of the money, because
it could give her the only thing she now desired. "If I could but get
cigarettes and take a whiff!" she said to herself, and all her thoughts
centred on the one desire to smoke and drink. She longed for spirits so
that she tasted them and felt the strength they would give her; and she
greedily breathed in the air when the fumes of tobacco reached her from
the door of a room that opened into the corridor. But she had to wait
long, for the secretary, who should have given the order for her to go,
forgot about the prisoners while talking and even disputing with one of
the advocates about the article forbidden by the censor.

At last, about five o'clock, she was allowed to go, and was led away
through the back door by her escort, the Nijni man and the Tchoovash.
Then, still within the entrance to the Law Courts, she gave them 50
copecks, asking them to get her two rolls and some cigarettes. The
Tchoovash laughed, took the money, and said, "All right; I'll get 'em,"
and really got her the rolls and the cigarettes and honestly returned
the change. She was not allowed to smoke on the way, and, with her
craving unsatisfied, she continued her way to the prison. When she was
brought to the gate of the prison, a hundred convicts who had arrived by
rail were being led in. The convicts, bearded, clean-shaven, old, young,
Russians, foreigners, some with their heads shaved and rattling with the
chains on their feet, filled the anteroom with dust, noise and an acid
smell of perspiration. Passing Maslova, all the convicts looked at her,
and some came up to her and brushed her as they passed.

"Ay, here's a wench--a fine one," said one.

"My respects to you, miss," said another, winking at her. One dark man
with a moustache, the rest of his face and the back of his head clean
shaved, rattling with his chains and catching her feet in them, sprang
near and embraced her.

"What! don't you know your chum? Come, come; don't give yourself airs,"
showing his teeth and his eyes glittering when she pushed him away.

"You rascal! what are you up to?" shouted the inspector's assistant,
coming in from behind. The convict shrank back and jumped away. The
assistant assailed Maslova.

"What are you here for?"

Maslova was going to say she had been brought back from the Law Courts,
but she was so tired that she did not care to speak.

"She has returned from the Law Courts, sir," said one of the soldiers,
coming forward with his fingers lifted to his cap.

"Well, hand her over to the chief warder. I won't have this sort of
thing."

"Yes, sir."

"Sokoloff, take her in!" shouted the assistant inspector.

The chief warder came up, gave Maslova a slap on the shoulder, and
making a sign with his head for her to follow led her into the corridor
of the women's ward. There she was searched, and as nothing prohibited
was found on her (she had hidden her box of cigarettes inside a roll)
she was led to the cell she had left in the morning.



CHAPTER XXX.

THE CELL.

The cell in which Maslova was imprisoned was a large room 21 feet long
and 10 feet broad; it had two windows and a large stove. Two-thirds of
the space were taken up by shelves used as beds. The planks they were
made of had warped and shrunk. Opposite the door hung a dark-coloured
icon with a wax candle sticking to it and a bunch of everlastings
hanging down from it. By the door to the right there was a dark spot on
the floor on which stood a stinking tub. The inspection had taken place
and the women were locked up for the night.

The occupants of this room were 15 persons, including three children.
It was still quite light. Only two of the women were lying down: a
consumptive woman imprisoned for theft, and an idiot who spent most of
her time in sleep and who was arrested because she had no passport. The
consumptive woman was not asleep, but lay with wide open eyes, her cloak
folded under her head, trying to keep back the phlegm that irritated her
throat, and not to cough.

Some of the other women, most of whom had nothing on but coarse brown
holland chemises, stood looking out of the window at the convicts down
in the yard, and some sat sewing. Among the latter was the old woman,
Korableva, who had seen Maslova off in the morning. She was a tall,
strong, gloomy-looking woman; her fair hair, which had begun to turn
grey on the temples, hung down in a short plait. She was sentenced to
hard labour in Siberia because she had killed her husband with an axe
for making up to their daughter. She was at the head of the women in
the cell, and found means of carrying on a trade in spirits with them.
Beside her sat another woman sewing a coarse canvas sack. This was the
wife of a railway watchman, [There are small watchmen's cottages at
distances of about one mile from each other along the Russian railways,
and the watchmen or their wives have to meet every train.] imprisoned
for three months because she did not come out with the flags to meet a
train that was passing, and an accident had occurred. She was a short,
snub-nosed woman, with small, black eyes; kind and talkative. The third
of the women who were sewing was Theodosia, a quiet young girl, white
and rosy, very pretty, with bright child's eyes, and long fair plaits
which she wore twisted round her head. She was in prison for attempting
to poison her husband. She had done this immediately after her wedding
(she had been given in marriage without her consent at the age of 16)
because her husband would give her no peace. But in the eight months
during which she had been let out on bail, she had not only made it up
with her husband, but come to love him, so that when her trial came
they were heart and soul to one another. Although her husband, her
father-in-law, but especially her mother-in-law, who had grown very fond
of her, did all they could to get her acquitted, she was sentenced to
hard labour in Siberia. The kind, merry, ever-smiling Theodosia had a
place next Maslova's on the shelf bed, and had grown so fond of her that
she took it upon herself as a duty to attend and wait on her. Two
other women were sitting without any work at the other end of the shelf
bedstead. One was a woman of about 40, with a pale, thin face, who once
probably had been very handsome. She sat with her baby at her thin,
white breast. The crime she had committed was that when a recruit was,
according to the peasants' view, unlawfully taken from their village,
and the people stopped the police officer and took the recruit away from
him, she (an aunt of the lad unlawfully taken) was the first to catch
hold of the bridle of the horse on which he was being carried off.
The other, who sat doing nothing, was a kindly, grey-haired old woman,
hunchbacked and with a flat bosom. She sat behind the stove on the
bedshelf, and pretended to catch a fat four-year-old boy, who ran
backwards and forwards in front of her, laughing gaily. This boy had
only a little shirt on and his hair was cut short. As he ran past the
old woman he kept repeating, "There, haven't caught me!" This old woman
and her son were accused of incendiarism. She bore her imprisonment with
perfect cheerfulness, but was concerned about her son, and chiefly about
her "old man," who she feared would get into a terrible state with no
one to wash for him. Besides these seven women, there were four standing
at one of the open windows, holding on to the iron bars. They were
making signs and shouting to the convicts whom Maslova had met when
returning to prison, and who were now passing through the yard. One
of these women was big and heavy, with a flabby body, red hair, and
freckled on her pale yellow face, her hands, and her fat neck. She
shouted something in a loud, raucous voice, and laughed hoarsely. This
woman was serving her term for theft. Beside her stood an awkward, dark
little woman, no bigger than a child of ten, with a long waist and very
short legs, a red, blotchy face, thick lips which did not hide her
long teeth, and eyes too far apart. She broke by fits and starts into
screeching laughter at what was going on in the yard. She was to be
tried for stealing and incendiarism. They called her Khoroshavka. Behind
her, in a very dirty grey chemise, stood a thin, miserable-looking
pregnant woman, who was to be tried for concealment of theft. This woman
stood silent, but kept smiling with pleasure and approval at what was
going on below. With these stood a peasant woman of medium height,
the mother of the boy who was playing with the old woman and of a
seven-year-old girl. These were in prison with her because she had no
one to leave them with. She was serving her term of imprisonment for
illicit sale of spirits. She stood a little further from the window
knitting a stocking, and though she listened to the other prisoners'
words she shook her head disapprovingly, frowned, and closed her eyes.
But her seven-year-old daughter stood in her little chemise, her flaxen
hair done up in a little pigtail, her blue eyes fixed, and, holding
the red-haired woman by the skirt, attentively listened to the words of
abuse that the women and the convicts flung at each other, and repeated
them softly, as if learning them by heart. The twelfth prisoner, who
paid no attention to what was going on, was a very tall, stately girl,
the daughter of a deacon, who had drowned her baby in a well. She went
about with bare feet, wearing only a dirty chemise. The thick, short
plait of her fair hair had come undone and hung down dishevelled, and
she paced up and down the free space of the cell, not looking at any
one, turning abruptly every time she came up to the wall.



CHAPTER XXXI.

THE PRISONERS.

When the padlock rattled and the door opened to let Maslova into the
cell, all turned towards her. Even the deacon's daughter stopped for a
moment and looked at her with lifted brows before resuming her steady
striding up and down.

Korableva stuck her needle into the brown sacking and looked
questioningly at Maslova through her spectacles. "Eh, eh, deary me, so
you have come back. And I felt sure they'd acquit you. So you've got
it?" She took off her spectacles and put her work down beside her on the
shelf bed.

"And here have I and the old lady been saying, 'Why, it may well be
they'll let her go free at once.' Why, it happens, ducky, they'll even
give you a heap of money sometimes, that's sure," the watchman's wife
began, in her singing voice: "Yes, we were wondering, 'Why's she so
long?' And now just see what it is. Well, our guessing was no use. The
Lord willed otherwise," she went on in musical tones.

"Is it possible? Have they sentenced you?" asked Theodosia, with
concern, looking at Maslova with her bright blue, child-like eyes; and
her merry young face changed as if she were going to cry.

Maslova did not answer, but went on to her place, the second from the
end, and sat down beside Korableva.

"Have you eaten anything?" said Theodosia, rising and coming up to
Maslova.

Maslova gave no reply, but putting the rolls on the bedstead, took
off her dusty cloak, the kerchief off her curly black head, and began
pulling off her shoes. The old woman who had been playing with the boy
came up and stood in front of Maslova. "Tz, tz, tz," she clicked with
her tongue, shaking her head pityingly. The boy also came up with her,
and, putting out his upper lip, stared with wide open eyes at the roll
Maslova had brought. When Maslova saw the sympathetic faces of her
fellow-prisoners, her lips trembled and she felt inclined to cry, but
she succeeded in restraining herself until the old woman and the boy
came up. When she heard the kind, pitying clicking of the old woman's
tongue, and met the boy's serious eyes turned from the roll to her face,
she could bear it no longer; her face quivered and she burst into sobs.

"Didn't I tell you to insist on having a proper advocate?" said
Norableva. "Well, what is it? Exile?"

Maslova could not answer, but took from inside the roll a box of
cigarettes, on which was a picture of a lady with hair done up very high
and dress cut low in front, and passed the box to Korableva. Korableva
looked at it and shook her head, chiefly because see did not approve of
Maslova's putting her money to such bad use; but still she took out a
cigarette, lit it at the lamp, took a puff, and almost forced it into
Maslova's hand. Maslova, still crying, began greedily to inhale the
tobacco smoke. "Penal servitude," she muttered, blowing out the smoke
and sobbing.

"Don't they fear the Lord, the cursed soul-slayers?" muttered Korableva,
"sentencing the lass for nothing." At this moment the sound of loud,
coarse laughter came from the women who were still at the window. The
little girl also laughed, and her childish treble mixed with the hoarse
and screeching laughter of the others. One of the convicts outside had
done something that produced this effect on the onlookers.

"Lawks! see the shaved hound, what he's doing," said the red-haired
woman, her whole fat body shaking with laughter; and leaning against the
grating she shouted meaning less obscene words.

"Ugh, the fat fright's cackling," said Korableva, who disliked the
red-haired woman. Then, turning to Maslova again, she asked: "How many
years?"

"Four," said Maslova, and the tears ran down her cheeks in such
profusion that one fell on the cigarette. Maslova crumpled it up angrily
and took another.

Though the watchman's wife did not smoke she picked up the cigarette
Maslova had thrown away and began straightening it out, talking
unceasingly.

"There, now, ducky, so it's true," she said. "Truth's gone to the dogs
and they do what they please, and here we were guessing that you'd go
free. Norableva says, 'She'll go free.' I say, 'No,' say I. 'No, dear,
my heart tells me they'll give it her.' And so it's turned out," she
went on, evidently listening with pleasure to her own voice.

The women who had been standing by the window now also came up to
Maslova, the convicts who had amused them having gone away. The first to
come up were the woman imprisoned for illicit trade in spirits, and her
little girl. "Why such a hard sentence?" asked the woman, sitting down
by Maslova and knitting fast.

"Why so hard? Because there's no money. That's why! Had there been
money, and had a good lawyer that's up to their tricks been hired,
they'd have acquitted her, no fear," said Korableva. "There's
what's-his-name--that hairy one with the long nose. He'd bring you out
clean from pitch, mum, he would. Ah, if we'd only had him!"

"Him, indeed," said Khoroshavka. "Why, he won't spit at you for less
than a thousand roubles."

"Seems you've been born under an unlucky star," interrupted the old
woman who was imprisoned for incendiarism. "Only think, to entice the
lad's wife and lock him himself up to feed vermin, and me, too, in my
old days--" she began to retell her story for the hundredth time. "If
it isn't the beggar's staff it's the prison. Yes, the beggar's staff and
the prison don't wait for an invitation."

"Ah, it seems that's the way with all of them," said the spirit trader;
and after looking at her little girl she put down her knitting, and,
drawing the child between her knees, began to search her head with deft
fingers. "Why do you sell spirits?" she went on. "Why? but what's one to
feed the children on?"

These words brought back to Maslova's mind her craving for drink.

"A little vodka," she said to Korableva, wiping the tears with her
sleeve and sobbing less frequently.

"All right, fork out," said Korableva.



CHAPTER XXXII.

A PRISON QUARREL.

Maslova got the money, which she had also hidden in a roll, and passed
the coupon to Korableva. Korableva accepted it, though she could not
read, trusting to Khoroshavka, who knew everything, and who said that
the slip of paper was worth 2 roubles 50 copecks, then climbed up to the
ventilator, where she had hidden a small flask of vodka. Seeing this,
the women whose places were further off went away. Meanwhile Maslova
shook the dust out of her cloak and kerchief, got up on the bedstead,
and began eating a roll.

"I kept your tea for you," said Theodosia, getting down from the shelf
a mug and a tin teapot wrapped in a rag, "but I'm afraid it is quite
cold." The liquid was quite cold and tasted more of tin than of tea, yet
Maslova filled the mug and began drinking it with her roll. "Finashka,
here you are," she said, breaking off a bit of the roll and giving it to
the boy, who stood looking at her mouth.

Meanwhile Korableva handed the flask of vodka and a mug to Maslova, who
offered some to her and to Khoroshavka. These prisoners were considered
the aristocracy of the cell because they had some money, and shared what
they possessed with the others.

In a few moments Maslova brightened up and related merrily what had
happened at the court, and what had struck her most, i.e., how all the
men had followed her wherever she went. In the court they all looked at
her, she said, and kept coming into the prisoners' room while she was
there.

"One of the soldiers even says, 'It's all to look at you that they
come.' One would come in, 'Where is such a paper?' or something, but I
see it is not the paper he wants; he just devours me with his eyes," she
said, shaking her head. "Regular artists."

"Yes, that's so," said the watchman's wife, and ran on in her musical
strain, "they're like flies after sugar."

"And here, too," Maslova interrupted her, "the same thing. They can
do without anything else. But the likes of them will go without bread
sooner than miss that! Hardly had they brought me back when in comes a
gang from the railway. They pestered me so, I did not know how to
rid myself of them. Thanks to the assistant, he turned them off. One
bothered so, I hardly got away."

"What's he like?" asked Khoroshevka.

"Dark, with moustaches."

"It must be him."

"Him--who?"

"Why, Schegloff; him as has just gone by."

"What's he, this Schegloff?"

"What, she don't know Schegloff? Why, he ran twice from Siberia. Now
they've got him, but he'll run away. The warders themselves are afraid
of him," said Khoroshavka, who managed to exchange notes with the male
prisoners and knew all that went on in the prison. "He'll run away,
that's flat."

"If he does go away you and I'll have to stay," said Korableva, turning
to Maslova, "but you'd better tell us now what the advocate says about
petitioning. Now's the time to hand it in."

Maslova answered that she knew nothing about it.

At that moment the red-haired woman came up to the "aristocracy" with
both freckled hands in her thick hair, scratching her head with her
nails.

"I'll tell you all about it, Katerina," she began. "First and foremost,
you'll have to write down you're dissatisfied with the sentence, then
give notice to the Procureur."

"What do you want here?" said Korableva angrily; "smell the vodka, do
you? Your chatter's not wanted. We know what to do without your advice."

"No one's speaking to you; what do you stick your nose in for?"

"It's vodka you want; that's why you come wriggling yourself in here."

"Well, offer her some," said Maslova, always ready to share anything she
possessed with anybody.

"I'll offer her something."

"Come on then," said the red-haired one, advancing towards Korableva.
"Ah! think I'm afraid of such as you?"

"Convict fright!"

"That's her as says it."

"Slut!"

"I? A slut? Convict! Murderess!" screamed the red-haired one.

"Go away, I tell you," said Korableva gloomily, but the red-haired one
came nearer and Korableva struck her in the chest. The red-haired woman
seemed only to have waited for this, and with a sudden movement caught
hold of Korableva's hair with one hand and with the other struck her in
the face. Korableva seized this hand, and Maslova and Khoroshavka caught
the red-haired woman by her arms, trying to pull her away, but she let
go the old woman's hair with her hand only to twist it round her fist.
Korableva, with her head bent to one side, was dealing out blows with
one arm and trying to catch the red-haired woman's hand with her teeth,
while the rest of the women crowded round, screaming and trying to
separate the fighters; even the consumptive one came up and stood
coughing and watching the fight. The children cried and huddled
together. The noise brought the woman warder and a jailer. The fighting
women were separated; and Korableva, taking out the bits of torn hair
from her head, and the red-haired one, holding her torn chemise together
over her yellow breast, began loudly to complain.

"I know, it's all the vodka. Wait a bit; I'll tell the inspector
tomorrow. He'll give it you. Can't I smell it? Mind, get it all out of
the way, or it will be the worse for you," said the warder. "We've no
time to settle your disputes. Get to your places and be quiet."

But quiet was not soon re-established. For a long time the women went on
disputing and explaining to one another whose fault it all was. At last
the warder and the jailer left the cell, the women grew quieter and
began going to bed, and the old woman went to the icon and commenced
praying.

"The two jailbirds have met," the red-haired woman suddenly called out
in a hoarse voice from the other end of the shelf beds, accompanying
every word with frightfully vile abuse.

"Mind you don't get it again," Korableva replied, also adding words of
abuse, and both were quiet again.

"Had I not been stopped I'd have pulled your damned eyes out," again
began the red-haired one, and an answer of the same kind followed from
Korableva. Then again a short interval and more abuse. But the intervals
became longer and longer, as when a thunder-cloud is passing, and at
last all was quiet.

All were in bed, some began to snore; and only the old woman, who always
prayed a long time, went on bowing before the icon and the deacon's
daughter, who had got up after the warder left, was pacing up and
down the room again. Maslova kept thinking that she was now a convict
condemned to hard labour, and had twice been reminded of this--once by
Botchkova and once by the red-haired woman--and she could not reconcile
herself to the thought. Korableva, who lay next to her, turned over in
her bed.

"There now," said Maslova in a low voice; "who would have thought it?
See what others do and get nothing for it."

"Never mind, girl. People manage to live in Siberia. As for you, you'll
not be lost there either," Korableva said, trying to comfort her.

"I know I'll not be lost; still it is hard. It's not such a fate I
want--I, who am used to a comfortable life."

"Ah, one can't go against God," said Korableva, with a sigh. "One can't,
my dear."

"I know, granny. Still, it's hard."

They were silent for a while.

"Do you hear that baggage?" whispered Korableva, drawing Maslova's
attention to a strange sound proceeding from the other end of the room.

This sound was the smothered sobbing of the red-haired woman. The
red-haired woman was crying because she had been abused and had not got
any of the vodka she wanted so badly; also because she remembered
how all her life she had been abused, mocked at, offended, beaten.
Remembering this, she pitied herself, and, thinking no one heard her,
began crying as children cry, sniffing with her nose and swallowing the
salt tears.

"I'm sorry for her," said Maslova.

"Of course one is sorry," said Korableva, "but she shouldn't come
bothering."



CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE LEAVEN AT WORK--NEKHLUDOFF'S DOMESTIC CHANGES.

The next morning Nekhludoff awoke, conscious that something had happened
to him, and even before he had remembered what it was he knew it to be
something important and good.

"Katusha--the trial!" Yes, he must stop lying and tell the whole truth.

By a strange coincidence on that very morning he received the
long-expected letter from Mary Vasilievna, the wife of the Marechal
de Noblesse, the very letter he particularly needed. She gave him full
freedom, and wished him happiness in his intended marriage.

"Marriage!" he repeated with irony. "How far I am from all that at
present."

And he remembered the plans he had formed the day before, to tell
the husband everything, to make a clean breast of it, and express his
readiness to give him any kind of satisfaction. But this morning this
did not seem so easy as the day before. And, then, also, why make a man
unhappy by telling him what he does not know? Yes, if he came and
asked, he would tell him all, but to go purposely and tell--no! that was
unnecessary.

And telling the whole truth to Missy seemed just as difficult this
morning. Again, he could not begin to speak without offence. As in many
worldly affairs, something had to remain unexpressed. Only one thing he
decided on, i.e., not to visit there, and to tell the truth if asked.

But in connection with Katusha, nothing was to remain unspoken. "I shall
go to the prison and shall tell her every thing, and ask her to forgive
me. And if need be--yes, if need be, I shall marry her," he thought.

This idea, that he was ready to sacrifice all on moral grounds, and
marry her, again made him feel very tender towards himself. Concerning
money matters he resolved this morning to arrange them in accord with
his conviction, that the holding of landed property was unlawful. Even
if he should not be strong enough to give up everything, he would still
do what he could, not deceiving himself or others.

It was long since he had met the coming day with so much energy. When
Agraphena Petrovna came in, he told her, with more firmness than he
thought himself capable of, that he no longer needed this lodging nor
her services. There had been a tacit understanding that he was keeping
up so large and expensive an establishment because he was thinking of
getting married. The giving up of the house had, therefore, a special
meaning. Agraphena Petrovna looked at him in surprise.

"I thank you very much, Agraphena Petrovna, for all your care for me,
but I no longer require so large a house nor so many servants. If you
wish to help me, be so good as to settle about the things, put them away
as it used to be done during mamma's life, and when Natasha comes she
will see to everything." Natasha was Nekhludoff's sister.

Agraphena Petrovna shook her head. "See about the things? Why, they'll
be required again," she said.

"No, they won't, Agraphena Petrovna; I assure you they won't be
required," said Nekhludoff, in answer to what the shaking of her head
had expressed. "Please tell Corney also that I shall pay him two months'
wages, but shall have no further need of him."

"It is a pity, Dmitri Ivanovitch, that you should think of doing this,"
she said. "Well, supposing you go abroad, still you'll require a place
of residence again."

"You are mistaken in your thoughts, Agraphena Petrovna; I am not going
abroad. If I go on a journey, it will be to quite a different place."
He suddenly blushed very red. "Yes, I must tell her," he thought; "no
hiding; everybody must be told."

"A very strange and important thing happened to me yesterday. Do you
remember my Aunt Mary Ivanovna's Katusha?"

"Oh, yes. Why, I taught her how to sew."

"Well, this Katusha was tried in the Court and I was on the jury."

"Oh, Lord! What a pity!" cried Agraphena Petrovna. "What was she being
tried for?"

"Murder; and it is I have done it all."

"Well, now this is very strange; how could you do it all?"

"Yes, I am the cause of it all; and it is this that has altered all my
plans."

"What difference can it make to you?"

"This difference: that I, being the cause of her getting on to that
path, must do all I can to help her."

"That is just according to your own good pleasure; you are not
particularly in fault there. It happens to every one, and if one's
reasonable, it all gets smoothed over and forgotten," she said,
seriously and severely. "Why should you place it to your account?
There's no need. I had already heard before that she had strayed from
the right path. Well, whose fault is it?"

"Mine! that's why I want to put it right."

"It is hard to put right."

"That is my business. But if you are thinking about yourself, then I
will tell you that, as mamma expressed the wish--"

"I am not thinking about myself. I have been so bountifully treated by
the dear defunct, that I desire nothing. Lisenka" (her married niece)
"has been inviting me, and I shall go to her when I am not wanted any
longer. Only it is a pity you should take this so to heart; it happens
to everybody."

"Well, I do not think so. And I still beg that you will help me let this
lodging and put away the things. And please do not be angry with me. I
am very, very grateful to you for all you have done."

And, strangely, from the moment Nekhludoff realised that it was he who
was so bad and disgusting to himself, others were no longer disgusting
to him; on the contrary, he felt a kindly respect for Agraphena
Petrovna, and for Corney.

He would have liked to go and confess to Corney also, but Corney's
manner was so insinuatingly deferential that he had not the resolution
to do it.

On the way to the Law Courts, passing along the same streets with the
same isvostchik as the day before, he was surprised what a different
being he felt himself to be. The marriage with Missy, which only
yesterday seemed so probable, appeared quite impossible now. The day
before he felt it was for him to choose, and had no doubts that she
would be happy to marry him; to-day he felt himself unworthy not only of
marrying, but even of being intimate with her. "If she only knew what
I am, nothing would induce her to receive me. And only yesterday I was
finding fault with her because she flirted with N---. Anyhow, even if
she consented to marry me, could I be, I won't say happy, but at peace,
knowing that the other was here in prison, and would to-day or to-morrow
he taken to Siberia with a gang of other prisoners, while I accepted
congratulations and made calls with my young wife; or while I count the
votes at the meetings, for and against the motion brought forward by the
rural inspection, etc., together with the Marechal de Noblesse, whom I
abominably deceive, and afterwards make appointments with his wife
(how abominable!) or while I continue to work at my picture, which will
certainly never get finished? Besides, I have no business to waste
time on such things. I can do nothing of the kind now," he continued
to himself, rejoicing at the change he felt within himself. "The first
thing now is to see the advocate and find out his decision, and then
. . . then go and see her and tell her everything."

And when he pictured to himself how he would see her, and tell her all,
confess his sin to her, and tell her that he would do all in his power
to atone for his sin, he was touched at his own goodness, and the tears
came to his eyes.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE ABSURDITY OF LAW--REFLECTIONS OF A JURYMAN.

On coming into the Law Courts Nekhludoff met the usher of yesterday, who
to-day seemed to him much to be pitied, in the corridor, and asked him
where those prisoners who had been sentenced were kept, and to whom one
had to apply for permission to visit them. The usher told him that the
condemned prisoners were kept in different places, and that, until they
received their sentence in its final form, the permission to visit them
depended on the president. "I'll come and call you myself, and take you
to the president after the session. The president is not even here at
present. After the session! And now please come in; we are going to
commence."

Nekhludoff thanked the usher for his kindness, and went into the
jurymen's room. As he was approaching the room, the other jurymen were
just leaving it to go into the court. The merchant had again partaken
of a little refreshment, and was as merry as the day before, and greeted
Nekhludoff like an old friend. And to-day Peter Gerasimovitch did not
arouse any unpleasant feelings in Nekhludoff by his familiarity and his
loud laughter. Nekhludoff would have liked to tell all the jurymen about
his relations to yesterday's prisoner. "By rights," he thought, "I ought
to have got up yesterday during the trial and disclosed my guilt."

He entered the court with the other jurymen, and witnessed the same
procedure as the day before.

"The judges are coming," was again proclaimed, and again three men,
with embroidered collars, ascended the platform, and there was the same
settling of the jury on the high-backed chairs, the same gendarmes, the
same portraits, the same priest, and Nekhludoff felt that, though he
knew what he ought to do, he could not interrupt all this solemnity.
The preparations for the trials were just the same as the day before,
excepting that the swearing in of the jury and the president's address
to them were omitted.

The case before the Court this day was one of burglary. The prisoner,
guarded by two gendarmes with naked swords, was a thin, narrow-chested
lad of 20, with a bloodless, sallow face, dressed in a grey cloak.
He sat alone in the prisoner's dock. This boy was accused of having,
together with a companion, broken the lock of a shed and stolen several
old mats valued at 3 roubles [the rouble is worth a little over two
shillings, and contains 100 copecks] and 67 copecks. According to the
indictment, a policeman had stopped this boy as he was passing with his
companion, who was carrying the mats on his shoulder. The boy and
his companion confessed at once, and were both imprisoned. The boy's
companion, a locksmith, died in prison, and so the boy was being tried
alone. The old mats were lying on the table as the objects of material
evidence. The business was conducted just in the same manner as the day
before, with the whole armoury of evidence, proofs, witnesses, swearing
in, questions, experts, and cross-examinations. In answer to every
question put to him by the president, the prosecutor, or the advocate,
the policeman (one of the witnesses) in variably ejected the words:
"just so," or "Can't tell." Yet, in spite of his being stupefied, and
rendered a mere machine by military discipline, his reluctance to speak
about the arrest of this prisoner was evident. Another witness, an old
house proprietor, and owner of the mats, evidently a rich old man, when
asked whether the mats were his, reluctantly identified them as such.
When the public prosecutor asked him what he meant to do with these
mats, what use they were to him, he got angry, and answered: "The devil
take those mats; I don't want them at all. Had I known there would be
all this bother about them I should not have gone looking for them, but
would rather have added a ten-rouble note or two to them, only not to
be dragged here and pestered with questions. I have spent a lot
on isvostchiks. Besides, I am not well. I have been suffering from
rheumatism for the last seven years." It was thus the witness spoke.

The accused himself confessed everything, and looking round stupidly,
like an animal that is caught, related how it had all happened. Still
the public prosecutor, drawing up his shoulders as he had done the day
before, asked subtle questions calculated to catch a cunning criminal.

In his speech he proved that the theft had been committed from a
dwelling-place, and a lock had been broken; and that the boy, therefore,
deserved a heavy punishment. The advocate appointed by the Court proved
that the theft was not committed from a dwelling-place, and that, though
the crime was a serious one, the prisoner was not so very dangerous
to society as the prosecutor stated. The president assumed the role of
absolute neutrality in the same way as he had done on the previous day,
and impressed on the jury facts which they all knew and could not help
knowing. Then came an interval, just as the day before, and they smoked;
and again the usher called out "The judges are coming," and in the
same way the two gendarmes sat trying to keep awake and threatening the
prisoner with their naked weapons.

The proceedings showed that this boy was apprenticed by his father at
a tobacco factory, where he remained five years. This year he had been
discharged by the owner after a strike, and, having lost his place, he
wandered about the town without any work, drinking all he possessed. In
a traktir [cheap restaurant] he met another like himself, who had lost
his place before the prisoner had, a locksmith by trade and a drunkard.
One night, those two, both drunk, broke the lock of a shed and took the
first thing they happened to lay hands on. They confessed all and were
put in prison, where the locksmith died while awaiting the trial. The
boy was now being tried as a dangerous creature, from whom society must
be protected.

"Just as dangerous a creature as yesterday's culprit," thought
Nekhludoff, listening to all that was going on before him. "They are
dangerous, and we who judge them? I, a rake, an adulterer, a deceiver.
We are not dangerous. But, even supposing that this boy is the most
dangerous of all that are here in the court, what should be done from a
common-sense point of view when he has been caught? It is clear that he
is not an exceptional evil-doer, but a most ordinary boy; every one
sees it--and that he has become what he is simply because he got into
circumstances that create such characters, and, therefore, to prevent
such a boy from going wrong the circumstances that create these
unfortunate beings must be done away with.

"But what do we do? We seize one such lad who happens to get caught,
knowing well that there are thousands like him whom we have not caught,
and send him to prison, where idleness, or most unwholesome, useless
labour is forced on him, in company of others weakened and ensnared by
the lives they have led. And then we send him, at the public expense,
from the Moscow to the Irkoutsk Government, in company with the most
depraved of men.

"But we do nothing to destroy the conditions in which people like these
are produced; on the contrary, we support the establishments where
they are formed. These establishments are well known: factories, mills,
workshops, public-houses, gin-shops, brothels. And we do not destroy
these places, but, looking at them as necessary, we support and regulate
them. We educate in this way not one, but millions of people, and then
catch one of them and imagine that we have done something, that we have
guarded ourselves, and nothing more can be expected of us. Have we
not sent him from the Moscow to the Irkoutsk Government?" Thus thought
Nekhludoff with unusual clearness and vividness, sitting in his
high-backed chair next to the colonel, and listening to the different
intonations of the advocates', prosecutor's, and president's voices, and
looking at their self-confident gestures. "And how much and what hard
effort this pretence requires," continued Nekhludoff in his mind,
glancing round the enormous room, the portraits, lamps, armchairs,
uniforms, the thick walls and large windows; and picturing to himself
the tremendous size of the building, and the still more ponderous
dimensions of the whole of this organisation, with its army of
officials, scribes, watchmen, messengers, not only in this place, but
all over Russia, who receive wages for carrying on this comedy which no
one needs. "Supposing we spent one-hundredth of these efforts helping
these castaways, whom we now only regard as hands and bodies, required
by us for our own peace and comfort. Had some one chanced to take pity
on him and given some help at the time when poverty made them send him
to town, it might have been sufficient," Nekhludoff thought, looking at
the boy's piteous face. "Or even later, when, after 12 hours' work
at the factory, he was going to the public-house, led away by his
companions, had some one then come and said, 'Don't go, Vania; it is
not right,' he would not have gone, nor got into bad ways, and would not
have done any wrong.

"But no; no one who would have taken pity on him came across this
apprentice in the years he lived like a poor little animal in the town,
and with his hair cut close so as not to breed vermin, and ran errands
for the workmen. No, all he heard and saw, from the older workmen and
his companions, since he came to live in town, was that he who cheats,
drinks, swears, who gives another a thrashing, who goes on the loose,
is a fine fellow. Ill, his constitution undermined by unhealthy labour,
drink, and debauchery--bewildered as in a dream, knocking aimlessly
about town, he gets into some sort of a shed, and takes from there some
old mats, which nobody needs--and here we, all of us educated people,
rich or comfortably off, meet together, dressed in good clothes and fine
uniforms, in a splendid apartment, to mock this unfortunate brother of
ours whom we ourselves have ruined.

"Terrible! It is difficult to say whether the cruelty or the absurdity
is greater, but the one and the other seem to reach their climax."

Nekhludoff thought all this, no longer listening to what was going on,
and he was horror-struck by that which was being revealed to him. He
could not understand why he had not been able to see all this before,
and why others were unable to see it.



CHAPTER XXXV.

THE PROCUREUR--NEKHLUDOFF REFUSES TO SERVE.

During an interval Nekhludoff got up and went out into the corridor,
with the intention of not returning to the court. Let them do what they
liked with him, he could take no more part in this awful and horrid
tomfoolery.

Having inquired where the Procureur's cabinet was he went straight to
him. The attendant did not wish to let him in, saying that the Procureur
was busy, but Nekhludoff paid no heed and went to the door, where he was
met by an official. He asked to be announced to the Procureur, saying he
was on the jury and had a very important communication to make.

His title and good clothes were of assistance to him. The official
announced him to the Procureur, and Nekhludoff was let in. The Procureur
met him standing, evidently annoyed at the persistence with which
Nekhludoff demanded admittance.

"What is it you want?" the Procureur asked, severely.

"I am on the jury; my name is Nekhludoff, and it is absolutely necessary
for me to see the prisoner Maslova," Nekhludoff said, quickly and
resolutely, blushing, and feeling that he was taking a step which would
have a decisive influence on his life.

The Procureur was a short, dark man, with short, grizzly hair, quick,
sparkling eyes, and a thick beard cut close on his projecting lower jaw.

"Maslova? Yes, of course, I know. She was accused of poisoning," the
Procureur said, quietly. "But why do you want to see her?" And then, as
if wishing to tone down his question, he added, "I cannot give you the
permission without knowing why you require it."

"I require it for a particularly important reason."

"Yes?" said the Procureur, and, lifting his eyes, looked attentively at
Nekhludoff. "Has her case been heard or not?"

"She was tried yesterday, and unjustly sentenced; she is innocent."

"Yes? If she was sentenced only yesterday," went on the Procureur,
paying no attention to Nekhludoff's statement concerning Maslova's
innocence, "she must still be in the preliminary detention prison until
the sentence is delivered in its final form. Visiting is allowed there
only on certain days; I should advise you to inquire there."

"But I must see her as soon as possible," Nekhludoff said, his jaw
trembling as he felt the decisive moment approaching.

"Why must you?" said the Procureur, lifting his brows with some
agitation.

"Because I betrayed her and brought her to the condition which exposed
her to this accusation."

"All the same, I cannot see what it has to do with visiting her."

"This: that whether I succeed or not in getting the sentence changed I
want to follow her, and--marry her," said Nekhludoff, touched to tears
by his own conduct, and at the same time pleased to see the effect he
produced on the Procureur.

"Really! Dear me!" said the Procureur. "This is certainly a very
exceptional case. I believe you are a member of the Krasnoporsk rural
administration?" he asked, as if he remembered having heard before of
this Nekhludoff, who was now making so strange a declaration.

"I beg your pardon, but I do not think that has anything to do with my
request," answered Nekhludoff, flushing angrily.

"Certainly not," said the Procureur, with a scarcely perceptible smile
and not in the least abashed; "only your wish is so extraordinary and so
out of the common."

"Well; but can I get the permission?"

"The permission? Yes, I will give you an order of admittance directly.
Take a seat."

He went up to the table, sat down, and began to write. "Please sit
down."

Nekhludoff continued to stand.

Having written an order of admittance, and handed it to Nekhludoff, the
Procureur looked curiously at him.

"I must also state that I can no longer take part in the sessions."

"Then you will have to lay valid reasons before the Court, as you, of
course, know."

"My reasons are that I consider all judging not only useless, but
immoral."

"Yes," said the Procureur, with the same scarcely perceptible smile,
as if to show that this kind of declaration was well known to him and
belonged to the amusing sort. "Yes, but you will certainly understand
that I as Procureur, can not agree with you on this point. Therefore,
I should advise you to apply to the Court, which will consider your
declaration, and find it valid or not valid, and in the latter case will
impose a fine. Apply, then, to the Court."

"I have made my declaration, and shall apply nowhere else," Nekhludoff
said, angrily.

"Well, then, good-afternoon," said the Procureur, bowing his head,
evidently anxious to be rid of this strange visitor.

"Who was that you had here?" asked one of the members of the Court, as
he entered, just after Nekhludoff left the room.

"Nekhludoff, you know; the same that used to make all sorts of strange
statements at the Krasnoporsk rural meetings. Just fancy! He is on the
jury, and among the prisoners there is a woman or girl sentenced to
penal servitude, whom he says he betrayed, and now he wants to marry
her."

"You don't mean to say so."

"That's what he told me. And in such a strange state of excitement!"

"There is something abnormal in the young men of to-day."

"Oh, but he is not so very young."

"Yes. But how tiresome your famous Ivoshenka was. He carries the day by
wearying one out. He talked and talked without end."

"Oh, that kind of people should be simply stopped, or they will become
real obstructionists."



CHAPTER XXXVI.

NEKHLUDOFF ENDEAVOURS TO VISIT MASLOVA.

From the Procureur Nekhludoff went straight to the preliminary detention
prison. However, no Maslova was to be found there, and the inspector
explained to Nekhludoff that she would probably be in the old temporary
prison. Nekhludoff went there.

Yes, Katerina Maslova was there.

The distance between the two prisons was enormous, and Nekhludoff only
reached the old prison towards evening. He was going up to the door of
the large, gloomy building, but the sentinel stopped him and rang. A
warder came in answer to the bell. Nekhludoff showed him his order of
admittance, but the warder said he could not let him in without the
inspector's permission. Nekhludoff went to see the inspector. As he was
going up the stairs he heard distant sounds of some complicated bravura,
played on the piano. When a cross servant girl, with a bandaged eye,
opened the door to him, those sounds seemed to escape from the room
and to strike his car. It was a rhapsody of Liszt's, that everybody was
tired of, splendidly played but only to one point. When that point was
reached the same thing was repeated. Nekhludoff asked the bandaged maid
whether the inspector was in. She answered that he was not in.

"Will he return soon?"

The rhapsody again stopped and recommenced loudly and brilliantly again
up to the same charmed point.

"I will go and ask," and the servant went away.

"Tell him he is not in and won't be to-day; he is out visiting. What do
they come bothering for?" came the sound of a woman's voice from behind
the door, and again the rhapsody rattled on and stopped, and the sound
of a chair pushed back was heard. It was plain the irritated pianist
meant to rebuke the tiresome visitor, who had come at an untimely hour.
"Papa is not in," a pale girl with crimped hair said, crossly, coming
out into the ante-room, but, seeing a young man in a good coat, she
softened.

"Come in, please. . . . What is it you want?"

"I want to see a prisoner in this prison."

"A political one, I suppose?"

"No, not a political one. I have a permission from the Procureur."

"Well, I don't know, and papa is out; but come in, please," she said,
again, "or else speak to the assistant. He is in the office at present;
apply there. What is your name?"

"I thank you," said Nekhludoff, without answering her question, and went
out.

The door was not yet closed after him when the same lively tones
recommenced. In the courtyard Nekhludoff met an officer with bristly
moustaches, and asked for the assistant-inspector. It was the assistant
himself. He looked at the order of admittance, but said that he could
not decide to let him in with a pass for the preliminary prison.
Besides, it was too late. "Please to come again to-morrow. To morrow, at
10, everybody is allowed to go in. Come then, and the inspector himself
will be at home. Then you can have the interview either in the common
room or, if the inspector allows it, in the office."

And so Nekhludoff did not succeed in getting an interview that day,
and returned home. As he went along the streets, excited at the idea of
meeting her, he no longer thought about the Law Courts, but recalled his
conversations with the Procureur and the inspector's assistant. The
fact that he had been seeking an interview with her, and had told the
Procureur, and had been in two prisons, so excited him that it was long
before he could calm down. When he got home he at once fetched out his
diary, that had long remained untouched, read a few sentences out of it,
and then wrote as follows:

"For two years I have not written anything in my diary, and thought I
never should return to this childishness. Yet it is not childishness,
but converse with my own self, with this real divine self which lives
in every man. All this time that I slept there was no one for me to
converse with. I was awakened by an extraordinary event on the 28th
of April, in the Law Court, when I was on the jury. I saw her in the
prisoners' dock, the Katusha betrayed by me, in a prisoner's cloak,
condemned to penal servitude through a strange mistake, and my own
fault. I have just been to the Procureur's and to the prison, but I was
not admitted. I have resolved to do all I can to see her, to confess to
her, and to atone for my sin, even by a marriage. God help me. My soul
is at peace and I am full of joy."



CHAPTER XXXVII.

MASLOVA RECALLS THE PAST.

That night Maslova lay awake a long time with her eyes open looking at
the door, in front of which the deacon's daughter kept passing. She was
thinking that nothing would induce her to go to the island of Sakhalin
and marry a convict, but would arrange matters somehow with one of the
prison officials, the secretary, a warder, or even a warder's assistant.
"Aren't they all given that way? Only I must not get thin, or else I am
lost."

She thought of how the advocate had looked at her, and also the
president, and of the men she met, and those who came in on purpose at
the court. She recollected how her companion, Bertha, who came to see
her in prison, had told her about the student whom she had "loved" while
she was with Kitaeva, and who had inquired about her, and pitied her
very much. She recalled many to mind, only not Nekhludoff. She never
brought back to mind the days of her childhood and youth, and her love
to Nekhludoff. That would have been too painful. These memories lay
untouched somewhere deep in her soul; she had forgotten him, and never
recalled and never even dreamt of him. To-day, in the court, she did not
recognise him, not only because when she last saw him he was in uniform,
without a beard, and had only a small moustache and thick, curly, though
short hair, and now was bald and bearded, but because she never thought
about him. She had buried his memory on that terrible dark night when
he, returning from the army, had passed by on the railway without
stopping to call on his aunts. Katusha then knew her condition. Up to
that night she did not consider the child that lay beneath her heart
a burden. But on that night everything changed, and the child became
nothing but a weight.

His aunts had expected Nekhludoff, had asked him to come and see them in
passing, but he had telegraphed that he could not come, as he had to be
in Petersburg at an appointed time. When Katusha heard this she made up
her mind to go to the station and see him. The train was to pass by at
two o'clock in the night. Katusha having helped the old ladies to bed,
and persuaded a little girl, the cook's daughter, Mashka, to come with
her, put on a pair of old boots, threw a shawl over her head, gathered
up her dress, and ran to the station.

It was a warm, rainy, and windy autumn night. The rain now pelted down
in warm, heavy drops, now stopped again. It was too dark to see the path
across the field, and in the wood it was pitch black, so that although
Katusha knew the way well, she got off the path, and got to the little
station where the train stopped for three minutes, not before, as she
had hoped, but after the second bell had been rung. Hurrying up the
platform, Katusha saw him at once at the windows of a first-class
carriage. Two officers sat opposite each other on the velvet-covered
seats, playing cards. This carriage was very brightly lit up; on the
little table between the seats stood two thick, dripping candles. He sat
in his closefitting breeches on the arm of the seat, leaning against
the back, and laughed. As soon as she recognised him she knocked at the
carriage window with her benumbed hand, but at that moment the last bell
rang, and the train first gave a backward jerk, and then gradually the
carriages began to move forward. One of the players rose with the cards
in his hand, and looked out. She knocked again, and pressed her face to
the window, but the carriage moved on, and she went alongside looking
in. The officer tried to lower the window, but could not. Nekhludoff
pushed him aside and began lowering it himself. The train went faster,
so that she had to walk quickly. The train went on still faster and the
window opened. The guard pushed her aside, and jumped in. Katusha ran
on, along the wet boards of the platform, and when she came to the end
she could hardly stop herself from falling as she ran down the steps
of the platform. She was running by the side of the railway, though the
first-class carriage had long passed her, and the second-class carriages
were gliding by faster, and at last the third-class carriages still
faster. But she ran on, and when the last carriage with the lamps at
the back had gone by, she had already reached the tank which fed the
engines, and was unsheltered from the wind, which was blowing her shawl
about and making her skirt cling round her legs. The shawl flew off her
head, but still she ran on.

"Katerina Michaelovna, you've lost your shawl!" screamed the little
girl, who was trying to keep up with her.

Katusha stopped, threw back her head, and catching hold of it with both
hands sobbed aloud. "Gone!" she screamed.

"He is sitting in a velvet arm-chair and joking and drinking, in a
brightly lit carriage, and I, out here in the mud, in the darkness, in
the wind and the rain, am standing and weeping," she thought to herself;
and sat down on the ground, sobbing so loud that the little girl got
frightened, and put her arms round her, wet as she was.

"Come home, dear," she said.

"When a train passes--then under a carriage, and there will be an end,"
Katusha was thinking, without heeding the girl.

And she made up her mind to do it, when, as it always happens, when a
moment of quiet follows great excitement, he, the child--his child--made
himself known within her. Suddenly all that a moment before had been
tormenting her, so that it had seemed impossible to live, all her
bitterness towards him, and the wish to revenge herself, even by dying,
passed away; she grew quieter, got up, put the shawl on her head, and
went home.

Wet, muddy, and quite exhausted, she returned, and from that day the
change which brought her where she now was began to operate in her soul.
Beginning from that dreadful night, she ceased believing in God and
in goodness. She had herself believed in God, and believed that other
people also believed in Him; but after that night she became convinced
that no one believed, and that all that was said about God and His
laws was deception and untruth. He whom she loved, and who had loved
her--yes, she knew that--had thrown her away; had abused her love. Yet
he was the best of all the people she knew. All the rest were still
worse. All that afterwards happened to her strengthened her in this
belief at every step. His aunts, the pious old ladies, turned her out
when she could no longer serve them as she used to. And of all those she
met, the women used her as a means of getting money, the men, from the
old police officer down to the warders of the prison, looked at her as
on an object for pleasure. And no one in the world cared for aught but
pleasure. In this belief the old author with whom she had come together
in the second year of her life of independence had strengthened her. He
had told her outright that it was this that constituted the happiness of
life, and he called it poetical and aesthetic.

Everybody lived for himself only, for his pleasure, and all the talk
concerning God and righteousness was deception. And if sometimes doubts
arose in her mind and she wondered why everything was so ill-arranged
in the world that all hurt each other, and made each other suffer, she
thought it best not to dwell on it, and if she felt melancholy she could
smoke, or, better still, drink, and it would pass.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

SUNDAY IN PRISON--PREPARING FOR MASS.

On Sunday morning at five o'clock, when a whistle sounded in the
corridor of the women's ward of the prison, Korableva, who was already
awake, called Maslova.

"Oh, dear! life again," thought Maslova, with horror, involuntarily
breathing in the air that had become terribly noisome towards the
morning. She wished to fall asleep again, to enter into the region of
oblivion, but the habit of fear overcame sleepiness, and she sat up and
looked round, drawing her feet under her. The women had all got up; only
the elder children were still asleep. The spirit-trader was carefully
drawing a cloak from under the children, so as not to wake them. The
watchman's wife was hanging up the rags to dry that served the baby
as swaddling clothes, while the baby was screaming desperately in
Theodosia's arms, who was trying to quiet it. The consumptive woman was
coughing with her hands pressed to her chest, while the blood rushed to
her face, and she sighed loudly, almost screaming, in the intervals of
coughing. The fat, red-haired woman was lying on her back, with
knees drawn up, and loudly relating a dream. The old woman accused of
incendiarism was standing in front of the image, crossing herself and
bowing, and repeating the same words over and over again. The deacon's
daughter sat on the bedstead, looking before her, with a dull, sleepy
face. Khoroshavka was twisting her black, oily, coarse hair round her
fingers. The sound of slipshod feet was heard in the passage, and the
door opened to let in two convicts, dressed in jackets and grey trousers
that did not reach to their ankles. With serious, cross faces they
lifted the stinking tub and carried it out of the cell. The women went
out to the taps in the corridor to wash. There the red-haired woman
again began a quarrel with a woman from another cell.

"Is it the solitary cell you want?" shouted an old jailer, slapping the
red-haired woman on her bare, fat back, so that it sounded through the
corridor. "You be quiet."

"Lawks! the old one's playful," said the woman, taking his action for a
caress.

"Now, then, be quick; get ready for the mass." Maslova had hardly time
to do her hair and dress when the inspector came with his assistants.

"Come out for inspection," cried a jailer.

Some more prisoners came out of other cells and stood in two rows along
the corridor; each woman had to place her hand on the shoulder of the
woman in front of her. They were all counted.

After the inspection the woman warder led the prisoners to church.
Maslova and Theodosia were in the middle of a column of over a hundred
women, who had come out of different cells. All were dressed in white
skirts, white jackets, and wore white kerchiefs on their heads, except
a few who had their own coloured clothes on. These were wives who, with
their children, were following their convict husbands to Siberia. The
whole flight of stairs was filled by the procession. The patter of
softly-shod feet mingled with the voices and now and then a laugh. When
turning, on the landing, Maslova saw her enemy, Botchkova, in front, and
pointed out her angry face to Theodosia. At the bottom of the stairs the
women stopped talking. Bowing and crossing themselves, they entered the
empty church, which glistened with gilding. Crowding and pushing one
another, they took their places on the right.

After the women came the men condemned to banishment, those serving
their term in the prison, and those exiled by their Communes; and,
coughing loudly, they took their stand, crowding the left side and the
middle of the church.

On one side of the gallery above stood the men sentenced to penal
servitude in Siberia, who had been let into the church before the
others. Each of them had half his head shaved, and their presence was
indicated by the clanking of the chains on their feet. On the other side
of the gallery stood those in preliminary confinement, without chains,
their heads not shaved.

The prison church had been rebuilt and ornamented by a rich merchant,
who spent several tens of thousands of roubles on it, and it glittered
with gay colours and gold. For a time there was silence in the church,
and only coughing, blowing of noses, the crying of babies, and now and
then the rattling of chains, was heard. But at last the convicts that
stood in the middle moved, pressed against each other, leaving a passage
in the centre of the church, down which the prison inspector passed to
take his place in front of every one in the nave.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE PRISON CHURCH--BLIND LEADERS OF THE BLIND.

The service began.

It consisted of the following. The priest, having dressed in a strange
and very inconvenient garb, made of gold cloth, cut and arranged little
bits of bread on a saucer, and then put them into a cup with wine,
repeating at the same time different names and prayers. Meanwhile
the deacon first read Slavonic prayers, difficult to understand in
themselves, and rendered still more incomprehensible by being read very
fast, and then sang them turn and turn about with the convicts. The
contents of the prayers were chiefly the desire for the welfare of
the Emperor and his family. These petitions were repeated many times,
separately and together with other prayers, the people kneeling. Besides
this, several verses from the Acts of the Apostles were read by the
deacon in a peculiarly strained voice, which made it impossible to
understand what he read, and then the priest read very distinctly a
part of the Gospel according to St. Mark, in which it said that Christ,
having risen from the dead before flying up to heaven to sit down at His
Father's right hand, first showed Himself to Mary Magdalene, out of whom
He had driven seven devils, and then to eleven of His disciples, and
ordered them to preach the Gospel to the whole creation, and the priest
added that if any one did not believe this he would perish, but he that
believed it and was baptised should be saved, and should besides drive
out devils and cure people by laying his hands on them, should talk in
strange tongues, should take up serpents, and if he drank poison should
not die, but remain well.

The essence of the service consisted in the supposition that the bits
cut up by the priest and put by him into the wine, when manipulated and
prayed over in a certain way, turned into the flesh and blood of God.

These manipulations consisted in the priest's regularly lifting and
holding up his arms, though hampered by the gold cloth sack he had on,
then, sinking on to his knees and kissing the table and all that was on
it, but chiefly in his taking a cloth by two of its corners and waving
it regularly and softly over the silver saucer and golden cup. It was
supposed that, at this point, the bread and the wine turned into flesh
and blood; therefore, this part of the service was performed with the
greatest solemnity.

"Now, to the blessed, most pure, and most holy Mother of God," the
priest cried from the golden partition which divided part of the church
from the rest, and the choir began solemnly to sing that it was very
right to glorify the Virgin Mary, who had borne Christ without losing
her virginity, and was therefore worthy of greater honour than some kind
of cherubim, and greater glory than some kind of seraphim. After this
the transformation was considered accomplished, and the priest having
taken the napkin off the saucer, cut the middle bit of bread in four,
and put it into the wine, and then into his mouth. He was supposed to
have eaten a bit of God's flesh and swallowed a little of His blood.
Then the priest drew a curtain, opened the middle door in the partition,
and, taking the gold cup in his hands, came out of the door, inviting
those who wished to do so also to come and eat some of God's flesh and
blood that was contained in the cup. A few children appeared to wish to
do so.

After having asked the children their names, the priest carefully took
out of the cup, with a spoon, and shoved a bit of bread soaked in wine
deep into the mouth of each child in turn, and the deacon, while wiping
the children's mouths, sang, in a merry voice, that the children were
eating the flesh and drinking the blood of God. After this the priest
carried the cup back behind the partition, and there drank all the
remaining blood and ate up all the bits of flesh, and after having
carefully sucked his moustaches and wiped his mouth, he stepped briskly
from behind the partition, the soles of his calfskin boots creaking.
The principal part of this Christian service was now finished, but
the priest, wishing to comfort the unfortunate prisoners, added to the
ordinary service another. This consisted of his going up to the gilt
hammered-out image (with black face and hands) supposed to represent
the very God he had been eating, illuminated by a dozen wax candles, and
proceeding, in a strange, discordant voice, to hum or sing the following
words:

"Jesu sweetest, glorified of the Apostles, Jesu lauded by the martyrs,
almighty Monarch, save me, Jesu my Saviour. Jesu, most beautiful, have
mercy on him who cries to Thee, Saviour Jesu. Born of prayer Jesu, all
thy saints, all thy prophets, save and find them worthy of the joys of
heaven. Jesu, lover of men."

Then he stopped, drew breath, crossed himself, bowed to the ground, and
every one did the same--the inspector, the warders, the prisoners; and
from above the clinking of the chains sounded more unintermittently.
Then he continued: "Of angels the Creator and Lord of powers, Jesu most
wonderful, the angels' amazement, Jesu most powerful, of our forefathers
the Redeemer. Jesu sweetest, of patriarchs the praise. Jesu most
glorious, of kings the strength. Jesu most good, of prophets the
fulfilment. Jesu most amazing, of martyrs the strength. Jesu most
humble, of monks the joy. Jesu most merciful, of priests the sweetness.
Jesu most charitable, of the fasting the continence. Jesu most sweet,
of the just the joy. Jesu most pure, of the celibates the chastity. Jesu
before all ages of sinners the salvation. Jesu, son of God, have mercy
on me."

Every time he repeated the word "Jesu" his voice became more and
more wheezy. At last he came to a stop, and holding up his silk-lined
cassock, and kneeling down on one knee, he stooped down to the ground
and the choir began to sing, repeating the words, "Jesu, Son of God,
have mercy on me," and the convicts fell down and rose again, shaking
back the hair that was left on their heads, and rattling with the chains
that were bruising their thin ankles.

This continued for a long time. First came the glorification, which
ended with the words, "Have mercy on me." Then more glorifications,
ending with "Alleluia!" And the convicts made the sign of the cross,
and bowed, first at each sentence, then after every two and then after
three, and all were very glad when the glorification ended, and the
priest shut the book with a sigh of relief and retired behind the
partition. One last act remained. The priest took a large, gilt cross,
with enamel medallions at the ends, from a table, and came out into the
centre of the church with it. First the inspector came up and kissed
the cross, then the jailers, then the convicts, pushing and abusing
each other in whispers. The priest, talking to the inspector, pushed the
cross and his hand now against the mouths and now against the noses of
the convicts, who were trying to kiss both the cross and the hand of the
priest. And thus ended the Christian service, intended for the comfort
and the teaching of these strayed brothers.



CHAPTER XL.

THE HUSKS OF RELIGION.

And none of those present, from the inspector down to Maslova, seemed
conscious of the fact that this Jesus, whose name the priest repeated
such a great number of times, and whom he praised with all these curious
expressions, had forbidden the very things that were being done there;
that He had prohibited not only this meaningless much-speaking and the
blasphemous incantation over the bread and wine, but had also, in the
clearest words, forbidden men to call other men their master, and to
pray in temples; and had ordered that every one should pray in solitude,
had forbidden to erect temples, saying that He had come to destroy
them, and that one should worship, not in a temple, but in spirit and
in truth; and, above all, that He had forbidden not only to judge, to
imprison, to torment, to execute men, as was being done here, but had
prohibited any kind of violence, saying that He had come to give freedom
to the captives.

No one present seemed conscious that all that was going on here was the
greatest blasphemy and a supreme mockery of that same Christ in whose
name it was being done. No one seemed to realise that the gilt cross
with the enamel medallions at the ends, which the priest held out to the
people to be kissed, was nothing but the emblem of that gallows on which
Christ had been executed for denouncing just what was going on here.
That these priests, who imagined they were eating and drinking the body
and blood of Christ in the form of bread and wine, did in reality eat
and drink His flesh and His blood, but not as wine and bits of bread,
but by ensnaring "these little ones" with whom He identified Himself,
by depriving them of the greatest blessings and submitting them to most
cruel torments, and by hiding from men the tidings of great joy which
He had brought. That thought did not enter into the mind of any one
present.

The priest did his part with a quiet conscience, because he was brought
up from childhood to consider that the only true faith was the faith
which had been held by all the holy men of olden times and was still
held by the Church, and demanded by the State authorities. He did not
believe that the bread turned into flesh, that it was useful for the
soul to repeat so many words, or that he had actually swallowed a bit of
God. No one could believe this, but he believed that one ought to hold
this faith. What strengthened him most in this faith was the fact that,
for fulfilling the demands of this faith, he had for the last 15 years
been able to draw an income, which enabled him to keep his family, send
his son to a gymnasium and his daughter to a school for the daughters of
the clergy. The deacon believed in the same manner, and even more firmly
than the priest, for he had forgotten the substance of the dogmas of
this faith, and knew only that the prayers for the dead, the masses,
with and without the acathistus, all had a definite price, which real
Christians readily paid, and, therefore, he called out his "have mercy,
have mercy," very willingly, and read and said what was appointed, with
the same quiet certainty of its being necessary to do so with which
other men sell faggots, flour, or potatoes. The prison inspector and the
warders, though they had never understood or gone into the meaning of
these dogmas and of all that went on in church, believed that they must
believe, because the higher authorities and the Tsar himself believed in
it. Besides, though faintly (and themselves unable to explain why), they
felt that this faith defended their cruel occupations. If this faith
did not exist it would have been more difficult, perhaps impossible, for
them to use all their powers to torment people, as they were now doing,
with a quiet conscience. The inspector was such a kind-hearted man that
he could not have lived as he was now living unsupported by his faith.
Therefore, he stood motionless, bowed and crossed himself zealously,
tried to feel touched when the song about the cherubims was being sung,
and when the children received communion he lifted one of them, and held
him up to the priest with his own hands.

The great majority of the prisoners believed that there lay a mystic
power in these gilt images, these vestments, candles, cups, crosses,
and this repetition of incomprehensible words, "Jesu sweetest" and "have
mercy"--a power through which might be obtained much convenience in this
and in the future life. Only a few clearly saw the deception that was
practised on the people who adhered to this faith, and laughed at it in
their hearts; but the majority, having made several attempts to get the
conveniences they desired, by means of prayers, masses, and candles, and
not having got them (their prayers remaining unanswered), were each of
them convinced that their want of success was accidental, and that
this organisation, approved by the educated and by archbishops, is very
important and necessary, if not for this, at any rate for the next life.

Maslova also believed in this way. She felt, like the rest, a mixed
sensation of piety and dulness. She stood at first in a crowd behind a
railing, so that she could see no one but her companions; but when those
to receive communion moved on, she and Theodosia stepped to the front,
and they saw the inspector, and, behind him, standing among the warders,
a little peasant, with a very light beard and fair hair. This was
Theodosia's husband, and he was gazing with fixed eyes at his wife.
During the acathistus Maslova occupied herself in scrutinising him and
talking to Theodosia in whispers, and bowed and made the sign of the
cross only when every one else did.



CHAPTER XLI.

VISITING DAY--THE MEN'S WARD.

Nekhludoff left home early. A peasant from the country was still driving
along the side street and calling out in a voice peculiar to his trade,
"Milk! milk! milk!"

The first warm spring rain had fallen the day before, and now wherever
the ground was not paved the grass shone green. The birch trees in the
gardens looked as if they were strewn with green fluff, the wild cherry
and the poplars unrolled their long, balmy buds, and in shops and
dwelling-houses the double window-frames were being removed and the
windows cleaned.

In the Tolkoochi [literally, jostling market, where second-hand clothes
and all sorts of cheap goods are sold] market, which Nekhludoff had to
pass on his way, a dense crowd was surging along the row of booths, and
tattered men walked about selling top-boots, which they carried under
their arms, and renovated trousers and waistcoats, which hung over their
shoulders.

Men in clean coats and shining boots, liberated from the factories, it
being Sunday, and women with bright silk kerchiefs on their heads and
cloth jackets trimmed with jet, were already thronging at the door of
the traktir. Policemen, with yellow cords to their uniforms and carrying
pistols, were on duty, looking out for some disorder which might
distract the ennui that oppressed them. On the paths of the boulevards
and on the newly-revived grass, children and dogs ran about, playing,
and the nurses sat merrily chattering on the benches. Along the streets,
still fresh and damp on the shady side, but dry in the middle, heavy
carts rumbled unceasingly, cabs rattled and tramcars passed ringing by.
The air vibrated with the pealing and clanging of church bells, that
were calling the people to attend to a service like that which was now
being conducted in the prison. And the people, dressed in their Sunday
best, were passing on their way to their different parish churches.

The isvostchik did not drive Nekhludoff up to the prison itself, but to
the last turning that led to the prison.

Several persons--men and women--most of them carrying small bundles,
stood at this turning, about 100 steps from the prison. To the right
there were several low wooden buildings; to the left, a two-storeyed
house with a signboard. The huge brick building, the prison proper, was
just in front, and the visitors were not allowed to come up to it. A
sentinel was pacing up and down in front of it, and shouted at any one
who tried to pass him.

At the gate of the wooden buildings, to the right, opposite the
sentinel, sat a warder on a bench, dressed in uniform, with gold cords,
a notebook in his hands. The visitors came up to him, and named the
persons they wanted to see, and he put the names down. Nekhludoff also
went up, and named Katerina Maslova. The warder wrote down the name.

"Why--don't they admit us yet?" asked Nekhludoff.

"The service is going on. When the mass is over, you'll be admitted."

Nekhludoff stepped aside from the waiting crowd. A man in tattered
clothes, crumpled hat, with bare feet and red stripes all over his face,
detached himself from the crowd, and turned towards the prison.

"Now, then, where are you going?" shouted the sentinel with the gun.

"And you hold your row," answered the tramp, not in the least abashed by
the sentinel's words, and turned back. "Well, if you'll not let me in,
I'll wait. But, no! Must needs shout, as if he were a general."

The crowd laughed approvingly. The visitors were, for the greater
part, badly-dressed people; some were ragged, but there were also
some respectable-looking men and women. Next to Nekhludoff stood a
clean-shaven, stout, and red-cheeked man, holding a bundle, apparently
containing under-garments. This was the doorkeeper of a bank; he had
come to see his brother, who was arrested for forgery. The good-natured
fellow told Nekhludoff the whole story of his life, and was going to
question him in turn, when their attention was aroused by a student and
a veiled lady, who drove up in a trap, with rubber tyres, drawn by a
large thoroughbred horse. The student was holding a large bundle. He
came up to Nekhludoff, and asked if and how he could give the rolls he
had brought in alms to the prisoners. His fiancee wished it (this lady
was his fiancee), and her parents had advised them to take some rolls to
the prisoners.

"I myself am here for the first time," said Nekhludoff, "and don't know;
but I think you had better ask this man," and he pointed to the warder
with the gold cords and the book, sitting on the right.

As they were speaking, the large iron door with a window in it opened,
and an officer in uniform, followed by another warder, stepped out.
The warder with the notebook proclaimed that the admittance of visitors
would now commence. The sentinel stepped aside, and all the visitors
rushed to the door as if afraid of being too late; some even ran. At
the door there stood a warder who counted the visitors as they came
in, saying aloud, 16, 17, and so on. Another warder stood inside the
building and also counted the visitors as they entered a second door,
touching each one with his hand, so that when they went away again
not one visitor should be able to remain inside the prison and not
one prisoner might get out. The warder, without looking at whom he was
touching, slapped Nekhludoff on the back, and Nekhludoff felt hurt by
the touch of the warder's hand; but, remembering what he had come about,
he felt ashamed of feeling dissatisfied and taking offence.

The first apartment behind the entrance doors was a large vaulted room
with iron bars to the small windows. In this room, which was called the
meeting-room, Nekhludoff was startled by the sight of a large picture of
the Crucifixion.

"What's that for?" he thought, his mind involuntarily connecting the
subject of the picture with liberation and not with imprisonment.

He went on, slowly letting the hurrying visitors pass before, and
experiencing a mingled feeling of horror at the evil-doers locked up in
this building, compassion for those who, like Katusha and the boy they
tried the day before, must be here though guiltless, and shyness and
tender emotion at the thought of the interview before him. The warder
at the other end of the meeting-room said something as they passed, but
Nekhludoff, absorbed by his own thoughts, paid no attention to him, and
continued to follow the majority of the visitors, and so got into the
men's part of the prison instead of the women's.

Letting the hurrying visitors pass before him, he was the last to get
into the interviewing-room. As soon as Nekhludoff opened the door of
this room, he was struck by the deafening roar of a hundred voices
shouting at once, the reason of which he did not at once understand. But
when he came nearer to the people, he saw that they were all pressing
against a net that divided the room in two, like flies settling on
sugar, and he understood what it meant. The two halves of the room,
the windows of which were opposite the door he had come in by, were
separated, not by one, but by two nets reaching from the floor to the
ceiling. The wire nets were stretched 7 feet apart, and soldiers were
walking up and down the space between them. On the further side of the
nets were the prisoners, on the nearer, the visitors. Between them was
a double row of nets and a space of 7 feet wide, so that they could not
hand anything to one another, and any one whose sight was not very
good could not even distinguish the face on the other side. It was also
difficult to talk; one had to scream in order to be heard.

On both sides were faces pressed close to the nets, faces of wives,
husbands, fathers, mothers, children, trying to see each other's
features and to say what was necessary in such a way as to be
understood.

But as each one tried to be heard by the one he was talking to, and
his neighbour tried to do the same, they did their best to drown each
other's voices' and that was the cause of the din and shouting which
struck Nekhludoff when he first came in. It was impossible to understand
what was being said and what were the relations between the different
people. Next Nekhludoff an old woman with a kerchief on her head stood
trembling, her chin pressed close to the net, and shouting something to
a young fellow, half of whose head was shaved, who listened attentively
with raised brows. By the side of the old woman was a young man in
a peasant's coat, who listened, shaking his head, to a boy very like
himself. Next stood a man in rags, who shouted, waving his arm and
laughing. Next to him a woman, with a good woollen shawl on her
shoulders, sat on the floor holding a baby in her lap and crying
bitterly. This was apparently the first time she saw the greyheaded man
on the other side in prison clothes, and with his head shaved. Beyond
her was the doorkeeper, who had spoken to Nekhludoff outside; he was
shouting with all his might to a greyhaired convict on the other side.

When Nekhludoff found that he would have to speak in similar conditions,
a feeling of indignation against those who were able to make and enforce
these conditions arose in him; he was surprised that, placed in such
a dreadful position, no one seemed offended at this outrage on human
feelings. The soldiers, the inspector, the prisoners themselves, acted
as if acknowledging all this to be necessary.

Nekhludoff remained in this room for about five minutes, feeling
strangely depressed, conscious of how powerless he was, and at variance
with all the world. He was seized with a curious moral sensation like
seasickness.



CHAPTER XLII.

VISITING DAY--THE WOMEN'S WARD.

"Well, but I must do what I came here for," he said, trying to pick up
courage. "What is to be done now?" He looked round for an official, and
seeing a thin little man in the uniform of an officer going up and down
behind the people, he approached him.

"Can you tell me, sir," he said, with exceedingly strained politeness of
manner, "where the women are kept, and where one is allowed to interview
them?"

"Is it the women's ward you want to go to?"

"Yes, I should like to see one of the women prisoners," Nekhludoff said,
with the same strained politeness.

"You should have said so when you were in the hall. Who is it, then,
that you want to see?"

"I want to see a prisoner called Katerina Maslova."

"Is she a political one?"

"No, she is simply . . ."

"What! Is she sentenced?"

"Yes; the day before yesterday she was sentenced," meekly answered
Nekhludoff, fearing to spoil the inspector's good humour, which seemed
to incline in his favour.

"If you want to go to the women's ward please to step this way," said
the officer, having decided from Nekhludoff's appearance that he was
worthy of attention. "Sideroff, conduct the gentleman to the women's
ward," he said, turning to a moustached corporal with medals on his
breast.

"Yes, sir."

At this moment heart-rending sobs were heard coming from some one near
the net.

Everything here seemed strange to Nekhludoff; but strangest of all was
that he should have to thank and feel obligation towards the inspector
and the chief warders, the very men who were performing the cruel deeds
that were done in this house.

The corporal showed Nekhludoff through the corridor, out of the men's
into the women's interviewing-room.

This room, like that of the men, was divided by two wire nets; but it
was much smaller, and there were fewer visitors and fewer prisoners, so
that there was less shouting than in the men's room. Yet the same thing
was going on here, only, between the nets instead of soldiers there was
a woman warder, dressed in a blue-edged uniform jacket, with gold cords
on the sleeves, and a blue belt. Here also, as in the men's room, the
people were pressing close to the wire netting on both sides; on the
nearer side, the townspeople in varied attire; on the further side, the
prisoners, some in white prison clothes, others in their own coloured
dresses. The whole length of the net was taken up by the people standing
close to it. Some rose on tiptoe to be heard across the heads of others;
some sat talking on the floor.

The most remarkable of the prisoners, both by her piercing screams and
her appearance, was a thin, dishevelled gipsy. Her kerchief had slipped
off her curly hair, and she stood near a post in the middle of the
prisoner's division, shouting something, accompanied by quick gestures,
to a gipsy man in a blue coat, girdled tightly below the waist. Next
the gipsy man, a soldier sat on the ground talking to prisoner; next the
soldier, leaning close to the net, stood a young peasant, with a fair
beard and a flushed face, keeping back his tears with difficulty. A
pretty, fair-haired prisoner, with bright blue eyes, was speaking to
him. These two were Theodosia and her husband. Next to them was a tramp,
talking to a broad-faced woman; then two women, then a man, then again a
woman, and in front of each a prisoner. Maslova was not among them. But
some one stood by the window behind the prisoners, and Nekhludoff knew
it was she. His heart began to beat faster, and his breath stopped. The
decisive moment was approaching. He went up to the part of the net where
he could see the prisoner, and recognised her at once. She stood behind
the blue-eyed Theodosia, and smiled, listening to what Theodosia was
saying. She did not wear the prison cloak now, but a white dress,
tightly drawn in at the waist by a belt, and very full in the bosom.
From under her kerchief appeared the black ringlets of her fringe, just
the same as in the court.

"Now, in a moment it will be decided," he thought.

"How shall I call her? Or will she come herself?"

She was expecting Bertha; that this man had come to see her never
entered her head.

"Whom do you want?" said the warder who was walking between the nets,
coming up to Nekhludoff.

"Katerina Maslova," Nekhludoff uttered, with difficulty.

"Katerina Maslova, some one to see you," cried the warder.



CHAPTER XLIII.

NEKHLUDOFF VISITS MASLOVA.

Maslova looked round, and with head thrown back and expanded chest,
came up to the net with that expression of readiness which he well
knew, pushed in between two prisoners, and gazed at Nekhludoff with a
surprised and questioning look. But, concluding from his clothing he was
a rich man, she smiled.

"Is it me you want?" she asked, bringing her smiling face, with the
slightly squinting eyes, nearer the net.

"I, I--I wished to see--" Nekhludoff did not know how to address her. "I
wished to see you--I--" He was not speaking louder than usual.

"No; nonsense, I tell you!" shouted the tramp who stood next to him.
"Have you taken it or not?"

"Dying, I tell you; what more do you want?" some one else was screaming
at his other side. Maslova could not hear what Nekhludoff was saying,
but the expression of his face as he was speaking reminded her of him.
She did not believe her own eyes; still the smile vanished from her face
and a deep line of suffering appeared on her brow.

"I cannot hear what you are saying," she called out, wrinkling her brow
and frowning more and more.

"I have come," said Nekhludoff. "Yes, I am doing my duty--I am
confessing," thought Nekhludoff; and at this thought the tears came in
his eyes, and he felt a choking sensation in his throat, and holding on
with both hands to the net, he made efforts to keep from bursting into
tears.

"I say, why do you shove yourself in where you're not wanted?" some one
shouted at one side of him.

"God is my witness; I know nothing," screamed a prisoner from the other
side.

Noticing his excitement, Maslova recognised him.

"You're like . . . but no; I don't know you," she shouted, without
looking at him, and blushing, while her face grew still more stern.

"I have come to ask you to forgive me," he said, in a loud but
monotonous voice, like a lesson learnt by heart. Having said these words
he became confused; but immediately came the thought that, if he felt
ashamed, it was all the better; he had to bear this shame, and he
continued in a loud voice:

"Forgive me; I have wronged you terribly."

She stood motionless and without taking her squinting eyes off him.

He could not continue to speak, and stepping away from the net he tried
to suppress the sobs that were choking him.

The inspector, the same officer who had directed Nekhludoff to the
women's ward, and whose interest he seemed to have aroused, came into
the room, and, seeing Nekhludoff not at the net, asked him why he was
not talking to her whom he wanted to see. Nekhludoff blew his nose, gave
himself a shake, and, trying to appear calm, said:

"It's so inconvenient through these nets; nothing can be heard."

Again the inspector considered for a moment.

"Ah, well, she can be brought out here for awhile. Mary Karlovna,"
turning to the warder, "lead Maslova out."

A minute later Maslova came out of the side door. Stepping softly, she
came up close to Nekhludoff, stopped, and looked up at him from under
her brows. Her black hair was arranged in ringlets over her forehead in
the same way as it had been two days ago; her face, though unhealthy and
puffy, was attractive, and looked perfectly calm, only the glittering
black eyes glanced strangely from under the swollen lids.

"You may talk here," said the inspector, and shrugging his shoulders he
stepped aside with a look of surprise. Nekhludoff moved towards a seat
by the wall.

Maslova cast a questioning look at the inspector, and then, shrugging
her shoulders in surprise, followed Nekhludoff to the bench, and having
arranged her skirt, sat down beside him.

"I know it is hard for you to forgive me," he began, but stopped. His
tears were choking him. "But though I can't undo the past, I shall now
do what is in my power. Tell me--"

"How have you managed to find me?" she said, without answering his
question, neither looking away from him nor quite at him, with her
squinting eyes.

"O God, help me! Teach me what to do," Nekhludoff thought, looking at
her changed face. "I was on the jury the day before yesterday," he said.
"You did not recognise me?"

"No, I did not; there was not time for recognitions. I did not even
look," she said.

"There was a child, was there not?" he asked.

"Thank God! he died at once," she answered, abruptly and viciously.

"What do you mean? Why?"

"I was so ill myself, I nearly died," she said, in the same quiet voice,
which Nekhludoff had not expected and could not understand.

"How could my aunts have let you go?"

"Who keeps a servant that has a baby? They sent me off as soon as
they noticed. But why speak of this? I remember nothing. That's all
finished."

"No, it is not finished; I wish to redeem my sin."

"There's nothing to redeem. What's been has been and is passed," she
said; and, what he never expected, she looked at him and smiled in an
unpleasantly luring, yet piteous, manner.

Maslova never expected to see him again, and certainly not here and not
now; therefore, when she first recognised him, she could not keep back
the memories which she never wished to revive. In the first moment she
remembered dimly that new, wonderful world of feeling and of thought
which had been opened to her by the charming young man who loved her
and whom she loved, and then his incomprehensible cruelty and the whole
string of humiliations and suffering which flowed from and followed that
magic joy. This gave her pain, and, unable to understand it, she did
what she was always in the habit of doing, she got rid of these memories
by enveloping them in the mist of a depraved life. In the first moment,
she associated the man now sitting beside her with the lad she had
loved; but feeling that this gave her pain, she dissociated them again.
Now, this well-dressed, carefully-got-up gentleman with perfumed beard
was no longer the Nekhludoff whom she had loved but only one of the
people who made use of creatures like herself when they needed them,
and whom creatures like herself had to make use of in their turn as
profitably as they could; and that is why she looked at him with a
luring smile and considered silently how she could best make use of him.

"That's all at an end," she said. "Now I'm condemned to Siberia," and
her lip trembled as she was saying this dreadful word.

"I knew; I was certain you were not guilty," said Nekhludoff.

"Guilty! of course not; as if I could be a thief or a robber." She
stopped, considering in what way she could best get something out of
him.

"They say here that all depends on the advocate," she began. "A petition
should be handed in, only they say it's expensive."

"Yes, most certainly," said Nekhludoff. "I have already spoken to an
advocate."

"No money ought to be spared; it should be a good one," she said.

"I shall do all that is possible."

They were silent, and then she smiled again in the same way.

"And I should like to ask you . . . a little money if you can . . . not
much; ten roubles, I do not want more," she said, suddenly.

"Yes, yes," Nekhludoff said, with a sense of confusion, and felt for his
purse.

She looked rapidly at the inspector, who was walking up and down the
room. "Don't give it in front of him; he'd take it away."

Nekhludoff took out his purse as soon as the inspector had turned his
back; but had no time to hand her the note before the inspector faced
them again, so he crushed it up in his hand.

"This woman is dead," Nekhludoff thought, looking at this once sweet,
and now defiled, puffy face, lit up by an evil glitter in the black,
squinting eyes which were now glancing at the hand in which he held
the note, then following the inspector's movements, and for a moment he
hesitated. The tempter that had been speaking to him in the night again
raised its voice, trying to lead him out of the realm of his inner into
the realm of his outer life, away from the question of what he should
do to the question of what the consequences would be, and what would be
practical.

"You can do nothing with this woman," said the voice; "you will only
tie a stone round your neck, which will help to drown you and hinder you
from being useful to others.

"Is it not better to give her all the money that is here, say good-bye,
and finish with her forever?" whispered the voice.

But here he felt that now, at this very moment, something most important
was taking place in his soul--that his inner life was, as it were,
wavering in the balance, so that the slightest effort would make it sink
to this side or the other. And he made this effort by calling to his
assistance that God whom he had felt in his soul the day before, and
that God instantly responded. He resolved to tell her everything now--at
once.

"Katusha, I have come to ask you to forgive me, and you have given me no
answer. Have you forgiven me? Will you ever forgive me?" he asked.

She did not listen to him, but looked at his hand and at the inspector,
and when the latter turned she hastily stretched out her hand, grasped
the note, and hid it under her belt.

"That's odd, what you are saying there," she said, with a smile of
contempt, as it seemed to him.

Nekhludoff felt that there was in her soul one who was his enemy and who
was protecting her, such as she was now, and preventing him from getting
at her heart. But, strange to say, this did not repel him, but drew him
nearer to her by some fresh, peculiar power. He knew that he must waken
her soul, that this was terribly difficult, but the very difficulty
attracted him. He now felt towards her as he had never felt towards her
or any one else before. There was nothing personal in this feeling: he
wanted nothing from her for himself, but only wished that she might not
remain as she now was, that she might awaken and become again what she
had been.

"Katusha, why do you speak like that? I know you; I remember you--and
the old days in Papovo."

"What's the use of recalling what's past?" she remarked, drily.

"I am recalling it in order to put it right, to atone for my sin,
Katusha," and he was going to say that he would marry her, but,
meeting her eyes, he read in them something so dreadful, so coarse, so
repellent, that he could not go on.

At this moment the visitors began to go. The inspector came up to
Nekhludoff and said that the time was up.

"Good-bye; I have still much to say to you, but you see it is impossible
to do so now," said Nekhludoff, and held out his hand. "I shall come
again."

"I think you have said all."

She took his hand but did not press it.

"No; I shall try to see you again, somewhere where we can talk, and then
I shall tell you what I have to say-something very important."

"Well, then, come; why not?" she answered, and smiled with that
habitual, inviting, and promising smile which she gave to the men whom
she wished to please.

"You are more than a sister to me," said Nekhludoff.

"That's odd," she said again, and went behind the grating.



CHAPTER XLIV.

MASLOVA'S VIEW OF LIFE.

Before the first interview, Nekhludoff thought that when she saw him
and knew of his intention to serve her, Katusha would be pleased and
touched, and would be Katusha again; but, to his horror, he found
that Katusha existed no more, and there was Maslova in her place. This
astonished and horrified him.

What astonished him most was that Katusha was not ashamed of her
position--not the position of a prisoner (she was ashamed of that), but
her position as a prostitute. She seemed satisfied, even proud of it.
And, yet, how could it be otherwise? Everybody, in order to be able to
act, has to consider his occupation important and good. Therefore, in
whatever position a person is, he is certain to form such a view of the
life of men in general which will make his occupation seem important and
good.

It is usually imagined that a thief, a murderer, a spy, a prostitute,
acknowledging his or her profession as evil, is ashamed of it. But the
contrary is true. People whom fate and their sin-mistakes have placed in
a certain position, however false that position may be, form a view of
life in general which makes their position seem good and admissible. In
order to keep up their view of life, these people instinctively keep to
the circle of those people who share their views of life and their own
place in it. This surprises us, where the persons concerned are thieves,
bragging about their dexterity, prostitutes vaunting their depravity, or
murderers boasting of their cruelty. This surprises us only because the
circle, the atmosphere in which these people live, is limited, and we
are outside it. But can we not observe the same phenomenon when the rich
boast of their wealth, i.e., robbery; the commanders in the army pride
themselves on victories, i.e., murder; and those in high places vaunt
their power, i.e., violence? We do not see the perversion in the views
of life held by these people, only because the circle formed by them is
more extensive, and we ourselves are moving inside of it.

And in this manner Maslova had formed her views of life and of her own
position. She was a prostitute condemned to Siberia, and yet she had a
conception of life which made it possible for her to be satisfied with
herself, and even to pride herself on her position before others.

According to this conception, the highest good for all men without
exception--old, young, schoolboys, generals, educated and uneducated,
was connected with the relation of the sexes; therefore, all men, even
when they pretended to be occupied with other things, in reality
took this view. She was an attractive woman, and therefore she was an
important and necessary person. The whole of her former and present life
was a confirmation of the correctness of this conception.

With such a view of life, she was by no means the lowest, but a very
important person. And Maslova prized this view of life more than
anything; she could not but prize it, for, if she lost the importance
that such a view of life gave her among men, she would lose the meaning
of her life. And, in order not to lose the meaning of her life, she
instinctively clung to the set that looked at life in the same way as
she did. Feeling that Nekhludoff wanted to lead her out into another
world, she resisted him, foreseeing that she would have to lose her
place in life, with the self-possession and self-respect it gave her.
For this reason she drove from her the recollections of her early youth
and her first relations with Nekhludoff. These recollections did not
correspond with her present conception of the world, and were therefore
quite rubbed out of her mind, or, rather, lay somewhere buried and
untouched, closed up and plastered over so that they should not escape,
as when bees, in order to protect the result of their labour, will
sometimes plaster a nest of worms. Therefore, the present Nekhludoff
was not the man she had once loved with a pure love, but only a rich
gentleman whom she could, and must, make use of, and with whom she could
only have the same relations as with men in general.

"No, I could not tell her the chief thing," thought Nekhludoff, moving
towards the front doors with the rest of the people. "I did not tell her
that I would marry her; I did not tell her so, but I will," he thought.

The two warders at the door let out the visitors, counting them again,
and touching each one with their hands, so that no extra person should
go out, and none remain within. The slap on his shoulder did not offend
Nekhludoff this time; he did not even notice it.



CHAPTER XLV.

FANARIN, THE ADVOCATE--THE PETITION.

Nekhludoff meant to rearrange the whole of his external life, to let
his large house and move to an hotel, but Agraphena Petrovna pointed out
that it was useless to change anything before the winter. No one would
rent a town house for the summer; anyhow, he would have to live and keep
his things somewhere. And so all his efforts to change his manner
of life (he meant to live more simply: as the students live) led to
nothing. Not only did everything remain as it was, but the house was
suddenly filled with new activity. All that was made of wool or fur was
taken out to be aired and beaten. The gate-keeper, the boy, the cook,
and Corney himself took part in this activity. All sorts of strange
furs, which no one ever used, and various uniforms were taken out and
hung on a line, then the carpets and furniture were brought out, and the
gate-keeper and the boy rolled their sleeves up their muscular arms and
stood beating these things, keeping strict time, while the rooms were
filled with the smell of naphthaline.

When Nekhludoff crossed the yard or looked out of the window and saw
all this going on, he was surprised at the great number of things there
were, all quite useless. Their only use, Nekhludoff thought, was the
providing of exercise for Agraphena Petrovna, Corney, the gate-keeper,
the boy, and the cook.

"But it's not worth while altering my manner of life now," he thought,
"while Maslova's case is not decided. Besides, it is too difficult. It
will alter of itself when she will be set free or exiled, and I follow
her."

On the appointed day Nekhludoff drove up to the advocate Fanarin's own
splendid house, which was decorated with huge palms and other plants,
and wonderful curtains, in fact, with all the expensive luxury
witnessing to the possession of much idle money, i.e., money acquired
without labour, which only those possess who grow rich suddenly. In
the waiting-room, just as in a doctor's waiting-room, he found many
dejected-looking people sitting round several tables, on which lay
illustrated papers meant to amuse them, awaiting their turns to be
admitted to the advocate. The advocate's assistant sat in the room at a
high desk, and having recognised Nekhludoff, he came up to him and said
he would go and announce him at once. But the assistant had not reached
the door before it opened and the sounds of loud, animated voices were
heard; the voice of a middle-aged, sturdy merchant, with a red face and
thick moustaches, and the voice of Fanarin himself. Fanarin was also
a middle-aged man of medium height, with a worn look on his face. Both
faces bore the expression which you see on the faces of those who have
just concluded a profitable but not quite honest transaction.

"Your own fault, you know, my dear sir," Fanarin said, smiling.

"We'd all be in 'eaven were it not for hour sins."

"Oh, yes, yes; we all know that," and both laughed un-naturally.

"Oh, Prince Nekhludoff! Please to step in," said Fanarin, seeing him,
and, nodding once more to the merchant, he led Nekhludoff into his
business cabinet, furnished in a severely correct style.

"Won't you smoke?" said the advocate, sitting down opposite Nekhludoff
and trying to conceal a smile, apparently still excited by the success
of the accomplished transaction.

"Thanks; I have come about Maslova's case."

"Yes, yes; directly! But oh, what rogues these fat money bags are!"
he said. "You saw this here fellow. Why, he has about twelve million
roubles, and he cannot speak correctly; and if he can get a twenty-five
rouble note out of you he'll have it, if he's to wrench it out with his
teeth."

"He says ''eaven' and 'hour,' and you say 'this here fellow,'"
Nekhludoff thought, with an insurmountable feeling of aversion towards
this man who wished to show by his free and easy manner that he and
Nekhludoff belonged to one and the same camp, while his other clients
belonged to another.

"He has worried me to death--a fearful scoundrel. I felt I must relieve
my feelings," said the advocate, as if to excuse his speaking about
things that had no reference to business. "Well, how about your case?
I have read it attentively, but do not approve of it. I mean that
greenhorn of an advocate has left no valid reason for an appeal."

"Well, then, what have you decided?"

"One moment. Tell him," he said to his assistant, who had just come in,
"that I keep to what I have said. If he can, it's all right; if not, no
matter."

"But he won't agree."

"Well, no matter," and the advocate frowned.

"There now, and it is said that we advocates get our money for nothing,"
he remarked, after a pause. "I have freed one insolvent debtor from a
totally false charge, and now they all flock to me. Yet every such case
costs enormous labour. Why, don't we, too, 'lose bits of flesh in the
inkstand?' as some writer or other has said. Well, as to your case, or,
rather, the case you are taking an interest in. It has been conducted
abominably. There is no good reason for appealing. Still," he continued,
"we can but try to get the sentence revoked. This is what I have noted
down." He took up several sheets of paper covered with writing, and
began to read rapidly, slurring over the uninteresting legal terms and
laying particular stress on some sentences. "To the Court of Appeal,
criminal department, etc., etc. According to the decisions, etc., the
verdict, etc., So-and-so Maslova pronounced guilty of having caused the
death through poison of the merchant Smelkoff, and has, according to
Statute 1454 of the penal code, been sentenced to Siberia," etc., etc.
He stopped. Evidently, in spite of his being so used to it, he still
felt pleasure in listening to his own productions. "This sentence is
the direct result of the most glaring judicial perversion and error,"
he continued, impressively, "and there are grounds for its revocation.
Firstly, the reading of the medical report of the examination of
Smelkoff's intestines was interrupted by the president at the very
beginning. This is point one."

"But it was the prosecuting side that demanded this reading," Nekhludoff
said, with surprise.

"That does not matter. There might have been reasons for the defence to
demand this reading, too."

"Oh, but there could have been no reason whatever for that."

"It is a ground for appeal, though. To continue: 'Secondly,' he went
on reading, 'when Maslova's advocate, in his speech for the defence,
wishing to characterise Maslova's personality, referred to the causes of
her fall, he was interrupted by the president calling him to order
for the alleged deviation from the direct subject. Yet, as has been
repeatedly pointed out by the Senate, the elucidation of the criminal's
characteristics and his or her moral standpoint in general has a
significance of the first importance in criminal cases, even if only
as a guide in the settling of the question of imputation.' That's point
two," he said, with a look at Nekhludoff.

"But he spoke so badly that no one could make anything of it,"
Nekhludoff said, still more astonished.

"The fellow's quite a fool, and of course could not be expected to say
anything sensible," Fanarin said, laughing; "but, all the same, it will
do as a reason for appeal. Thirdly: 'The president, in his summing up,
contrary to the direct decree of section 1, statute 801, of the criminal
code, omitted to inform the jury what the judicial points are that
constitute guilt; and did not mention that having admitted the fact of
Maslova having administered the poison to Smelkoff, the jury had a right
not to impute the guilt of murder to her, since the proofs of wilful
intent to deprive Smelkoff of life were absent, and only to pronounce
her guilty of carelessness resulting in the death of the merchant, which
she did not desire.' This is the chief point."

"Yes; but we ought to have known that ourselves. It was our mistake."

"And now the fourth point," the advocate continued. "The form of the
answer given by the jury contained an evident contradiction. Maslova
is accused of wilfully poisoning Smelkoff, her one object being that of
cupidity, the only motive to commit murder she could have had. The jury
in their verdict acquit her of the intent to rob, or participation in
the stealing of valuables, from which it follows that they intended
also to acquit her of the intent to murder, and only through a
misunderstanding, which arose from the incompleteness of the president's
summing up, omitted to express it in due form in their answer. Therefore
an answer of this kind by the jury absolutely demanded the application
of statutes 816 and 808 of the criminal code of procedure, i.e., an
explanation by the president to the jury of the mistake made by them,
and another debate on the question of the prisoner's guilt."

"Then why did the president not do it?"

"I, too, should like to know why," Fanarin said, laughing.

"Then the Senate will, of course, correct this error?"

"That will all depend on who will preside there at the time. Well, now,
there it is. I have further said," he continued, rapidly, "a verdict of
this kind gave the Court no right to condemn Maslova to be punished as
a criminal, and to apply section 3, statute 771 of the penal code to her
case. This is a decided and gross violation of the basic principles of
our criminal law. In view of the reasons stated, I have the honour of
appealing to you, etc., etc., the refutation, according to 909, 910, and
section 2, 912 and 928 statute of the criminal code, etc., etc. . . .
to carry this case before another department of the same Court for a
further examination. There; all that can be done is done, but, to be
frank, I have little hope of success, though, of course, it all depends
on what members will be present at the Senate. If you have any influence
there you can but try."

"I do know some."

"All right; only be quick about it. Else they'll all go off for a change
of air; then you may have to wait three months before they return. Then,
in case of failure, we have still the possibility of appealing to His
Majesty. This, too, depends on the private influence you can bring to
work. In this case, too, I am at your service; I mean as to the working
of the petition, not the influence."

"Thank you. Now as to your fees?"

"My assistant will hand you the petition and tell you."

"One thing more. The Procureur gave me a pass for visiting this person
in prison, but they tell me I must also get a permission from the
governor in order to get an interview at another time and in another
place than those appointed. Is this necessary?"

"Yes, I think so. But the governor is away at present; a vice-governor
is in his place. And he is such an impenetrable fool that you'll
scarcely be able to do anything with him."

"Is it Meslennikoff?"

"Yes."

"I know him," said Nekhludoff, and got up to go. At this moment a
horribly ugly, little, bony, snub-nosed, yellow-faced woman flew into
the room. It was the advocate's wife, who did not seem to be in the
least bit troubled by her ugliness. She was attired in the most original
manner; she seemed enveloped in something made of velvet and silk,
something yellow and green, and her thin hair was crimped.

She stepped out triumphantly into the ante-room, followed by a tall,
smiling man, with a greenish complexion, dressed in a coat with silk
facings, and a white tie. This was an author. Nekhludoff knew him by
sight.

She opened the cabinet door and said, "Anatole, you must come to
me. Here is Simeon Ivanovitch, who will read his poems, and you must
absolutely come and read about Garshin."

Nekhludoff noticed that she whispered something to her husband, and,
thinking it was something concerning him, wished to go away, but she
caught him up and said: "I beg your pardon, Prince, I know you, and,
thinking an introduction superfluous, I beg you to stay and take part
in our literary matinee. It will be most interesting. M. Fanarin will
read."

"You see what a lot I have to do," said Fanarin, spreading out his hands
and smilingly pointing to his wife, as if to show how impossible it was
to resist so charming a creature.

Nekhludoff thanked the advocate's wife with extreme politeness for the
honour she did him in inviting him, but refused the invitation with a
sad and solemn look, and left the room.

"What an affected fellow!" said the advocate's wife, when he had gone
out.

In the ante-room the assistant handed him a ready-written petition,
and said that the fees, including the business with the Senate and the
commission, would come to 1,000 roubles, and explained that M. Fanarin
did not usually undertake this kind of business, but did it only to
oblige Nekhludoff.

"And about this petition. Who is to sign it?"

"The prisoner may do it herself, or if this is inconvenient, M. Fanarin
can, if he gets a power of attorney from her."

"Oh, no. I shall take the petition to her and get her to sign it," said
Nekhludoff, glad of the opportunity of seeing her before the appointed
day.



CHAPTER XLVI.

A PRISON FLOGGING.

At the usual time the jailer's whistle sounded in the corridors of the
prison, the iron doors of the cells rattled, bare feet pattered, heels
clattered, and the prisoners who acted as scavengers passed along the
corridors, filling the air with disgusting smells. The prisoners washed,
dressed, and came out for revision, then went to get boiling water for
their tea.

The conversation at breakfast in all the cells was very lively. It was
all about two prisoners who were to be flogged that day. One, Vasiliev,
was a young man of some education, a clerk, who had killed his mistress
in a fit of jealousy. His fellow-prisoners liked him because he
was merry and generous and firm in his behaviour with the prison
authorities. He knew the laws and insisted on their being carried out.
Therefore he was disliked by the authorities. Three weeks before a
jailer struck one of the scavengers who had spilt some soup over his new
uniform. Vasiliev took the part of the scavenger, saying that it was not
lawful to strike a prisoner.

"I'll teach you the law," said the jailer, and gave Vasiliev a scolding.
Vasiliev replied in like manner, and the jailer was going to hit him,
but Vasiliev seized the jailer's hands, held them fast for about three
minutes, and, after giving the hands a twist, pushed the jailer out of
the door. The jailer complained to the inspector, who ordered Vasiliev
to be put into a solitary cell.

The solitary cells were a row of dark closets, locked from outside, and
there were neither beds, nor chairs, nor tables in them, so that the
inmates had to sit or lie on the dirty floor, while the rats, of which
there were a great many in those cells, ran across them. The rats were
so bold that they stole the bread from the prisoners, and even attacked
them if they stopped moving. Vasiliev said he would not go into the
solitary cell, because he had not done anything wrong; but they used
force. Then he began struggling, and two other prisoners helped him to
free himself from the jailers. All the jailers assembled, and among them
was Petrov, who was distinguished for his strength. The prisoners got
thrown down and pushed into the solitary cells.

The governor was immediately informed that something very like a
rebellion had taken place. And he sent back an order to flog the two
chief offenders, Vasiliev and the tramp, Nepomnishy, giving each thirty
strokes with a birch rod. The flogging was appointed to take place in
the women's interviewing-room.

All this was known in the prison since the evening, and it was being
talked about with animation in all the cells.

Korableva, Khoroshevka, Theodosia, and Maslova sat together in their
corner, drinking tea, all of them flushed and animated by the vodka they
had drunk, for Maslova, who now had a constant supply of vodka, freely
treated her companions to it.

"He's not been a-rioting, or anything," Korableva said, referring to
Vasiliev, as she bit tiny pieces off a lump of sugar with her strong
teeth. "He only stuck up for a chum, because it's not lawful to strike
prisoners nowadays."

"And he's a fine fellow, I've heard say," said Theodosia, who sat
bareheaded, with her long plaits round her head, on a log of wood
opposite the shelf bedstead on which the teapot stood.

"There, now, if you were to ask _him_," the watchman's wife said to
Maslova (by him she meant Nekhludoff).

"I shall tell him. He'll do anything for me," Maslova said, tossing her
head, and smiling.

"Yes, but when is he coming? and they've already gone to fetch them,"
said Theodosia. "It is terrible," she added, with a sigh.

"I once did see how they flogged a peasant in the village.
Father-in-law, he sent me once to the village elder. Well, I went,
and there . . . " The watchman's wife began her long story, which was
interrupted by the sound of voices and steps in the corridor above them.

The women were silent, and sat listening.

"There they are, hauling him along, the devils!" Khoroshavka said.
"They'll do him to death, they will. The jailers are so enraged with him
because he never would give in to them."

All was quiet again upstairs, and the watchman's wife finished her story
of how she was that frightened when she went into the barn and saw
them flogging a peasant, her inside turned at the sight, and so on.
Khoroshevka related how Schegloff had been flogged, and never uttered
a sound. Then Theodosia put away the tea things, and Korableva and the
watchman's wife took up their sewing. Maslova sat down on the bedstead,
with her arms round her knees, dull and depressed. She was about to lie
down and try to sleep, when the woman warder called her into the office
to see a visitor.

"Now, mind, and don't forget to tell him about us," the old woman
(Menshova) said, while Maslova was arranging the kerchief on her head
before the dim looking-glass. "We did not set fire to the house, but he
himself, the fiend, did it; his workman saw him do it, and will not damn
his soul by denying it. You just tell to ask to see my Mitri. Mitri
will tell him all about it, as plain as can be. Just think of our being
locked up in prison when we never dreamt of any ill, while he, the
fiend, is enjoying himself at the pub, with another man's wife."

"That's not the law," remarked Korableva.

"I'll tell him--I'll tell him," answered Maslova. "Suppose I have
another drop, just to keep up courage," she added, with a wink; and
Korableva poured out half a cup of vodka, which Maslova drank. Then,
having wiped her mouth and repeating the words "just to keep up
courage," tossing her head and smiling gaily, she followed the warder
along the corridor.



CHAPTER XLVII.

NEKHLUDOFF AGAIN VISITS MASLOVA.

Nekhludoff had to wait in the hall for a long time. When he had arrived
at the prison and rung at the entrance door, he handed the permission of
the Procureur to the jailer on duty who met him.

"No, no," the jailer on duty said hurriedly, "the inspector is engaged."

"In the office?" asked Nekhludoff.

"No, here in the interviewing-room.".

"Why, is it a visiting day to-day?"

"No; it's special business."

"I should like to see him. What am I to do?" said Nekhludoff.

"When the inspector comes out you'll tell him--wait a bit," said the
jailer.

At this moment a sergeant-major, with a smooth, shiny face and
moustaches impregnated with tobacco smoke, came out of a side door, with
the gold cords of his uniform glistening, and addressed the jailer in a
severe tone.

"What do you mean by letting any one in here? The office. . . ."

"I was told the inspector was here," said Nekhludoff, surprised at the
agitation he noticed in the sergeant-major's manner.

At this moment the inner door opened, and Petrov came out, heated and
perspiring.

"He'll remember it," he muttered, turning to the sergeant major. The
latter pointed at Nekhludoff by a look, and Petrov knitted his brows and
went out through a door at the back.

"Who will remember it? Why do they all seem so confused? Why did the
sergeant-major make a sign to him?" Nekhludoff thought.

The sergeant-major, again addressing Nekhludoff, said: "You cannot meet
here; please step across to the office." And Nekhludoff was about to
comply when the inspector came out of the door at the back, looking even
more confused than his subordinates, and sighing continually. When he
saw Nekhludoff he turned to the jailer.

"Fedotoff, have Maslova, cell 5, women's ward, taken to the office."

"Will you come this way, please," he said, turning to Nekhludoff. They
ascended a steep staircase and entered a little room with one window, a
writing-table, and a few chairs in it. The inspector sat down.

"Mine are heavy, heavy duties," he remarked, again addressing
Nekhludoff, and took out a cigarette.

"You are tired, evidently," said Nekhludoff.

"Tired of the whole of the service--the duties are very trying. One
tries to lighten their lot and only makes it worse; my only thought is
how to get away. Heavy, heavy duties!"

Nekhludoff did not know what the inspector's particular difficulties
were, but he saw that to-day he was in a peculiarly dejected and
hopeless condition, calling for pity.

"Yes, I should think the duties were heavy for a kind-hearted man," he
said. "Why do you serve in this capacity?"

"I have a family."

"But, if it is so hard--"

"Well, still you know it is possible to be of use in some measure; I
soften down all I can. Another in my place would conduct the affairs
quite differently. Why, we have more than 2,000 persons here. And what
persons! One must know how to manage them. It is easier said than done,
you know. After all, they are also men; one cannot help pitying them."
The inspector began telling Nekhludoff of a fight that had lately taken
place among the convicts, which had ended by one man being killed.

The story was interrupted by the entrance of Maslova, who was
accompanied by a jailer.

Nekhludoff saw her through the doorway before she had noticed the
inspector. She was following the warder briskly, smiling and tossing her
head. When she saw the inspector she suddenly changed, and gazed at
him with a frightened look; but, quickly recovering, she addressed
Nekhludoff boldly and gaily.

"How d'you do?" she said, drawling out her words, and smilingly took his
hand and shook it vigorously, not like the first time.

"Here, I've brought you a petition to sign," said Nekhludoff, rather
surprised by the boldness with which she greeted him to-day.

"The advocate has written out a petition which you will have to sign,
and then we shall send it to Petersburg."

"All right! That can be done. Anything you like," she said, with a wink
and a smile.

And Nekhludoff drew a folded paper from his pocket and went up to the
table.

"May she sign it here?" asked Nekhludoff, turning to the inspector.

"It's all right, it's all right! Sit down. Here's a pen; you can write?"
said the inspector.

"I could at one time," she said; and, after arranging her skirt and the
sleeves of her jacket, she sat down at the table, smiled awkwardly, took
the pen with her small, energetic hand, and glanced at Nekhludoff with a
laugh.

Nekhludoff told her what to write and pointed out the place where to
sign.

Sighing deeply as she dipped her pen into the ink, and carefully shaking
some drops off the pen, she wrote her name.

"Is it all?" she asked, looking from Nekhludoff to the inspector, and
putting the pen now on the inkstand, now on the papers.

"I have a few words to tell you," Nekhludoff said, taking the pen from
her.

"All right; tell me," she said. And suddenly, as if remembering
something, or feeling sleepy, she grew serious.

The inspector rose and left the room, and Nekhludoff remained with her.



CHAPTER XLVIII.

MASLOVA REFUSES TO MARRY.

The jailer who had brought Maslova in sat on a windowsill at some
distance from them.

The decisive moment had come for Nekhludoff. He had been incessantly
blaming himself for not having told her the principal thing at the first
interview, and was now determined to tell her that he would marry her.
She was sitting at the further side of the table. Nekhludoff sat down
opposite her. It was light in the room, and Nekhludoff for the first
time saw her face quite near. He distinctly saw the crowsfeet round her
eyes, the wrinkles round her mouth, and the swollen eyelids. He felt
more sorry than before. Leaning over the table so as not to be heard by
the jailer--a man of Jewish type with grizzly whiskers, who sat by the
window--Nekhludoff said:

"Should this petition come to nothing we shall appeal to the Emperor.
All that is possible shall be done."

"There, now, if we had had a proper advocate from the first," she
interrupted. "My defendant was quite a silly. He did nothing but pay me
compliments," she said, and laughed. "If it had then been known that I
was acquainted with you, it would have been another matter. They think
every one's a thief."

"How strange she is to-day," Nekhludoff thought, and was just going to
say what he had on his mind when she began again:

"There's something I want to say. We have here an old woman; such a fine
one, d'you know, she just surprises every one; she is imprisoned for
nothing, and her son, too, and everybody knows they are innocent, though
they are accused of having set fire to a house. D'you know, hearing I
was acquainted with you, she says: 'Tell him to ask to see my son; he'll
tell him all about it."' Thus spoke Maslova, turning her head from side
to side, and glancing at Nekhludoff. "Their name's Menshoff. Well, will
you do it? Such a fine old thing, you know; you can see at once she's
innocent. You'll do it, there's a dear," and she smiled, glanced up at
him, and then cast down her eyes.

"All right. I'll find out about them," Nekhludoff said, more and more
astonished by her free-and-easy manner. "But I was going to speak to you
about myself. Do you remember what I told you last time?"

"You said a lot last time. What was it you told me?" she said,
continuing to smile and to turn her head from side to side.

"I said I had come to ask you to forgive me," he began.

"What's the use of that? Forgive, forgive, where's the good of--"

"To atone for my sin, not by mere words, but in deed. I have made up my
mind to marry you."

An expression of fear suddenly came over her face. Her squinting eyes
remained fixed on him, and yet seemed not to be looking at him.

"What's that for?" she said, with an angry frown.

"I feel that it is my duty before God to do it."

"What God have you found now? You are not saying what you ought to. God,
indeed! What God? You ought to have remembered God then," she said, and
stopped with her mouth open. It was only now that Nekhludoff noticed
that her breath smelled of spirits, and that he understood the cause of
her excitement.

"Try and be calm," he said.

"Why should I be calm?" she began, quickly, flushing scarlet. "I am a
convict, and you are a gentleman and a prince. There's no need for you
to soil yourself by touching me. You go to your princesses; my price is
a ten-rouble note."

"However cruelly you may speak, you cannot express what I myself am
feeling," he said, trembling all over; "you cannot imagine to what
extent I feel myself guilty towards you."

"Feel yourself guilty?" she said, angrily mimicking him. "You did not
feel so then, but threw me 100 roubles. That's your price."

"I know, I know; but what is to be done now?" said Nekhludoff. "I have
decided not to leave you, and what I have said I shall do."

"And I say you sha'n't," she said, and laughed aloud.

"Katusha," he said, touching her hand.

"You go away. I am a convict and you a prince, and you've no business
here," she cried, pulling away her hand, her whole appearance
transformed by her wrath. "You've got pleasure out of me in this life,
and want to save yourself through me in the life to come. You are
disgusting to me--your spectacles and the whole of your dirty fat mug.
Go, go!" she screamed, starting to her feet.

The jailer came up to them.

"What are you kicking up this row for?' That won't--"

"Let her alone, please," said Nekhludoff.

"She must not forget herself," said the jailer. "Please wait a little,"
said Nekhludoff, and the jailer returned to the window.

Maslova sat down again, dropping her eyes and firmly clasping her small
hands.

Nekhludoff stooped over her, not knowing what to do.

"You do not believe me?" he said.

"That you mean to marry me? It will never be. I'll rather hang myself.
So there!"

"Well, still I shall go on serving you."

"That's your affair, only I don't want anything from you. I am telling
you the plain truth," she said. "Oh, why did I not die then?" she added,
and began to cry piteously.

Nekhludoff could not speak; her tears infected him.

She lifted her eyes, looked at him in surprise, and began to wipe her
tears with her kerchief.

The jailer came up again and reminded them that it was time to part.

Maslova rose.

"You are excited. If it is possible, I shall come again tomorrow; you
think it over," said Nekhludoff.

She gave him no answer and, without looking up, followed the jailer out
of the room.

"Well, lass, you'll have rare times now," Korableva said, when Maslova
returned to the cell. "Seems he's mighty sweet on you; make the most
of it while he's after you. He'll help you out. Rich people can do
anything."

"Yes, that's so," remarked the watchman's wife, with her musical voice.
"When a poor man thinks of getting married, there's many a slip 'twixt
the cup and the lip; but a rich man need only make up his mind and it's
done. We knew a toff like that duckie. What d'you think he did?"

"Well, have you spoken about my affairs?" the old woman asked.

But Maslova gave her fellow-prisoners no answer; she lay down on the
shelf bedstead, her squinting eyes fixed on a corner of the room, and
lay there until the evening.

A painful struggle went on in her soul. What Nekhludoff had told her
called up the memory of that world in which she had suffered and which
she had left without having understood, hating it. She now feared to
wake from the trance in which she was living. Not having arrived at any
conclusion when evening came, she again bought some vodka and drank with
her companions.



CHAPTER XLIX.

VERA DOUKHOVA.

"So this is what it means, this," thought Nekhludoff as he left the
prison, only now fully understanding his crime. If he had not tried to
expiate his guilt he would never have found out how great his crime was.
Nor was this all; she, too, would never have felt the whole horror of
what had been done to her. He only now saw what he had done to the soul
of this woman; only now she saw and understood what had been done to
her.

Up to this time Nekhludoff had played with a sensation of
self-admiration, had admired his own remorse; now he was simply filled
with horror. He knew he could not throw her up now, and yet he could not
imagine what would come of their relations to one another.

Just as he was going out, a jailer, with a disagreeable, insinuating
countenance, and a cross and medals on his breast, came up and handed
him a note with an air of mystery.

"Here is a note from a certain person, your honour," he said to
Nekhludoff as he gave him the envelope.

"What person?"

"You will know when you read it. A political prisoner. I am in that
ward, so she asked me; and though it is against the rules, still
feelings of humanity--" The jailer spoke in an unnatural manner.

Nekhludoff was surprised that a jailer of the ward where political
prisoners were kept should pass notes inside the very prison walls, and
almost within sight of every one; he did not then know that this was
both a jailer and a spy. However, he took the note and read it on coming
out of the prison.

The note was written in a bold hand, and ran as follows: "Having heard
that you visit the prison, and are interested in the case of a criminal
prisoner, the desire of seeing you arose in me. Ask for a permission
to see me. I can give you a good deal of information concerning your
protegee, and also our group.--Yours gratefully, VERA DOUKHOVA."

Vera Doukhova had been a school-teacher in an out-of-the-way village of
the Novgorod Government, where Nekhludoff and some friends of his had
once put up while bear hunting. Nekhludoff gladly and vividly recalled
those old days, and his acquaintance with Doukhova. It was just before
Lent, in an isolated spot, 40 miles from the railway. The hunt had
been successful; two bears had been killed; and the company were having
dinner before starting on their return journey, when the master of the
hut where they were putting up came in to say that the deacon's daughter
wanted to speak to Prince Nekhludoff. "Is she pretty?" some one asked.
"None of that, please," Nekhludoff said, and rose with a serious look
on his face. Wiping his mouth, and wondering what the deacon's daughter
might want of him, he went into the host's private hut.

There he found a girl with a felt hat and a warm cloak on--a sinewy,
ugly girl; only her eyes with their arched brows were beautiful.

"Here, miss, speak to him," said the old housewife; "this is the prince
himself. I shall go out meanwhile."

"In what way can I be of service to you?" Nekhludoff asked.

"I--I--I see you are throwing away your money on such nonsense--on
hunting," began the girl, in great confusion. "I know--I only want one
thing--to be of use to the people, and I can do nothing because I know
nothing--" Her eyes were so truthful, so kind, and her expression of
resoluteness and yet bashfulness was so touching, that Nekhludoff, as
it often happened to him, suddenly felt as if he were in her position,
understood, and sympathised.

"What can I do, then?"

"I am a teacher, but should like to follow a course of study; and I
am not allowed to do so. That is, not that I am not allowed to; they'd
allow me to, but I have not got the means. Give them to me, and when I
have finished the course I shall repay you. I am thinking the rich kill
bears and give the peasants drink; all this is bad. Why should they not
do good? I only want 80 roubles. But if you don't wish to, never mind,"
she added, gravely.

"On the contrary, I am very grateful to you for this opportunity. . . .
I will bring it at once," said Nekhludoff.

He went out into the passage, and there met one of his comrades, who
had been overhearing his conversation. Paying no heed to his chaffing,
Nekhludoff got the money out of his bag and took it to her.

"Oh, please, do not thank me; it is I who should thank you," he said.

It was pleasant to remember all this now; pleasant to remember that
he had nearly had a quarrel with an officer who tried to make an
objectionable joke of it, and how another of his comrades had taken his
part, which led to a closer friendship between them. How successful the
whole of that hunting expedition had been, and how happy he had felt
when returning to the railway station that night. The line of sledges,
the horses in tandem, glide quickly along the narrow road that lies
through the forest, now between high trees, now between low firs weighed
down by the snow, caked in heavy lumps on their branches. A red light
flashes in the dark, some one lights an aromatic cigarette. Joseph, a
bear driver, keeps running from sledge to sledge, up to his knees in
snow, and while putting things to rights he speaks about the elk which
are now going about on the deep snow and gnawing the bark off the aspen
trees, of the bears that are lying asleep in their deep hidden dens, and
his breath comes warm through the opening in the sledge cover. All this
came back to Nekhludoff's mind; but, above all, the joyous sense of
health, strength, and freedom from care: the lungs breathing in the
frosty air so deeply that the fur cloak is drawn tightly on his chest,
the fine snow drops off the low branches on to his face, his body
is warm, his face feels fresh, and his soul is free from care,
self-reproach, fear, or desire. How beautiful it was. And now, O God!
what torment, what trouble!

Evidently Vera Doukhova was a revolutionist and imprisoned as such. He
must see her, especially as she promised to advise him how to lighten
Maslova's lot.



CHAPTER L.

THE VICE-GOVERNOR OF THE PRISON.

Awaking early the next morning, Nekhludoff remembered what he had done
the day before, and was seized with fear.

But in spite of this fear, he was more determined than ever to continue
what he had begun.

Conscious of a sense of duty, he left the house and went to see
Maslennikoff in order to obtain from him a permission to visit Maslova
in prison, and also the Menshoffs--mother and son--about whom Maslova
had spoken to him. Nekhludoff had known this Maslennikoff a long time;
they had been in the regiment together. At that time Maslennikoff was
treasurer to the regiment.

He was a kind-hearted and zealous officer, knowing and wishing to know
nothing beyond the regiment and the Imperial family. Now Nekhludoff
saw him as an administrator, who had exchanged the regiment for an
administrative office in the government where he lived. He was married
to a rich and energetic woman, who had forced him to exchange military
for civil service. She laughed at him, and caressed him, as if he were
her own pet animal. Nekhludoff had been to see them once during the
winter, but the couple were so uninteresting to him that he had not gone
again.

At the sight of Nekhludoff Maslennikoff's face beamed all over. He had
the same fat red face, and was as corpulent and as well dressed as in
his military days. Then, he used to be always dressed in a well-brushed
uniform, made according to the latest fashion, tightly fitting his chest
and shoulders; now, it was a civil service uniform he wore, and that,
too, tightly fitted his well-fed body and showed off his broad chest,
and was cut according to the latest fashion. In spite of the difference
in age (Maslennikoff was 40), the two men were very familiar with one
another.

"Halloo, old fellow! How good of you to come! Let us go and see my wife.
I have just ten minutes to spare before the meeting. My chief is away,
you know. I am at the head of the Government administration," he said,
unable to disguise his satisfaction.

"I have come on business."

"What is it?" said Maslennikoff, in an anxious and severe tone, putting
himself at once on his guard.

"There is a person, whom I am very much interested in, in prison" (at
the word "prison" Maslennikoff's face grew stern); "and I should like to
have an interview in the office, and not in the common visiting-room. I
have been told it depended on you."

"Certainly, mon cher," said Maslennikoff, putting both hands on
Nekhludoff's knees, as if to tone down his grandeur; "but remember, I am
monarch only for an hour."

"Then will you give me an order that will enable me to see her?"

"It's a woman?"

"Yes."

"What is she there for?"

"Poisoning, but she has been unjustly condemned."

"Yes, there you have it, your justice administered by jury, ils n'en
font point d'autres," he said, for some unknown reason, in French. "I
know you do not agree with me, but it can't be helped, c'est mon opinion
bien arretee," he added, giving utterance to an opinion he had for the
last twelve months been reading in the retrograde Conservative paper. "I
know you are a Liberal."

"I don't know whether I am a Liberal or something else," Nekhludoff
said, smiling; it always surprised him to find himself ranked with a
political party and called a Liberal, when he maintained that a man
should be heard before he was judged, that before being tried all men
were equal, that nobody at all ought to be ill-treated and beaten, but
especially those who had not yet been condemned by law. "I don't know
whether I am a Liberal or not; but I do know that however had the
present way of conducting a trial is, it is better than the old."

"And whom have you for an advocate?"

"I have spoken to Fanarin."

"Dear me, Fanarin!" said Meslennikoff, with a grimace, recollecting how
this Fanarin had examined him as a witness at a trial the year before
and had, in the politest manner, held him up to ridicule for half an
hour.

"I should not advise you to have anything to do with him. _Fanarin est
un homme tare_."

"I have one more request to make," said Nekhludoff, without answering
him. "There's a girl whom I knew long ago, a teacher; she is a very
pitiable little thing, and is now also imprisoned, and would like to see
me. Could you give me a permission to visit her?"

Meslennikoff bent his head on one side and considered.

"She's a political one?"

"Yes, I have been told so."

"Well, you see, only relatives get permission to visit political
prisoners. Still, I'll give you an open order. _Je sais que vous
n'abuserez pas_. What's the name of your protegee? Doukhova? _Elle est
jolie?_"

"Hideuse."

Maslennikoff shook his head disapprovingly, went up to the table, and
wrote on a sheet of paper, with a printed heading: "The bearer, Prince
Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff, is to be allowed to interview in the
prison office the meschanka Maslova, and also the medical assistant,
Doukhova," and he finished with an elaborate flourish.

"Now you'll be able to see what order we have got there. And it is
very difficult to keep order, it is so crowded, especially with people
condemned to exile; but I watch strictly, and love the work. You will
see they are very comfortable and contented. But one must know
how to deal with them. Only a few days ago we had a little
trouble--insubordination; another would have called it mutiny, and would
have made many miserable, but with us it all passed quietly. We must
have solicitude on one hand, firmness and power on the other," and he
clenched the fat, white, turquoise-ringed fist, which issued out of
the starched cuff of his shirt sleeve, fastened with a gold stud.
"Solicitude and firm power."

"Well, I don't know about that," said Nekhludoff. "I went there twice,
and felt very much depressed."

"Do you know, you ought to get acquainted with the Countess Passek,"
continued Maslennikoff, growing talkative. "She has given herself up
entirely to this sort of work. Elle fait beaucoup de bien. Thanks to
her--and, perhaps I may add without false modesty, to me--everything has
been changed, changed in such a way that the former horrors no longer
exist, and they are really quite comfortable there. Well, you'll see.
There's Fanarin. I do not know him personally; besides, my social
position keeps our ways apart; but he is positively a bad man, and
besides, he takes the liberty of saying such things in the court--such
things!"

"Well, thank you," Nekhludoff said, taking the paper, and without
listening further he bade good-day to his former comrade.

"And won't you go in to see my wife?"

"No, pray excuse me; I have no time now."

"Dear me, why she will never forgive me," said Maslennikoff,
accompanying his old acquaintance down to the first landing, as he was
in the habit of doing to persons of not the greatest, but the second
greatest importance, with whom he classed Nekhludoff; "now do go in, if
only for a moment."

But Nekhludoff remained firm; and while the footman and the door-keeper
rushed to give him his stick and overcoat, and opened the door, outside
of which there stood a policeman, Nekhludoff repeated that he really
could not come in.

"Well, then; on Thursday, please. It is her 'at-home.' I will tell her
you will come," shouted Maslennikoff from the stairs.



CHAPTER LI.

THE CELLS.

Nekhludoff drove that day straight from Maslennikoff's to the prison,
and went to the inspector's lodging, which he now knew. He was again
struck by the sounds of the same piano of inferior quality; but this
time it was not a rhapsody that was being played, but exercises by
Clementi, again with the same vigour, distinctness, and quickness. The
servant with the bandaged eye said the inspector was in, and showed
Nekhludoff to a small drawing-room, in which there stood a sofa and,
in front of it, a table, with a large lamp, which stood on a piece of
crochet work, and the paper shade of which was burnt on one side. The
chief inspector entered, with his usual sad and weary look.

"Take a seat, please. What is it you want?" he said, buttoning up the
middle button of his uniform.

"I have just been to the vice-governor's, and got this order from him. I
should like to see the prisoner Maslova."

"Markova?" asked the inspector, unable to bear distinctly because of the
music.

"Maslova!"

"Well, yes." The inspector got up and went to the door whence proceeded
Clementi's roulades.

"Mary, can't you stop just a minute?" he said, in a voice that showed
that this music was the bane of his life. "One can't hear a word."

The piano was silent, but one could hear the sound of reluctant steps,
and some one looked in at the door.

The inspector seemed to feel eased by the interval of silence, lit a
thick cigarette of weak tobacco, and offered one to Nekhludoff.

Nekhludoff refused.

"What I want is to see Maslova."

"Oh, yes, that can be managed. Now, then, what do you want?" he said,
addressing a little girl of five or six, who came into the room and
walked up to her father with her head turned towards Nekhludoff, and her
eyes fixed on him.

"There, now, you'll fall down," said the inspector, smiling, as the
little girl ran up to him, and, not looking where she was going, caught
her foot in a little rug.

"Well, then, if I may, I shall go."

"It's not very convenient to see Maslova to-day," said the inspector.

"How's that?"

"Well, you know, it's all your own fault," said the inspector, with a
slight smile. "Prince, give her no money into her hands. If you like,
give it me. I will keep it for her. You see, you gave her some money
yesterday; she got some spirits (it's an evil we cannot manage to root
out), and to-day she is quite tipsy, even violent."

"Can this be true?"

"Oh, yes, it is. I have even been obliged to have recourse to severe
measures, and to put her into a separate cell. She is a quiet woman in
an ordinary way. But please do not give her any money. These people are
so--" What had happened the day before came vividly back to Nekhludoff's
mind, and again he was seized with fear.

"And Doukhova, a political prisoner; might I see her?"

"Yes, if you like," said the inspector. He embraced the little girl,
who was still looking at Nekhludoff, got up, and, tenderly motioning
her aside, went into the ante-room. Hardly had he got into the overcoat
which the maid helped him to put on, and before he had reached the door,
the distinct sounds of Clementi's roulades again began.

"She entered the Conservatoire, but there is such disorder there. She
has a great gift," said the inspector, as they went down the stairs.
"She means to play at concerts."

The inspector and Nekhludoff arrived at the prison. The gates were
instantly opened as they appeared. The jailers, with their fingers
lifted to their caps, followed the inspector with their eyes. Four
men, with their heads half shaved, who were carrying tubs filled with
something, cringed when they saw the inspector. One of them frowned
angrily, his black eyes glaring.

"Of course a talent like that must be developed; it would not do to bury
it, but in a small lodging, you know, it is rather hard." The inspector
went on with the conversation, taking no notice of the prisoners.

"Who is it you want to see?"

"Doukhova."

"Oh, she's in the tower. You'll have to wait a little," he said.

"Might I not meanwhile see the prisoners Menshoff, mother and son, who
are accused of incendiarism?"

"Oh, yes. Cell No. 21. Yes, they can be sent for."

"But might I not see Menshoff in his cell?"

"Oh, you'll find the waiting-room more pleasant."

"No. I should prefer the cell. It is more interesting."

"Well, you have found something to be interested in!"

Here the assistant, a smartly-dressed officer, entered the side door.

"Here, see the Prince into Menshoff's cell, No. 21," said the inspector
to his assistant, "and then take him to the office. And I'll go and
call--What's her name? Vera Doukhova."

The inspector's assistant was young, with dyed moustaches, and diffusing
the smell of eau-de-cologne. "This way, please," he said to Nekhludoff,
with a pleasant smile. "Our establishment interests you?"

"Yes, it does interest me; and, besides, I look upon it as a duty to
help a man who I heard was confined here, though innocent."

The assistant shrugged his shoulders.

"Yes, that may happen," he said quietly, politely stepping aside to let
the visitor enter, the stinking corridor first. "But it also happens
that they lie. Here we are."

The doors of the cells were open, and some of the prisoners were in the
corridor. The assistant nodded slightly to the jailers, and cast a side
glance at the prisoners, who, keeping close to the wall, crept back to
their cells, or stood like soldiers, with their arms at their sides,
following the official with their eyes. After passing through one
corridor, the assistant showed Nekhludoff into another to the left,
separated from the first by an iron door. This corridor was darker, and
smelt even worse than the first. The corridor had doors on both sides,
with little holes in them about an inch in diameter. There was only an
old jailer, with an unpleasant face, in this corridor.

"Where is Menshoff?" asked the inspector's assistant.

"The eighth cell to the left."

"And these? Are they occupied?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Yes, all but one."



CHAPTER LII.

NO. 21.

"May I look in?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Oh, certainly," answered the assistant, smiling, and turned to the
jailer with some question.

Nekhludoff looked into one of the little holes, and saw a tall young man
pacing up and down the cell. When the man heard some one at the door he
looked up with a frown, but continued walking up and down.

Nekhludoff looked into another hole. His eye met another large eye
looking out of the hole at him, and he quickly stepped aside. In the
third cell he saw a very small man asleep on the bed, covered, head and
all, with his prison cloak. In the fourth a broad-faced man was sitting
with his elbows on his knees and his head low down. At the sound of
footsteps this man raised his head and looked up. His face, especially
his large eyes, bore the expression of hopeless dejection. One could see
that it did not even interest him to know who was looking into his
cell. Whoever it might be, he evidently hoped for nothing good from him.
Nekhludoff was seized with dread, and went to Menshoff's cell, No. 21,
without stopping to look through any more holes. The jailer unlocked the
door and opened it. A young man, with long neck, well-developed muscles,
a small head, and kind, round eyes, stood by the bed, hastily putting
on his cloak, and looking at the newcomers with a frightened face.
Nekhludoff was specially struck by the kind, round eyes that were
throwing frightened and inquiring glances in turns at him, at the
jailer, and at the assistant, and back again.

"Here's a gentleman wants to inquire into your affair."

"Thank you kindly."

"Yes, I was told about you," Nekhludoff said, going through the cell up
to the dirty grated window, "and I should like to hear all about it from
yourself."

Menshoff also came up to the window, and at once started telling his
story, at first looking shyly at the inspector's assistant, but growing
gradually bolder. When the assistant left the cell and went into the
corridor to give some order the man grew quite bold. The story was told
with the accent and in the manner common to a most ordinary good peasant
lad. To hear it told by a prisoner dressed in this degrading clothing,
and inside a prison, seemed very strange to Nekhludoff. Nekhludoff
listened, and at the same time kept looking around him--at the low
bedstead with its straw mattress, the window and the dirty, damp wall,
and the piteous face and form of this unfortunate, disfigured peasant
in his prison cloak and shoes, and he felt sadder and sadder, and would
have liked not to believe what this good-natured fellow was saying. It
seemed too dreadful to think that men could do such a thing as to take
a man, dress him in convict clothes, and put him in this horrible place
without any reason only because he himself had been injured. And yet the
thought that this seemingly true story, told with such a good-natured
expression on the face, might be an invention and a lie was still
more dreadful. This was the story: The village public-house keeper had
enticed the young fellow's wife. He tried to get justice by all sorts
of means. But everywhere the public-house keeper managed to bribe the
officials, and was acquitted. Once, he took his wife back by force, but
she ran away next day. Then he came to demand her back, but, though he
saw her when he came in, the public-house keeper told him she was not
there, and ordered him to go away. He would not go, so the public-house
keeper and his servant beat him so that they drew blood. The next day
a fire broke out in the public-house, and the young man and his mother
were accused of having set the house on fire. He had not set it on fire,
but was visiting a friend at the time.

"And it is true that you did not set it on fire?"

"It never entered my head to do it, sir. It must be my enemy that did
it himself. They say he had only just insured it. Then they said it was
mother and I that did it, and that we had threatened him. It is true I
once did go for him, my heart couldn't stand it any longer."

"Can this be true?"

"God is my witness it is true. Oh, sir, be so good--" and Nekhludoff had
some difficulty to prevent him from bowing down to the ground. "You see
I am perishing without any reason." His face quivered and he turned
up the sleeve of his cloak and began to cry, wiping the tears with the
sleeve of his dirty shirt.

"Are you ready?" asked the assistant.

"Yes. Well, cheer up. We will consult a good lawyer, and will do what we
can," said Nekhludoff, and went out. Menshoff stood close to the door,
so that the jailer knocked him in shutting it, and while the jailer was
locking it he remained looking out through the little hole.



CHAPTER LIII.

VICTIMS OF GOVERNMENT.

Passing back along the broad corridor (it was dinner time, and the cell
doors were open), among the men dressed in their light yellow cloaks,
short, wide trousers, and prison shoes, who were looking eagerly at him,
Nekhludoff felt a strange mixture of sympathy for them, and horror and
perplexity at the conduct of those who put and kept them here, and,
besides, he felt, he knew not why, ashamed of himself calmly examining
it all.

In one of the corridors, some one ran, clattering with his shoes, in
at the door of a cell. Several men came out from here, and stood in
Nekhludoff's way, bowing to him.

"Please, your honour (we don't know what to call you), get our affair
settled somehow."

"I am not an official. I know nothing about it."

"Well, anyhow, you come from outside; tell somebody--one of the
authorities, if need be," said an indignant voice. "Show some pity
on us, as a human being. Here we are suffering the second month for
nothing."

"What do you mean? Why?" said Nekhludoff.

"Why? We ourselves don't know why, but are sitting here the second
month."

"Yes, it's quite true, and it is owing to an accident," said the
inspector. "These people were taken up because they had no passports,
and ought to have been sent back to their native government; but the
prison there is burnt, and the local authorities have written, asking us
not to send them on. So we have sent all the other passportless people
to their different governments, but are keeping these."

"What! For no other reason than that?" Nekhludoff exclaimed, stopping at
the door.

A crowd of about forty men, all dressed in prison clothes, surrounded
him and the assistant, and several began talking at once. The assistant
stopped them.

"Let some one of you speak."

A tall, good-looking peasant, a stone-mason, of about fifty, stepped out
from the rest. He told Nekhludoff that all of them had been ordered back
to their homes and were now being kept in prison because they had no
passports, yet they had passports which were only a fortnight overdue.
The same thing had happened every year; they had many times omitted to
renew their passports till they were overdue, and nobody had ever said
anything; but this year they had been taken up and were being kept in
prison the second month, as if they were criminals.

"We are all masons, and belong to the same artel. We are told that the
prison in our government is burnt, but this is not our fault. Do help
us."

Nekhludoff listened, but hardly understood what the good-looking old
man was saying, because his attention was riveted to a large, dark-grey,
many-legged louse that was creeping along the good-looking man's cheek.

"How's that? Is it possible for such a reason?" Nekhludoff said, turning
to the assistant.

"Yes, they should have been sent off and taken back to their homes,"
calmly said the assistant, "but they seem to have been forgotten or
something."

Before the assistant had finished, a small, nervous man, also in prison
dress, came out of the crowd, and, strangely contorting his mouth, began
to say that they were being ill-used for nothing.

"Worse than dogs," he began.

"Now, now; not too much of this. Hold your tongue, or you know--"

"What do I know?" screamed the little man, desperately. "What is our
crime?"

"Silence!" shouted the assistant, and the little man was silent.

"But what is the meaning of all this?" Nekhludoff thought to himself
as he came out of the cell, while a hundred eyes were fixed upon him
through the openings of the cell doors and from the prisoners that met
him, making him feel as if he were running the gauntlet.

"Is it really possible that perfectly innocent people are kept here?"
Nekhludoff uttered when they left the corridor.

"What would you have us do? They lie so. To hear them talk they are all
of them innocent," said the inspector's assistant. "But it does happen
that some are really imprisoned for nothing."

"Well, these have done nothing."

"Yes, we must admit it. Still, the people are fearfully spoilt. There
are such types--desperate fellows, with whom one has to look sharp.
To-day two of that sort had to be punished."

"Punished? How?"

"Flogged with a birch-rod, by order."

"But corporal punishment is abolished."

"Not for such as are deprived of their rights. They are still liable to
it."

Nekhludoff thought of what he had seen the day before while waiting
in the hall, and now understood that the punishment was then being
inflicted, and the mixed feeling of curiosity, depression, perplexity,
and moral nausea, that grew into physical sickness, took hold of him
more strongly than ever before.

Without listening to the inspector's assistant, or looking round, he
hurriedly left the corridor, and went to the office. The inspector was
in the office, occupied with other business, and had forgotten to send
for Doukhova. He only remembered his promise to have her called when
Nekhludoff entered the office.

"Sit down, please. I'll send for her at once," said the inspector.



CHAPTER LIV.

PRISONERS AND FRIENDS.

The office consisted of two rooms. The first room, with a large,
dilapidated stove and two dirty windows, had a black measure for
measuring the prisoners in one corner, and in another corner hung a
large image of Christ, as is usual in places where they torture people.
In this room stood several jailers. In the next room sat about twenty
persons, men and women in groups and in pairs, talking in low voices.
There was a writing table by the window.

The inspector sat down by the table, and offered Nekhludoff a chair
beside him. Nekhludoff sat down, and looked at the people in the room.

The first who drew his attention was a young man with a pleasant face,
dressed in a short jacket, standing in front of a middle-aged woman
with dark eyebrows, and he was eagerly telling her something and
gesticulating with his hands. Beside them sat an old man, with blue
spectacles, holding the hand of a young woman in prisoner's clothes, who
was telling him something. A schoolboy, with a fixed, frightened look on
his face, was gazing at the old man. In one corner sat a pair of
lovers. She was quite young and pretty, and had short, fair hair, looked
energetic, and was elegantly dressed; he had fine features, wavy hair,
and wore a rubber jacket. They sat in their corner and seemed stupefied
with love. Nearest to the table sat a grey-haired woman dressed in
black, evidently the mother of a young, consumptive-looking fellow, in
the same kind of jacket. Her head lay on his shoulder. She was trying
to say something, but the tears prevented her from speaking; she began
several times, but had to stop. The young man held a paper in his hand,
and, apparently not knowing what to do, kept folding and pressing it
with an angry look on his face.

Beside them was a short-haired, stout, rosy girl, with very prominent
eyes, dressed in a grey dress and a cape; she sat beside the weeping
mother, tenderly stroking her. Everything about this girl was beautiful;
her large, white hands, her short, wavy hair, her firm nose and lips,
but the chief charm of her face lay in her kind, truthful hazel eyes.
The beautiful eyes turned away from the mother for a moment when
Nekhludoff came in, and met his look. But she turned back at once and
said something to the mother.

Not far from the lovers a dark, dishevelled man, with a gloomy face, sat
angrily talking to a beardless visitor, who looked as if he belonged to
the Scoptsy sect.

At the very door stood a young man in a rubber jacket, who seemed more
concerned about the impression he produced on the onlooker than about
what he was saying. Nekhludoff, sitting by the inspector's side, looked
round with strained curiosity. A little boy with closely-cropped hair
came up to him and addressed him in a thin little voice.

"And whom are you waiting for?"

Nekhludoff was surprised at the question, but looking at the boy, and
seeing the serious little face with its bright, attentive eyes fixed
on him, answered him seriously that he was waiting for a woman of his
acquaintance.

"Is she, then, your sister?" the boy asked.

"No, not my sister," Nekhludoff answered in surprise.

"And with whom are you here?" he inquired of the boy.

"I? With mamma; she is a political one," he replied.

"Mary Pavlovna, take Kolia!" said the inspector, evidently considering
Nekhludoff's conversation with the boy illegal.

Mary Pavlovna, the beautiful girl who had attracted Nekhludoff's
attention, rose tall and erect, and with firm, almost manly steps,
approached Nekhludoff and the boy.

"What is he asking you? Who you are?" she inquired with a slight smile,
and looking straight into his face with a trustful look in her kind,
prominent eyes, and as simply as if there could be no doubt whatever
that she was and must be on sisterly terms with everybody.

"He likes to know everything," she said, looking at the boy with so
sweet and kind a smile that both the boy and Nekhludoff were obliged to
smile back.

"He was asking me whom I have come to see."

"Mary Pavlovna, it is against the rules to speak to strangers. You know
it is," said the inspector.

"All right, all right," she said, and went back to the consumptive lad's
mother, holding Kolia's little hand in her large, white one, while he
continued gazing up into her face.

"Whose is this little boy?" Nekhludoff asked of the inspector.

"His mother is a political prisoner, and he was born in prison,"
said the inspector, in a pleased tone, as if glad to point out how
exceptional his establishment was.

"Is it possible?"

"Yes, and now he is going to Siberia with her."

"And that young girl?"

"I cannot answer your question," said the inspector, shrugging his
shoulders. "Besides, here is Doukhova."



CHAPTER LV.

VERA DOUKHOVA EXPLAINS.

Through a door, at the back of the room, entered, with a wriggling gait,
the thin, yellow Vera Doukhova, with her large, kind eyes.

"Thanks for having come," she said, pressing Nekhludoff's hand. "Do you
remember me? Let us sit down."

"I did not expect to see you like this."

"Oh, I am very happy. It is so delightful, so delightful, that I desire
nothing better," said Vera Doukhova, with the usual expression of fright
in the large, kind, round eyes fixed on Nekhludoff, and twisting the
terribly thin, sinewy neck, surrounded by the shabby, crumpled, dirty
collar of her bodice. Nekhludoff asked her how she came to be in prison.

In answer she began relating all about her affairs with great animation.
Her speech was intermingled with a great many long words, such as
propaganda, disorganisation, social groups, sections and sub-sections,
about which she seemed to think everybody knew, but which Nekhludoff had
never heard of.

She told him all the secrets of the Nardovolstvo, [literally, "People's
Freedom," a revolutionary movement] evidently convinced that he was
pleased to hear them. Nekhludoff looked at her miserable little neck,
her thin, unkempt hair, and wondered why she had been doing all these
strange things, and why she was now telling all this to him. He pitied
her, but not as he had pitied Menshoff, the peasant, kept for no fault
of his own in the stinking prison. She was pitiable because of the
confusion that filled her mind. It was clear that she considered herself
a heroine, and was ready to give her life for a cause, though she could
hardly have explained what that cause was and in what its success would
lie.

The business that Vera Doukhova wanted to see Nekhludoff about was
the following: A friend of hers, who had not even belonged to their
"sub-group," as she expressed it, had been arrested with her about five
months before, and imprisoned in the Petropavlovsky fortress because
some prohibited books and papers (which she had been asked to keep) had
been found in her possession. Vera Doukhova felt herself in some measure
to blame for her friend's arrest, and implored Nekhludoff, who had
connections among influential people, to do all he could in order to set
this friend free.

Besides this, Doukhova asked him to try and get permission for
another friend of hers, Gourkevitch (who was also imprisoned in the
Petropavlovsky fortress), to see his parents, and to procure some
scientific books which he required for his studies. Nekhludoff promised
to do what he could when he went to Petersburg.

As to her own story, this is what she said: Having finished a course
of midwifery, she became connected with a group of adherents to the
Nardovolstvo, and made up her mind to agitate in the revolutionary
movement. At first all went on smoothly. She wrote proclamations
and occupied herself with propaganda work in the factories; then, an
important member having been arrested, their papers were seized and all
concerned were arrested. "I was also arrested, and shall be exiled. But
what does it matter? I feel perfectly happy." She concluded her story
with a piteous smile.

Nekhludoff made some inquiries concerning the girl with the prominent
eyes. Vera Doukhova told him that this girl was the daughter of a
general, and had been long attached to the revolutionary party, and was
arrested because she had pleaded guilty to having shot a gendarme.
She lived in a house with some conspirators, where they had a secret
printing press. One night, when the police came to search this house,
the occupiers resolved to defend themselves, put out the light, and
began destroying the things that might incriminate them. The police
forced their way in, and one of the conspirators fired, and mortally
wounded a gendarme. When an inquiry was instituted, this girl said that
it was she who had fired, although she had never had a revolver in her
hands, and would not have hurt a fly. And she kept to it, and was now
condemned to penal servitude in Siberia.

"An altruistic, fine character," said Vera Doukhova, approvingly.

The third business that Vera Doukhova wanted to talk about concerned
Maslova. She knew, as everybody does know in prison, the story of
Maslova's life and his connection with her, and advised him to take
steps to get her removed into the political prisoner's ward, or into
the hospital to help to nurse the sick, of which there were very many at
that time, so that extra nurses were needed.

Nekhludoff thanked her for the advice, and said he would try to act upon
it.



CHAPTER LVI.

NEKHLUDOFF AND THE PRISONERS.

Their conversation was interrupted by the inspector, who said that the
time was up, and the prisoners and their friends must part. Nekhludoff
took leave of Vera Doukhova and went to the door, where he stopped to
watch what was going on.

The inspector's order called forth only heightened animation among the
prisoners in the room, but no one seemed to think of going. Some rose
and continued to talk standing, some went on talking without rising.
A few began crying and taking leave of each other. The mother and
her consumptive son seemed especially pathetic. The young fellow kept
twisting his bit of paper and his face seemed angry, so great were his
efforts not to be infected by his mother's emotion. The mother, hearing
that it was time to part, put her head on his shoulder and sobbed and
sniffed aloud.

The girl with the prominent eyes--Nekhludoff could not help watching
her--was standing opposite the sobbing mother, and was saying something
to her in a soothing tone. The old man with the blue spectacles stood
holding his daughter's hand and nodding in answer to what she said. The
young lovers rose, and, holding each other's hands, looked silently into
one another's eyes.

"These are the only two who are merry," said a young man with a short
coat who stood by Nekhludoff's side, also looking at those who were
about to part, and pointed to the lovers. Feeling Nekhludoff's and
the young man's eyes fixed on them, the lovers--the young man with the
rubber coat and the pretty girl--stretched out their arms, and with
their hands clasped in each other's, danced round and round again.
"To-night they are going to be married here in prison, and she will
follow him to Siberia," said the young man.

"What is he?"

"A convict, condemned to penal servitude. Let those two at least have a
little joy, or else it is too painful," the young man added, listening
to the sobs of the consumptive lad's mother.

"Now, my good people! Please, please do not oblige me to have recourse
to severe measures," the inspector said, repeating the same words
several times over. "Do, please," he went on in a weak, hesitating
manner. "It is high time. What do you mean by it? This sort of thing is
quite impossible. I am now asking you for the last time," he repeated
wearily, now putting out his cigarette and then lighting another.

It was evident that, artful, old, and common as were the devices
enabling men to do evil to others without feeling responsible for it,
the inspector could not but feel conscious that he was one of those who
were guilty of causing the sorrow which manifested itself in this
room. And it was apparent that this troubled him sorely. At length the
prisoners and their visitors began to go--the first out of the inner,
the latter out of the outer door. The man with the rubber jacket passed
out among them, and the consumptive youth and the dishevelled man. Mary
Pavlovna went out with the boy born in prison.

The visitors went out too. The old man with the blue spectacles,
stepping heavily, went out, followed by Nekhludoff.

"Yes, a strange state of things this," said the talkative young man, as
if continuing an interrupted conversation, as he descended the stairs
side by side with Nekhludoff. "Yet we have reason to be grateful to the
inspector who does not keep strictly to the rules, kind-hearted fellow.
If they can get a talk it does relieve their hearts a bit, after all!"

While talking to the young man, who introduced himself as Medinzeff,
Nekhludoff reached the hall. There the inspector came up to them with
weary step.

"If you wish to see Maslova," he said, apparently desiring to be polite
to Nekhludoff, "please come to-morrow."

"Very well," answered Nekhludoff, and hurried away, experiencing
more than ever that sensation of moral nausea which he always felt on
entering the prison.

The sufferings of the evidently innocent Menshoff seemed terrible, and
not so much his physical suffering as the perplexity, the distrust in
the good and in God which he must feel, seeing the cruelty of the people
who tormented him without any reason.

Terrible were the disgrace and sufferings cast on these hundreds of
guiltless people simply because something was not written on paper as it
should have been. Terrible were the brutalised jailers, whose occupation
is to torment their brothers, and who were certain that they were
fulfilling an important and useful duty; but most terrible of all seemed
this sickly, elderly, kind-hearted inspector, who was obliged to part
mother and son, father and daughter, who were just the same sort of
people as he and his own children.

"What is it all for?" Nekhludoff asked himself, and could not find an
answer.



CHAPTER LVII.

THE VICE-GOVERNOR'S "AT-HOME".

The next day Nekhludoff went to see the advocate, and spoke to him
about the Menshoffs' case, begging him to undertake their defence. The
advocate promised to look into the case, and if it turned out to be as
Nekhludoff said he would in all probability undertake the defence free
of charge. Then Nekhludoff told him of the 130 men who were kept in
prison owing to a mistake. "On whom did it depend? Whose fault was it?"

The advocate was silent for a moment, evidently anxious to give a
correct reply.

"Whose fault is it? No one's," he said, decidedly. "Ask the Procureur,
he'll say it is the Governor's; ask the Governor, he'll say it is the
Procureur's fault. No one is in fault."

"I am just going to see the Vice-Governor. I shall tell him."

"Oh, that's quite useless," said the advocate, with a smile. "He is such
a--he is not a relation or friend of yours?--such a blockhead, if I may
say so, and yet a crafty animal at the same time."

Nekhludoff remembered what Maslennikoff had said about the advocate, and
did not answer, but took leave and went on to Maslennikoff's. He had
to ask Maslennikoff two things: about Maslova's removal to the prison
hospital, and about the 130 passportless men innocently imprisoned.
Though it was very hard to petition a man whom he did not respect, and
by whose orders men were flogged, yet it was the only means of gaining
his end, and he had to go through with it.

As he drove up to Maslennikoff's house Nekhludoff saw a number of
different carriages by the front door, and remembered that it was
Maslennikoff's wife's "at-home" day, to which he had been invited. At
the moment Nekhludoff drove up there was a carriage in front of the
door, and a footman in livery, with a cockade in his hat, was helping
a lady down the doorstep. She was holding up her train, and showing her
thin ankles, black stockings, and slippered feet. Among the carriages
was a closed landau, which he knew to be the Korchagins'.

The grey-haired, red-checked coachman took off his hat and bowed in a
respectful yet friendly manner to Nekhludoff, as to a gentleman he knew
well. Nekhludoff had not had time to inquire for Maslennikoff, when the
latter appeared on the carpeted stairs, accompanying a very important
guest not only to the first landing but to the bottom of the stairs.
This very important visitor, a military man, was speaking in French
about a lottery for the benefit of children's homes that were to be
founded in the city, and expressed the opinion that this was a good
occupation for the ladies. "It amuses them, and the money comes."

_"Qu'elles s'amusent et que le bon dieu les benisse. M. Nekhludoff!_ How
d'you do? How is it one never sees you?" he greeted Nekhludoff. "_Allez
presenter vos devoirs a Madame._ And the Korchagins are here et Nadine
Bukshevden. _Toutes les jolies femmes de la ville,_" said the important
guest, slightly raising his uniformed shoulders as he presented them to
his own richly liveried servant to have his military overcoat put on.
"_Au revoir, mon cher._" And he pressed Maslennikoff's hand.

"Now, come up; I am so glad," said Maslennikoff, grasping Nekhludoff's
hand. In spite of his corpulency Maslennikoff hurried quickly up the
stairs. He was in particularly good spirits, owing to the attention paid
him by the important personage. Every such attention gave him the same
sense of delight as is felt by an affectionate dog when its master pats
it, strokes it, or scratches its ears. It wags its tail, cringes,
jumps about, presses its ears down, and madly rushes about in a circle.
Maslennikoff was ready to do the same. He did not notice the serious
expression on Nekhludoff's face, paid no heed to his words, but pulled
him irresistibly towards the drawing-room, so that it was impossible for
Nekhludoff not to follow. "Business after wards. I shall do whatever
you want," said Meslennikoff, as he drew Nekhludoff through the dancing
hall. "Announce Prince Nekhludoff," he said to a footman, without
stopping on his way. The footman started off at a trot and passed them.

"_Vous n'avez qu' a ordonner._ But you must see my wife. As it is, I got
it for letting you go without seeing her last time."

By the time they reached the drawing-room the footman had already
announced Nekhludoff, and from between the bonnets and heads that
surrounded it the smiling face of Anna Ignatievna, the Vice-Governor's
wife, beamed on Nekhludoff. At the other end of the drawing-room several
ladies were seated round the tea-table, and some military men and some
civilians stood near them. The clatter of male and female voices went on
unceasingly.

"Enfin! you seem to have quite forgotten us. How have we offended?"
With these words, intended to convey an idea of intimacy which had never
existed between herself and Nekhludoff, Anna Ignatievna greeted the
newcomer.

"You are acquainted?--Madam Tilyaevsky, M. Chernoff. Sit down a bit
nearer. Missy _vene donc a notre table on vous apportera votre_ the
. . . And you," she said, having evidently forgotten his name, to an officer
who was talking to Missy, "do come here. A cup of tea, Prince?"

"I shall never, never agree with you. It's quite simple; she did not
love," a woman's voice was heard saying.

"But she loved tarts."

"Oh, your eternal silly jokes!" put in, laughingly, another lady
resplendent in silks, gold, and jewels.

"C'est excellent these little biscuits, and so light. I think I'll take
another."

"Well, are you moving soon?"

"Yes, this is our last day. That's why we have come. Yes, it must be
lovely in the country; we are having a delightful spring."

Missy, with her hat on, in a dark-striped dress of some kind that fitted
her like a skin, was looking very handsome. She blushed when she saw
Nekhludoff.

"And I thought you had left," she said to him.

"I am on the point of leaving. Business is keeping me in town, and it is
on business I have come here."

"Won't you come to see mamma? She would like to see you," she said, and
knowing that she was saying what was not true, and that he knew it also,
she blushed still more.

"I fear I shall scarcely have time," Nekhludoff said gloomily, trying
to appear as if he had not noticed her blush. Missy frowned angrily,
shrugged her shoulders, and turned towards an elegant officer, who
grasped the empty cup she was holding, and knocking his sword against
the chairs, manfully carried the cup across to another table.

"You must contribute towards the Home fund."

"I am not refusing, but only wish to keep my bounty fresh for the
lottery. There I shall let it appear in all its glory."

"Well, look out for yourself," said a voice, followed by an evidently
feigned laugh.

Anna Ignatievna was in raptures; her "at-home" had turned out a
brilliant success. "Micky tells me you are busying yourself with prison
work. I can understand you so well," she said to Nekhludoff. "Micky (she
meant her fat husband, Maslennikoff) may have other defects, but you
know how kind-hearted he is. All these miserable prisoners are his
children. He does not regard them in any other light. _Il est d'une
bonte---_" and she stopped, finding no words to do justice to this bonte
of his, and quickly turned to a shrivelled old woman with bows of lilac
ribbon all over, who came in just then.

Having said as much as was absolutely necessary, and with as little
meaning as conventionality required, Nekhludoff rose and went up to
Meslennikoff. "Can you give me a few minutes' hearing, please?"

"Oh, yes. Well, what is it?"

"Let us come in here."

They entered a small Japanese sitting-room, and sat down by the window.



CHAPTER LVIII.

THE VICE-GOVERNOR SUSPICIOUS.

"Well? _Je suis a vous_. Will you smoke? But wait a bit; we must be
careful and not make a mess here," said Maslennikoff, and brought an
ashpan. "Well?"

"There are two matters I wish to ask you about."

"Dear me!"

An expression of gloom and dejection came over Maslennikoff's
countenance, and every trace of the excitement, like that of the dog's
whom its master has scratched behind the cars, vanished completely. The
sound of voices reached them from the drawing-room. A woman's voice was
heard, saying, _"Jamais je ne croirais,"_ and a man's voice from
the other side relating something in which the names of la Comtesse
Voronzoff and Victor Apraksine kept recurring. A hum of voices, mixed
with laughter, came from another side. Maslennikoff tried to listen to
what was going on in the drawing-room and to what Nekhludoff was saying
at the same time.

"I am again come about that same woman," said Nekhludoff.

"Oh, yes; I know. The one innocently condemned."

"I would like to ask that she should be appointed to serve in the prison
hospital. I have been told that this could be arranged."

Maslennikoff compressed his lips and meditated. "That will be scarcely
possible," he said. "However, I shall see what can be done, and shall
wire you an answer tomorrow."

"I have been told that there were many sick, and help was needed."

"All right, all right. I shall let you know in any case."

"Please do," said Nekhludoff.

The sound of a general and even a natural laugh came from the
drawing-room.

"That's all that Victor. He is wonderfully sharp when he is in the right
vein," said Maslennikoff.

"The next thing I wanted to tell you," said Nekhludoff, "is that 130
persons are imprisoned only because their passports are overdue. They
have been kept here a month."

And he related the circumstances of the case.

"How have you come to know of this?" said Maslennikoff, looking uneasy
and dissatisfied.

"I went to see a prisoner, and these men came and surrounded me in the
corridor, and asked . . ."

"What prisoner did you go to see?"

"A peasant who is kept in prison, though innocent. I have put his case
into the hands of a lawyer. But that is not the point."

"Is it possible that people who have done no wrong are imprisoned only
because their passports are overdue? And . . ."

"That's the Procureur's business," Maslennikoff interrupted, angrily.
"There, now, you see what it is you call a prompt and just form of
trial. It is the business of the Public Prosecutor to visit the prison
and to find out if the prisoners are kept there lawfully. But that set
play cards; that's all they do."

"Am I to understand that you can do nothing?" Nekhludoff said,
despondently, remembering that the advocate had foretold that the
Governor would put the blame on the Procureur.

"Oh, yes, I can. I shall see about it at once."

"So much the worse for her. _C'est un souffre douleur_," came the voice
of a woman, evidently indifferent to what she was saying, from the
drawing-room.

"So much the better. I shall take it also," a man's voice was heard to
say from the other side, followed by the playful laughter of a woman,
who was apparently trying to prevent the man from taking something away
from her.

"No, no; not on any account," the woman's voice said.

"All right, then. I shall do all this," Maslennikoff repeated, and put
out the cigarette he held in his white, turquoise-ringed hand. "And now
let us join the ladies."

"Wait a moment," Nekhludoff said, stopping at the door of the
drawing-room. "I was told that some men had received corporal punishment
in the prison yesterday. Is this true?"

Maslennikoff blushed.

"Oh, that's what you are after? No, mon cher, decidedly it won't do to
let you in there; you want to get at everything. Come, come; Anna is
calling us," he said, catching Nekhludoff by the arm, and again becoming
as excited as after the attention paid him by the important person, only
now his excitement was not joyful, but anxious.

Nekhludoff pulled his arm away, and without taking leave of any one
and without saying a word, he passed through the drawing-room with a
dejected look, went down into the hall, past the footman, who sprang
towards him, and out at the street door.

"What is the matter with him? What have you done to him?" asked Anna of
her husband.

"This is _a la Francaise_," remarked some one.

"_A la Francaise_, indeed--it is _a la Zoulou_."

"Oh, but he's always been like that."

Some one rose, some one came in, and the clatter went on its course.
The company used this episode with Nekhludoff as a convenient topic of
conversation for the rest of the "at-home."

On the day following his visit to Maslennikoff, Nekhludoff received a
letter from him, written in a fine, firm hand, on thick, glazed paper,
with a coat-of-arms, and sealed with sealing-wax. Maslennikoff said
that he had written to the doctor concerning Maslova's removal to the
hospital, and hoped Nekhludoff's wish would receive attention. The
letter was signed, "Your affectionate elder comrade," and the signature
ended with a large, firm, and artistic flourish. "Fool!" Nekhludoff
could not refrain from saying, especially because in the word
"comrade" he felt Maslennikoff's condescension towards him, i.e., while
Maslennikoff was filling this position, morally most dirty and shameful,
he still thought himself a very important man, and wished, if not
exactly to flatter Nekhludoff, at least to show that he was not too
proud to call him comrade.



CHAPTER LIX.

NEKHLUDOFF'S THIRD INTERVIEW WITH MASLOVA IN PRISON.

One of the most widespread superstitions is that every man has his own
special, definite qualities; that a man is kind, cruel, wise, stupid,
energetic, apathetic, etc. Men are not like that. We may say of a man
that he is more often kind than cruel, oftener wise than stupid, oftener
energetic than apathetic, or the reverse; but it would be false to say
of one man that he is kind and wise, of another that he is wicked and
foolish. And yet we always classify mankind in this way. And this is
untrue. Men are like rivers: the water is the same in each, and alike in
all; but every river is narrow here, is more rapid there, here slower,
there broader, now clear, now cold, now dull, now warm. It is the same
with men. Every man carries in himself the germs of every human quality,
and sometimes one manifests itself, sometimes another, and the man often
becomes unlike himself, while still remaining the same man, In some
people these changes are very rapid, and Nekhludoff was such a man.
These changes in him were due to physical and to spiritual causes. At
this time he experienced such a change.

That feeling of triumph and joy at the renewal of life which he had
experienced after the trial and after the first interview with Katusha,
vanished completely, and after the last interview fear and revulsion
took the place of that joy. He was determined not to leave her, and not
to change his decision of marrying her, if she wished it; but it seemed
very hard, and made him suffer.

On the day after his visit to Maslennikoff, he again went to the prison
to see her.

The inspector allowed him to speak to her, only not in the advocate's
room nor in the office, but in the women's visiting-room. In spite
of his kindness, the inspector was more reserved with Nekhludoff than
hitherto.

An order for greater caution had apparently been sent, as a result of
his conversation with Meslennikoff.

"You may see her," the inspector said; "but please remember what I
said as regards money. And as to her removal to the hospital, that his
excellency wrote to me about, it can be done; the doctor would agree.
Only she herself does not wish it. She says, 'Much need have I to carry
out the slops for the scurvy beggars.' You don't know what these people
are, Prince," he added.

Nekhludoff did not reply, but asked to have the interview. The
inspector called a jailer, whom Nekhludoff followed into the women's
visiting-room, where there was no one but Maslova waiting. She came from
behind the grating, quiet and timid, close up to him, and said, without
looking at him:

"Forgive me, Dmitri Ivanovitch, I spoke hastily the day before
yesterday."

"It is not for me to forgive you," Nekhludoff began.

"But all the same, you must leave me," she interrupted, and in the
terribly squinting eyes with which she looked at him Nekhludoff read the
former strained, angry expression.

"Why should I leave you?"

"So."

"But why so?"

She again looked up, as it seemed to him, with the same angry look.

"Well, then, thus it is," she said. "You must leave me. It is true
what I am saying. I cannot. You just give it up altogether." Her lips
trembled and she was silent for a moment. "It is true. I'd rather hang
myself."

Nekhludoff felt that in this refusal there was hatred and unforgiving
resentment, but there was also something besides, something good. This
confirmation of the refusal in cold blood at once quenched all the
doubts in Nekhludoff's bosom, and brought back the serious, triumphant
emotion he had felt in relation to Katusha.

"Katusha, what I have said I will again repeat," he uttered, very
seriously. "I ask you to marry me. If you do not wish it, and for as
long as you do not wish it, I shall only continue to follow you, and
shall go where you are taken."

"That is your business. I shall not say anything more," she answered,
and her lips began to tremble again.

He, too, was silent, feeling unable to speak.

"I shall now go to the country, and then to Petersburg," he said, when
he was quieter again. "I shall do my utmost to get your--our case, I
mean, reconsidered, and by the help of God the sentence may be revoked."

"And if it is not revoked, never mind. I have deserved it, if not in
this case, in other ways," she said, and he saw how difficult it was for
her to keep down her tears.

"Well, have you seen Menshoff?" she suddenly asked, to hide her emotion.
"It's true they are innocent, isn't it?"

"Yes, I think so."

"Such a splendid old woman," she said.

There was another pause.

"Well, and as to the hospital?" she suddenly said, and looking at him
with her squinting eyes. "If you like, I will go, and I shall not drink
any spirits, either."

Nekhludoff looked into her eyes. They were smiling.

"Yes, yes, she is quite a different being," Nekhludoff thought. After
all his former doubts, he now felt something he had never before
experienced--the certainty that love is invincible.

When Maslova returned to her noisome cell after this interview, she took
off her cloak and sat down in her place on the shelf bedstead with her
hands folded on her lap. In the cell were only the consumptive woman,
the Vladimir woman with her baby, Menshoff's old mother, and the
watchman's wife. The deacon's daughter had the day before been declared
mentally diseased and removed to the hospital. The rest of the women
were away, washing clothes. The old woman was asleep, the cell door
stood open, and the watchman's children were in the corridor outside.
The Vladimir woman, with her baby in her arms, and the watchman's
wife, with the stocking she was knitting with deft fingers, came up to
Maslova. "Well, have you had a chat?" they asked. Maslova sat silent on
the high bedstead, swinging her legs, which did not reach to the floor.

"What's the good of snivelling?" said the watchman's wife. "The chief
thing's not to go down into the dumps. Eh, Katusha? Now, then!" and she
went on, quickly moving her fingers.

Maslova did not answer.

"And our women have all gone to wash," said the Vladimir woman. "I
heard them say much has been given in alms to-day. Quite a lot has been
brought."

"Finashka," called out the watchman's wife, "where's the little imp gone
to?"

She took a knitting needle, stuck it through both the ball and the
stocking, and went out into the corridor.

At this moment the sound of women's voices was heard from the corridor,
and the inmates of the cell entered, with their prison shoes, but
no stockings on their feet. Each was carrying a roll, some even two.
Theodosia came at once up to Maslova.

"What's the matter; is anything wrong?" Theodosia asked, looking
lovingly at Maslova with her clear, blue eyes. "This is for our tea,"
and she put the rolls on a shelf.

"Why, surely he has not changed his mind about marrying?" asked
Korableva.

"No, he has not, but I don't wish to," said Maslova, "and so I told
him."

"More fool you!" muttered Korableva in her deep tones.

"If one's not to live together, what's the use of marrying?" said
Theodosia.

"There's your husband--he's going with you," said the watchman's wife.

"Well, of course, we're married," said Theodosia. "But why should he go
through the ceremony if he is not to live with her?"

"Why, indeed! Don't be a fool! You know if he marries her she'll roll in
wealth," said Korableva.

"He says, 'Wherever they take you, I'll follow,'" said Maslova. "If he
does, it's well; if he does not, well also. I am not going to ask him
to. Now he is going to try and arrange the matter in Petersburg. He is
related to all the Ministers there. But, all the same, I have no need of
him," she continued.

"Of course not," suddenly agreed Korableva, evidently thinking about
something else as she sat examining her bag. "Well, shall we have a
drop?"

"You have some," replied Maslova. "I won't."

END OF BOOK I.




BOOK II.



CHAPTER I.

PROPERTY IN LAND.

It was possible for Maslova's case to come before the Senate in a
fortnight, at which time Nekhludoff meant to go to Petersburg, and, if
need be, to appeal to the Emperor (as the advocate who had drawn up the
petition advised) should the appeal be disregarded (and, according to
the advocate, it was best to be prepared for that, since the causes for
appeal were so slight). The party of convicts, among whom was Maslova,
would very likely leave in the beginning of June. In order to be able to
follow her to Siberia, as Nekhludoff was firmly resolved to do, he was
now obliged to visit his estates, and settle matters there. Nekhludoff
first went to the nearest, Kousminski, a large estate that lay in the
black earth district, and from which he derived the greatest part of his
income.

He had lived on that estate in his childhood and youth, and had been
there twice since, and once, at his mother's request, he had taken a
German steward there, and had with him verified the accounts. The state
of things there and the peasants' relations to the management, i.e.,
the landlord, had therefore been long known to him. The relations of the
peasants to the administration were those of utter dependence on that
management. Nekhludoff knew all this when still a university student,
he had confessed and preached Henry Georgeism, and, on the basis of that
teaching, had given the land inherited from his father to the peasants.
It is true that after entering the army, when he got into the habit of
spending 20,000 roubles a year, those former occupations ceased to be
regarded as a duty, and were forgotten, and he not only left off asking
himself where the money his mother allowed him came from, but even
avoided thinking about it. But his mother's death, the coming into the
property, and the necessity of managing it, again raised the question
as to what his position in reference to private property in land was. A
month before Nekhludoff would have answered that he had not the strength
to alter the existing order of things; that it was not he who was
administering the estate; and would one way or another have eased his
conscience, continuing to live far from his estates, and having the
money sent him. But now he decided that he could not leave things to go
on as they were, but would have to alter them in a way unprofitable
to himself, even though he had all these complicated and difficult
relations with the prison world which made money necessary, as well as a
probable journey to Siberia before him. Therefore he decided not to farm
the land, but to let it to the peasants at a low rent, to enable them
to cultivate it without depending on a landlord. More than once, when
comparing the position of a landowner with that of an owner of serfs,
Nekhludoff had compared the renting of land to the peasants instead
of cultivating it with hired labour, to the old system by which serf
proprietors used to exact a money payment from their serfs in place of
labour. It was not a solution of the problem, and yet a step towards the
solution; it was a movement towards a less rude form of slavery. And it
was in this way he meant to act.

Nekhludoff reached Kousminski about noon. Trying to simplify his life
in every way, he did not telegraph, but hired a cart and pair at the
station. The driver was a young fellow in a nankeen coat, with a belt
below his long waist. He was glad to talk to the gentleman, especially
because while they were talking his broken-winded white horse and the
emaciated spavined one could go at a foot-pace, which they always liked
to do.

The driver spoke about the steward at Kousminski without knowing that he
was driving "the master." Nekhludoff had purposely not told him who he
was.

"That ostentatious German," said the driver (who had been to town and
read novels) as he sat sideways on the box, passing his hand from
the top to the bottom of his long whip, and trying to show off his
accomplishments--"that ostentatious German has procured three light
bays, and when he drives out with his lady---oh, my! At Christmas he had
a Christmas-tree in the big house. I drove some of the visitors there.
It had 'lectric lights; you could not see the like of it in the whole
of the government. What's it to him, he has cribbed a heap of money. I
heard say he has bought an estate."

Nekhludoff had imagined that he was quite indifferent to the way the
steward managed his estate, and what advantages the steward derived from
it. The words of the long-waisted driver, however, were not pleasant to
hear.

A dark cloud now and then covered the sun; the larks were soaring above
the fields of winter corn; the forests were already covered with fresh
young green; the meadows speckled with grazing cattle and horses. The
fields were being ploughed, and Nekhludoff enjoyed the lovely day. But
every now and then he had an unpleasant feeling, and, when he asked
himself what it was caused by, he remembered what the driver had told
him about the way the German was managing Kousminski. When he got to his
estate and set to work this unpleasant feeling vanished.

Looking over the books in the office, and a talk with the foreman, who
naively pointed out the advantages to be derived from the facts that the
peasants had very little land of their own and that it lay in the midst
of the landlord's fields, made Nekhludoff more than ever determined to
leave off farming and to let his land to the peasants.

From the office books and his talk with the foreman, Nekhludoff found
that two-thirds of the best of the cultivated land was still being
tilled with improved machinery by labourers receiving fixed wages, while
the other third was tilled by the peasants at the rate of five roubles
per desiatin [about two and three-quarter acres]. So that the peasants
had to plough each desiatin three times, harrow it three times, sow
and mow the corn, make it into sheaves, and deliver it on the threshing
ground for five roubles, while the same amount of work done by wage
labour came to at least 10 roubles. Everything the peasants got from the
office they paid for in labour at a very high price. They paid in labour
for the use of the meadows, for wood, for potato-stalks, and were nearly
all of them in debt to the office. Thus, for the land that lay beyond
the cultivated fields, which the peasants hired, four times the price
that its value would bring in if invested at five per cent was taken
from the peasants.

Nekhludoff had known all this before, but he now saw it in a new light,
and wondered how he and others in his position could help seeing how
abnormal such conditions are. The steward's arguments that if the land
were let to the peasants the agricultural implements would fetch next to
nothing, as it would be impossible to get even a quarter of their value
for them, and that the peasants would spoil the land, and how great a
loser Nekhludoff would be, only strengthened Nekhludoff in the opinion
that he was doing a good action in letting the land to the peasants
and thus depriving himself of a large part of his income. He decided to
settle this business now, at once, while he was there. The reaping and
selling of the corn he left for the steward to manage in due season, and
also the selling of the agricultural implements and useless buildings.
But he asked his steward to call the peasants of the three neighbouring
villages that lay in the midst of his estate (Kousminski) to a meeting,
at which he would tell them of his intentions and arrange about the
price at which they were to rent the land.

With the pleasant sense of the firmness he had shown in the face of the
steward's arguments, and his readiness to make a sacrifice, Nekhludoff
left the office, thinking over the business before him, and strolled
round the house, through the neglected flower-garden--this year the
flowers were planted in front of the steward's house--over the tennis
ground, now overgrown with dandelions, and along the lime-tree walk,
where he used to smoke his cigar, and where he had flirted with the
pretty Kirimova, his mother's visitor. Having briefly prepared in his
mind the speech he was going to make to the peasants, he again went in
to the steward, and, after tea, having once more arranged his thoughts,
he went into the room prepared for him in the big house, which used to
be a spare bedroom.

In this clean little room, with pictures of Venice on the walls, and a
mirror between the two windows, there stood a clean bed with a spring
mattress, and by the side of it a small table, with a decanter of water,
matches, and an extinguisher. On a table by the looking-glass lay his
open portmanteau, with his dressing-case and some books in it; a Russian
book, The Investigation of the Laws of Criminality, and a German and
an English book on the same subject, which he meant to read while
travelling in the country. But it was too late to begin to-day, and he
began preparing to go to bed.

An old-fashioned inlaid mahogany arm-chair stood in the corner of
the room, and this chair, which Nekhludoff remembered standing in his
mother's bedroom, suddenly raised a perfectly unexpected sensation in
his soul. He was suddenly filled with regret at the thought of the house
that would tumble to ruin, and the garden that would run wild, and the
forest that would be cut down, and all these farmyards, stables, sheds,
machines, horses, cows which he knew had cost so much effort, though not
to himself, to acquire and to keep. It had seemed easy to give up all
this, but now it was hard, not only to give this, but even to let the
land and lose half his income. And at once a consideration, which proved
that it was unreasonable to let the land to the peasants, and thus to
destroy his property, came to his service. "I must not hold property in
land. If I possess no property in land, I cannot keep up the house and
farm. And, besides, I am going to Siberia, and shall not need either
the house or the estate," said one voice. "All this is so," said another
voice, "but you are not going to spend all your life in Siberia. You may
marry, and have children, and must hand the estate on to them in as good
a condition as you received it. There is a duty to the land, too.
To give up, to destroy everything is very easy; to acquire it very
difficult. Above all, you must consider your future life, and what
you will do with yourself, and you must dispose of your property
accordingly. And are you really firm in your resolve? And then, are you
really acting according to your conscience, or are you acting in order
to be admired of men?" Nekhludoff asked himself all this, and had to
acknowledge that he was influenced by the thought of what people would
say about him. And the more he thought about it the more questions
arose, and the more unsolvable they seemed.

In hopes of ridding himself of these thoughts by falling asleep, and
solving them in the morning when his head would be fresh, he lay down on
his clean bed. But it was long before he could sleep. Together with the
fresh air and the moonlight, the croaking of the frogs entered the room,
mingling with the trills of a couple of nightingales in the park and
one close to the window in a bush of lilacs in bloom. Listening to
the nightingales and the frogs, Nekhludoff remembered the inspector's
daughter, and her music, and the inspector; that reminded him of
Maslova, and how her lips trembled, like the croaking of the frogs, when
she said, "You must just leave it." Then the German steward began going
down to the frogs, and had to be held back, but he not only went down
but turned into Maslova, who began reproaching Nekhludoff, saying, "You
are a prince, and I am a convict." "No, I must not give in," thought
Nekhludoff, waking up, and again asking himself, "Is what I am doing
right? I do not know, and no matter, no matter, I must only fall asleep
now." And he began himself to descend where he had seen the inspector
and Maslova climbing down to, and there it all ended.



CHAPTER II.

EFFORTS AT LAND RESTORATION.

The next day Nekhludoff awoke at nine o'clock. The young office clerk
who attended on "the master" brought him his boots, shining as they had
never shone before, and some cold, beautifully clear spring water, and
informed him that the peasants were already assembling.

Nekhludoff jumped out of bed, and collected his thoughts. Not a trace
of yesterday's regret at giving up and thus destroying his property
remained now. He remembered this feeling of regret with surprise; he was
now looking forward with joy to the task before him, and could not help
being proud of it. He could see from the window the old tennis ground,
overgrown with dandelions, on which the peasants were beginning to
assemble. The frogs had not croaked in vain the night before; the day
was dull. There was no wind; a soft warm rain had begun falling in the
morning, and hung in drops on leaves, twigs, and grass. Besides the
smell of the fresh vegetation, the smell of damp earth, asking for more
rain, entered in at the window. While dressing, Nekhludoff several times
looked out at the peasants gathered on the tennis ground. One by one
they came, took off their hats or caps to one another, and took their
places in a circle, leaning on their sticks. The steward, a stout,
muscular, strong young man, dressed in a short pea-jacket, with a
green stand-up collar, and enormous buttons, came to say that all had
assembled, but that they might wait until Nekhludoff had finished his
breakfast--tea and coffee, whichever he pleased; both were ready.

"No, I think I had better go and see them at once," said Nekhludoff,
with an unexpected feeling of shyness and shame at the thought of the
conversation he was going to have with the peasants. He was going to
fulfil a wish of the peasants, the fulfilment of which they did not
even dare to hope for--to let the land to them at a low price, i.e.,
to confer a great boon; and yet he felt ashamed of something. When
Nekhludoff came up to the peasants, and the fair, the curly, the bald,
the grey heads were bared before him, he felt so confused that he
could say nothing. The rain continued to come down in small drops,
that remained on the hair, the beards, and the fluff of the men's rough
coats. The peasants looked at "the master," waiting for him to speak,
and he was so abashed that he could not speak. This confused silence
was broken by the sedate, self-assured German steward, who considered
himself a good judge of the Russian peasant, and who spoke Russian
remarkably well. This strong, over-fed man, and Nekhludoff himself,
presented a striking contrast to the peasants, with their thin, wrinkled
faces and the shoulder blades protruding beneath their coarse coats.

"Here's the Prince wanting to do you a favor, and to let the land to
you; only you are not worthy of it," said the steward.

"How are we not worthy of it, Vasili Karlovitch? Don't we work for you?
We were well satisfied with the deceased lady--God have mercy on her
soul--and the young Prince will not desert us now. Our thanks to him,"
said a redhaired, talkative peasant.

"Yes, that's why I have called you together. I should like to let you
have all the land, if you wish it."

The peasants said nothing, as if they did not understand or did not
believe it.

"Let's see. Let us have the land? What do you mean?" asked a middle-aged
man.

"To let it to you, that you might have the use of it, at a low rent."

"A very agreeable thing," said an old man.

"If only the pay is such as we can afford," said another.

"There's no reason why we should not rent the land."

"We are accustomed to live by tilling the ground."

"And it's quieter for you, too, that way. You'll have to do nothing
but receive the rent. Only think of all the sin and worry now!" several
voices were heard saying.

"The sin is all on your side," the German remarked. "If only you did
your work, and were orderly."

"That's impossible for the likes of us," said a sharp-nosed old man.
"You say, 'Why do you let the horse get into the corn?' just as if I
let it in. Why, I was swinging my scythe, or something of the kind,
the livelong day, till the day seemed as long as a year, and so I fell
asleep while watching the herd of horses at night, and it got into your
oats, and now you're skinning me."

"And you should keep order."

"It's easy for you to talk about order, but it's more than our strength
will bear," answered a tall, dark, hairy middleaged man.

"Didn't I tell you to put up a fence?"

"You give us the wood to make it of," said a short, plain-looking
peasant. "I was going to put up a fence last year, and you put me to
feed vermin in prison for three months. That was the end of that fence."

"What is it he is saying?" asked Nekhludoff, turning to the steward.

"Der ersto Dieb im Dorfe," [The greatest thief in the village] answered
the steward in German. "He is caught stealing wood from the forest every
year." Then turning to the peasant, he added, "You must learn to respect
other people's property."

"Why, don't we respect you?" said an old man. "We are obliged to respect
you. Why, you could twist us into a rope; we are in your hands."

"Eh, my friend, it's impossible to do you. It's you who are ever ready
to do us," said the steward.

"Do you, indeed. Didn't you smash my jaw for me, and I got nothing for
it? No good going to law with the rich, it seems."

"You should keep to the law."

A tournament of words was apparently going on without those who took
part in it knowing exactly what it was all about; but it was noticeable
that there was bitterness on one side, restricted by fear, and on the
other a consciousness of importance and power. It was very trying to
Nekhludoff to listen to all this, so he returned to the question of
arranging the amount and the terms of the rent.

"Well, then, how about the land? Do you wish to take it, and what price
will you pay if I let you have the whole of it?"

"The property is yours: it is for you to fix the price."

Nekhludoff named the price. Though it was far below that paid in the
neighbourhood, the peasants declared it too high, and began bargaining,
as is customary among them. Nekhludoff thought his offer would be
accepted with pleasure, but no signs of pleasure were visible.

One thing only showed Nekhludoff that his offer was a profitable one
to the peasants. The question as to who would rent the land, the whole
commune or a special society, was put, and a violent dispute arose among
those peasants who were in favour of excluding the weak and those not
likely to pay the rent regularly, and the peasants who would have to be
excluded on that score. At last, thanks to the steward, the amount and
the terms of the rent were fixed, and the peasants went down the hill
towards their villages, talking noisily, while Nekhludoff and the
steward went into the office to make up the agreement. Everything was
settled in the way Nekhludoff wished and expected it to be. The peasants
had their land 30 per cent. cheaper than they could have got it anywhere
in the district, the revenue from the land was diminished by half, but
was more than sufficient for Nekhludoff, especially as there would be
money coming in for a forest he sold, as well as for the agricultural
implements, which would be sold, too. Everything seemed excellently
arranged, yet he felt ashamed of something. He could see that the
peasants, though they spoke words of thanks, were not satisfied, and
had expected something greater. So it turned out that he had deprived
himself of a great deal, and yet not done what the peasants had
expected.

The next day the agreement was signed, and accompanied by several old
peasants, who had been chosen as deputies, Nekhludoff went out, got
into the steward's elegant equipage (as the driver from the station had
called it), said "good-bye" to the peasants, who stood shaking their
heads in a dissatisfied and disappointed manner, and drove off to the
station. Nekhludoff was dissatisfied with himself without knowing why,
but all the time he felt sad and ashamed of something.



CHAPTER III.

OLD ASSOCIATIONS.

From Kousminski Nekhludoff went to the estate he had inherited from his
aunts, the same where he first met Katusha. He meant to arrange about
the land there in the way he had done in Kousminski. Besides this, he
wished to find out all he could about Katusha and her baby, and when and
how it had died. He got to Panovo early one morning, and the first thing
that struck him when he drove up was the look of decay and dilapidation
that all the buildings bore, especially the house itself. The iron
roofs, which had once been painted green, looked red with rust, and
a few sheets of iron were bent back, probably by a storm. Some of the
planks which covered the house from outside were torn away in several
places; these were easier to get by breaking the rusty nails that held
them. Both porches, but especially the side porch he remembered so well,
were rotten and broken; only the banister remained. Some of the windows
were boarded up, and the building in which the foreman lived, the
kitchen, the stables--all were grey and decaying. Only the garden had
not decayed, but had grown, and was in full bloom; from over the fence
the cherry, apple, and plum trees looked like white clouds. The lilac
bushes that formed the hedge were in full bloom, as they had been
when, 14 years ago, Nekhludoff had played gorelki with the 15-year-old
Katusha, and had fallen and got his hand stung by the nettles behind one
of those lilac bushes. The larch that his aunt Sophia had planted near
the house, which then was only a short stick, had grown into a tree,
the trunk of which would have made a beam, and its branches were covered
with soft yellow green needles as with down. The river, now within its
banks, rushed noisily over the mill dam. The meadow the other side of
the river was dotted over by the peasants' mixed herds. The foreman,
a student, who had left the seminary without finishing the course, met
Nekhludoff in the yard, with a smile on his face, and, still smiling,
asked him to come into the office, and, as if promising something
exceptionally good by this smile, he went behind a partition. For a
moment some whispering was heard behind the partition. The isvostchik
who had driven Nekhludoff from the station, drove away after receiving
a tip, and all was silent. Then a barefooted girl passed the window;
she had on an embroidered peasant blouse, and long earrings in her ears;
then a man walked past, clattering with his nailed boots on the trodden
path.

Nekhludoff sat down by the little casement, and looked out into the
garden and listened. A soft, fresh spring breeze, smelling of newly-dug
earth, streamed in through the window, playing with the hair on his damp
forehead and the papers that lay on the window-sill, which was all cut
about with a knife.

"Tra-pa-trop, tra-pa-trop," comes a sound from the river, as the women
who were washing clothes there slapped them in regular measure with
their wooden bats, and the sound spread over the glittering surface of
the mill pond while the rhythmical sound of the falling water came from
the mill, and a frightened fly suddenly flew loudly buzzing past his
ear.

And all at once Nekhludoff remembered how, long ago, when he was young
and innocent, he had heard the women's wooden bats slapping the wet
clothes above the rhythmical sound from the mill, and in the same way
the spring breeze had blown about the hair on his wet forehead and the
papers on the window-sill, which was all cut about with a knife, and
just in the same way a fly had buzzed loudly past his car.

It was not exactly that he remembered himself as a lad of 15, but he
seemed to feel himself the same as he was then, with the same freshness
and purity, and full of the same grand possibilities for the future, and
at the same time, as it happens in a dream, he knew that all this could
be no more, and he felt terribly sad. "At what time would you like
something to eat?" asked the foreman, with a smile.

"When you like; I am not hungry. I shall go for a walk through the
village."

"Would you not like to come into the house? Everything is in order
there. Have the goodness to look in. If the outside---"

"Not now; later on. Tell me, please, have you got a woman here called
Matrona Kharina?" (This was Katusha's aunt, the village midwife.)

"Oh, yes; in the village she keeps a secret pot-house. I know she does,
and I accuse her of it and scold her; but as to taking her up, it would
be a pity. An old woman, you know; she has grandchildren," said the
foreman, continuing to smile in the same manner, partly wishing to
be pleasant to the master, and partly because he was convinced that
Nekhludoff understood all these matters just as well as he did himself.

"Where does she live? I shall go across and see her."

"At the end of the village; the further side, the third from the end. To
the left there is a brick cottage, and her hut is beyond that. But I'd
better see you there," the foreman said with a graceful smile.

"No, thanks, I shall find it; and you be so good as to call a meeting
of the peasants, and tell them that I want to speak to them about
the land," said Nekhludoff, with the intention of coming to the same
agreement with the peasants here as he had done in Kousminski, and, if
possible, that same evening.



CHAPTER IV.

THE PEASANTS' LOT.

When Nekhludoff came out of the gate he met the girl with the long
earrings on the well-trodden path that lay across the pasture
ground, overgrown with dock and plantain leaves. She had a long,
brightly-coloured apron on, and was quickly swinging her left arm in
front of herself as she stepped briskly with her fat, bare feet. With
her right arm she was pressing a fowl to her stomach. The fowl, with
red comb shaking, seemed perfectly calm; he only rolled up his eyes and
stretched out and drew in one black leg, clawing the girl's apron. When
the girl came nearer to "the master," she began moving more slowly, and
her run changed into a walk. When she came up to him she stopped, and,
after a backward jerk with her head, bowed to him; and only when he had
passed did she recommence to run homeward with the cock. As he went down
towards the well, he met an old woman, who had a coarse dirty blouse on,
carrying two pails full of water, that hung on a yoke across her bent
back. The old woman carefully put down the pails and bowed, with the
same backward jerk of her head.

After passing the well Nekhludoff entered the village. It was a bright,
hot day, and oppressive, though only ten o'clock. At intervals the sun
was hidden by the gathering clouds. An unpleasant, sharp smell of manure
filled the air in the street. It came from carts going up the hillside,
but chiefly from the disturbed manure heaps in the yards of the huts,
by the open gates of which Nekhludoff had to pass. The peasants,
barefooted, their shirts and trousers soiled with manure, turned to look
at the tall, stout gentleman with the glossy silk ribbon on his grey hat
who was walking up the village street, touching the ground every other
step with a shiny, bright-knobbed walking-stick. The peasants returning
from the fields at a trot and jotting in their empty carts, took
off their hats, and, in their surprise, followed with their eyes the
extraordinary man who was walking up their street. The women came out
of the gates or stood in the porches of their huts, pointing him out to
each other and gazing at him as he passed.

When Nekhludoff was passing the fourth gate, he was stopped by a cart
that was coming out, its wheels creaking, loaded high with manure, which
was pressed down, and was covered with a mat to sit on. A six-year-old
boy, excited by the prospect of a drive, followed the cart. A young
peasant, with shoes plaited out of bark on his feet, led the horse out
of the yard. A long-legged colt jumped out of the gate; but, seeing
Nekhludoff, pressed close to the cart, and scraping its legs against the
wheels, jumped forward, past its excited, gently-neighing mother, as she
was dragging the heavy load through the gateway. The next horse was led
out by a barefooted old man, with protruding shoulder-blades, in a dirty
shirt and striped trousers.

When the horses got out on to the hard road, strewn over with bits
of dry, grey manure, the old man returned to the gate, and bowed to
Nekhludoff.

"You are our ladies' nephew, aren't you?"

"Yes, I am their nephew."

"You've kindly come to look us up, eh?" said the garrulous old man.

"Yes, I have. Well, how are you getting on?"

"How do we get on? We get on very badly," the old man drawled, as if it
gave him pleasure.

"Why so badly?" Nekhludoff asked, stepping inside the gate.

"What is our life but the very worst life?" said the old man, following
Nekhludoff into that part of the yard which was roofed over.

Nekhludoff stopped under the roof.

"I have got 12 of them there," continued the old man, pointing to two
women on the remainder of the manure heap, who stood perspiring with
forks in their hands, the kerchiefs tumbling off their heads, with their
skirts tucked up, showing the calves of their dirty, bare legs. "Not a
month passes but I have to buy six poods [a pood is 36 English pounds]
of corn, and where's the money to come from?"

"Have you not got enough corn of your own?"

"My own?" repeated the old man, with a smile of contempt; "why I have
only got land for three, and last year we had not enough to last till
Christmas."

"What do you do then?"

"What do we do? Why, I hire out as a labourer; and then I borrowed some
money from your honour. We spent it all before Lent, and the tax is not
paid yet."

"And how much is the tax?"

"Why, it's 17 roubles for my household. Oh, Lord, such a life! One
hardly knows one's self how one manages to live it."

"May I go into your hut?" asked Nekhludoff, stepping across the yard
over the yellow-brown layers of manure that had been raked up by the
forks, and were giving off a strong smell.

"Why not? Come in," said the old man, and stepping quickly with his
bare feet over the manure, the liquid oozing between his toes, he passed
Nekhludoff and opened the door of the hut.

The women arranged the kerchiefs on their heads and let down their
skirts, and stood looking with surprise at the clean gentleman with gold
studs to his sleeves who was entering their house. Two little girls,
with nothing on but coarse chemises, rushed out of the hut. Nekhludoff
took off his hat, and, stooping to get through the low door, entered,
through a passage into the dirty, narrow hut, that smelt of sour food,
and where much space was taken up by two weaving looms. In the hut an
old woman was standing by the stove, with the sleeves rolled up over her
thin, sinewy brown arms.

"Here is our master come to see us," said the old man.

"I'm sure he's very welcome," said the old woman, kindly.

"I would like to see how you live."

"Well, you see how we live. The hut is coming down, and might kill one
any day; but my old man he says it's good enough, and so we live like
kings," said the brisk old woman, nervously jerking her head. "I'm
getting the dinner; going to feed the workers."

"And what are you going to have for dinner?"

"Our food is very good. First course, bread and kvas; [kvas is a kind of
sour, non-intoxicant beer made of rye] second course, kvas and bread,"
said the old woman, showing her teeth, which were half worn away.

"No," seriously; "let me see what you are going to eat."

"To eat?" said the old man, laughing. "Ours is not a very cunning meal.
You just show him, wife."

"Want to see our peasant food? Well, you are an inquisitive gentleman,
now I come to look at you. He wants to know everything. Did I not tell
you bread and kvas and then we'll have soup. A woman brought us some
fish, and that's what the soup is made of, and after that, potatoes."

"Nothing more?"

"What more do you want? We'll also have a little milk," said the old
woman, looking towards the door. The door stood open, and the passage
outside was full of people--boys, girls, women with babies--thronged
together to look at the strange gentleman who wanted to see the
peasants' food. The old woman seemed to pride herself on the way she
behaved with a gentleman.

"Yes, it's a miserable life, ours; that goes without saying, sir," said
the old man. "What are you doing there?" he shouted to those in the
passage. "Well, good-bye," said Nekhludoff, feeling ashamed and uneasy,
though unable to account for the feeling.

"Thank you kindly for having looked us up," said the old man.

The people in the passage pressed closer together to let Nekhludoff
pass, and he went out and continued his way up the street.

Two barefooted boys followed him out of the passage the elder in a
shirt that had once been white, the other in a worn and faded pink one.
Nekhludoff looked back at them.

"And where are you going now?" asked the boy with the white shirt.
Nekhludoff answered: "To Matrona Kharina. Do you know her?" The boy
with the pink shirt began laughing at something; but the elder asked,
seriously:

"What Matrona is that? Is she old?"

"Yes, she is old."

"Oh--oh," he drawled; "that one; she's at the other end of the village;
we'll show you. Yes, Fedka, we'll go with him. Shall we?"

"Yes, but the horses?"

"They'll be all right, I dare say."

Fedka agreed, and all three went up the street.



CHAPTER V.

MASLOVA'S AUNT.

Nekhludoff felt more at ease with the boys than with the grown-up
people, and he began talking to them as they went along. The little
one with the pink shirt stopped laughing, and spoke as sensibly and as
exactly as the elder one.

"Can you tell me who are the poorest people you have got here?" asked
Nekhludoff.

"The poorest? Michael is poor, Simon Makhroff, and Martha, she is very
poor."

"And Anisia, she is still poorer; she's not even got a cow. They go
begging," said little Fedka.

"She's not got a cow, but they are only three persons, and Martha's
family are five," objected the elder boy.

"But the other's a widow," the pink boy said, standing up for Anisia.

"You say Anisia is a widow, and Martha is no better than a widow," said
the elder boy; "she's also no husband."

"And where is her husband?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Feeding vermin in prison," said the elder boy, using this expression,
common among the peasants.

"A year ago he cut down two birch trees in the land-lord's forest," the
little pink boy hurried to say, "so he was locked up; now he's sitting
the sixth month there, and the wife goes begging. There are three
children and a sick grandmother," he went on with his detailed account.

"And where does she live?" Nekhludoff asked.

"In this very house," answered the boy, pointing to a hut, in front
of which, on the footpath along which Nekhludoff was walking, a tiny,
flaxen-headed infant stood balancing himself with difficulty on his
rickety legs.

"Vaska! Where's the little scamp got to?" shouted a woman, with a dirty
grey blouse, and a frightened look, as she ran out of the house, and,
rushing forward, seized the baby before Nekhludoff came up to it, and
carried it in, just as if she were afraid that Nekhludoff would hurt her
child.

This was the woman whose husband was imprisoned for Nekhludoff's birch
trees.

"Well, and this Matrona, is she also poor?" Nekhludoff asked, as they
came up to Matrona's house.

"She poor? No. Why, she sells spirits," the thin, pink little boy
answered decidedly.

When they reached the house Nekhludoff left the boys outside and went
through the passage into the hut. The hut was 14 feet long. The bed
that stood behind the big stove was not long enough for a tall person
to stretch out on. "And on this very bed," Nekhludoff thought, "Katusha
bore her baby and lay ill afterwards." The greater part of the hut was
taken up by a loom, on which the old woman and her eldest granddaughter
were arranging the warp when Nekhludoff came in, striking his forehead
against the low doorway. Two other grandchildren came rushing in after
Nekhludoff, and stopped, holding on to the lintels of the door.

"Whom do you want?" asked the old woman, crossly. She was in a bad
temper because she could not manage to get the warp right, and, besides,
carrying on an illicit trade in spirits, she was always afraid when any
stranger came in.

"I am--the owner of the neighbouring estates, and should like to speak
to you."

"Dear me; why, it's you, my honey; and I, fool, thought it was just some
passer-by. Dear me, you--it's you, my precious," said the old woman,
with simulated tenderness in her voice.

"I should like to speak to you alone," said Nekhludoff, with a glance
towards the door, where the children were standing, and behind them a
woman holding a wasted, pale baby, with a sickly smile on its face, who
had a little cap made of different bits of stuff on its head.

"What are you staring at? I'll give it you. Just hand me my crutch," the
old woman shouted to those at the door.

"Shut the door, will you!" The children went away, and the woman closed
the door.

"And I was thinking, who's that? And it's 'the master' himself. My
jewel, my treasure. Just think," said the old woman, "where he has
deigned to come. Sit down here, your honour," she said, wiping the seat
with her apron. "And I was thinking what devil is it coming in, and it's
your honour, 'the master' himself, the good gentleman, our benefactor.
Forgive me, old fool that I am; I'm getting blind."

Nekhludoff sat down, and the old woman stood in front of him, leaning
her cheek on her right hand, while the left held up the sharp elbow of
her right arm.

"Dear me, you have grown old, your honour; and you used to be as fresh
as a daisy. And now! Cares also, I expect?"

"This is what I have come about: Do you remember Katusha Maslova?"

"Katerina? I should think so. Why, she is my niece. How could I help
remembering; and the tears I have shed because of her. Why, I know all
about it. Eh, sir, who has not sinned before God? who has not offended
against the Tsar? We know what youth is. You used to be drinking tea and
coffee, so the devil got hold of you. He is strong at times. What's to
be done? Now, if you had chucked her; but no, just see how you rewarded
her, gave her a hundred roubles. And she? What has she done? Had she
but listened to me she might have lived all right. I must say the truth,
though she is my niece: that girl's no good. What a good place I found
her! She would not submit, but abused her master. Is it for the likes
of us to scold gentlefolk? Well, she was sent away. And then at the
forester's. She might have lived there; but no, she would not."

"I want to know about the child. She was confined at your house, was she
not? Where's the child?"

"As to the child, I considered that well at the time. She was so bad
I never thought she would get up again. Well, so I christened the baby
quite properly, and we sent it to the Foundlings'. Why should one let
an innocent soul languish when the mother is dying? Others do like this:
they just leave the baby, don't feed it, and it wastes away. But, thinks
I, no; I'd rather take some trouble, and send it to the Foundlings'.
There was money enough, so I sent it off."

"Did you not get its registration number from the Foundlings' Hospital?"

"Yes, there was a number, but the baby died," she said. "It died as soon
as she brought it there."

"Who is she?"

"That same woman who used to live in Skorodno. She made a business of
it. Her name was Malania. She's dead now. She was a wise woman. What do
you think she used to do? They'd bring her a baby, and she'd keep it and
feed it; and she'd feed it until she had enough of them to take to the
Foundlings'. When she had three or four, she'd take them all at once.
She had such a clever arrangement, a sort of big cradle--a double one
she could put them in one way or the other. It had a handle. So she'd
put four of them in, feet to feet and the heads apart, so that they
should not knock against each other. And so she took four at once. She'd
put some pap in a rag into their mouths to keep 'em silent, the pets."

"Well, go on."

"Well, she took Katerina's baby in the same way, after keeping it a
fortnight, I believe. It was in her house it began to sicken."

"And was it a fine baby?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Such a baby, that if you wanted a finer you could not find one. Your
very image," the old woman added, with a wink.

"Why did it sicken? Was the food bad?"

"Eh, what food? Only just a pretence of food. Naturally, when it's not
one's own child. Only enough to get it there alive. She said she
just managed to get it to Moscow, and there it died. She brought a
certificate--all in order. She was such a wise woman."

That was all Nekhludoff could find out concerning his child.



CHAPTER VI.

REFLECTIONS OF A LANDLORD.

Again striking his head against both doors, Nekhludoff went out into the
street, where the pink and the white boys were waiting for him. A few
newcomers were standing with them. Among the women, of whom several
had babies in their arms, was the thin woman with the baby who had the
patchwork cap on its head. She held lightly in her arms the bloodless
infant, who kept strangely smiling all over its wizened little face, and
continually moving its crooked thumbs.

Nekhludoff knew the smile to be one of suffering. He asked who the woman
was.

"It is that very Anisia I told you about," said the elder boy.

Nekhludoff turned to Anisia.

"How do you live?" he asked. "By what means do you gain your
livelihood?"

"How do I live? I go begging," said Anisia, and began to cry.

Nekhludoff took out his pocket-book, and gave the woman a 10-rouble
note. He had not had time to take two steps before another woman with
a baby caught him up, then an old woman, then another young one. All of
them spoke of their poverty, and asked for help. Nekhludoff gave them
the 60 roubles--all in small notes--which he had with him, and, terribly
sad at heart, turned home, i.e., to the foreman's house.

The foreman met Nekhludoff with a smile, and informed him that the
peasants would come to the meeting in the evening. Nekhludoff thanked
him, and went straight into the garden to stroll along the paths strewn
over with the petals of apple-blossom and overgrown with weeds, and to
think over all he had seen.

At first all was quiet, but soon Nekhludoff heard from behind the
foreman's house two angry women's voices interrupting each other, and
now and then the voice of the ever-smiling foreman. Nekhludoff listened.

"My strength's at an end. What are you about, dragging the very cross
[those baptized in the Russo-Greek Church always wear a cross round
their necks] off my neck," said an angry woman's voice.

"But she only got in for a moment," said another voice. "Give it her
back, I tell you. Why do you torment the beast, and the children, too,
who want their milk?"

"Pay, then, or work it off," said the foreman's voice.

Nekhludoff left the garden and entered the porch, near which stood two
dishevelled women--one of them pregnant and evidently near her time.
On one of the steps of the porch, with his hands in the pockets of his
holland coat, stood the foreman. When they saw the master, the women
were silent, and began arranging the kerchiefs on their heads, and the
foreman took his hands out of his pockets and began to smile.

This is what had happened. From the foreman's words, it seemed that the
peasants were in the habit of letting their calves and even their cows
into the meadow belonging to the estate. Two cows belonging to the
families of these two women were found in the meadow, and driven into
the yard. The foreman demanded from the women 30 copecks for each cow
or two days' work. The women, however, maintained that the cows had got
into the meadow of their own accord; that they had no money, and asked
that the cows, which had stood in the blazing sun since morning without
food, piteously lowing, should be returned to them, even if it had to be
on the understanding that the price should be worked off later on.

"How often have I not begged of you," said the smiling foreman, looking
back at Nekhludoff as if calling upon him to be a witness, "if you drive
your cattle home at noon, that you should have an eye on them?"

"I only ran to my little one for a bit, and they got away."

"Don't run away when you have undertaken to watch the cows."

"And who's to feed the little one? You'd not give him the breast, I
suppose?" said the other woman. "Now, if they had really damaged the
meadow, one would not take it so much to heart; but they only strayed in
a moment."

"All the meadows are damaged," the foreman said, turning to Nekhludoff.
"If I exact no penalty there will be no hay."

"There, now, don't go sinning like that; my cows have never been caught
there before," shouted the pregnant woman.

"Now that one has been caught, pay up or work it off."

"All right, I'll work it off; only let me have the cow now, don't
torture her with hunger," she cried, angrily. "As it is, I have no rest
day or night. Mother-in-law is ill, husband taken to drink; I'm all
alone to do all the work, and my strength's at an end. I wish you'd
choke, you and your working it off."

Nekhludoff asked the foreman to let the women take the cows, and went
back into the garden to go on thinking out his problem, but there was
nothing more to think about.

Everything seemed so clear to him now that he could not stop wondering
how it was that everybody did not see it, and that he himself had for
such a long while not seen what was so clearly evident. The people were
dying out, and had got used to the dying-out process, and had formed
habits of life adapted to this process: there was the great mortality
among the children, the over-working of the women, the under-feeding,
especially of the aged. And so gradually had the people come to this
condition that they did not realise the full horrors of it, and did
not complain. Therefore, we consider their condition natural and as it
should be. Now it seemed as clear as daylight that the chief cause of
the people's great want was one that they themselves knew and always
pointed out, i.e., that the land which alone could feed them had been
taken from them by the landlords.

And how evident it was that the children and the aged died because they
had no milk, and they had no milk because there was no pasture land, and
no land to grow corn or make hay on. It was quite evident that all the
misery of the people or, at least by far the greater part of it, was
caused by the fact that the land which should feed them was not in their
hands, but in the hands of those who, profiting by their rights to the
land, live by the work of these people. The land so much needed by men
was tilled by these people, who were on the verge of starvation, so
that the corn might be sold abroad and the owners of the land might buy
themselves hats and canes, and carriages and bronzes, etc. He understood
this as clearly as he understood that horses when they have eaten all
the grass in the inclosure where they are kept will have to grow thin
and starve unless they are put where they can get food off other land.

This was terrible, and must not go on. Means must be found to alter it,
or at least not to take part in it. "And I will find them," he thought,
as he walked up and down the path under the birch trees.

In scientific circles, Government institutions, and in the papers we
talk about the causes of the poverty among the people and the means of
ameliorating their condition; but we do not talk of the only sure means
which would certainly lighten their condition, i.e., giving back to them
the land they need so much.

Henry George's fundamental position recurred vividly to his mind and how
he had once been carried away by it, and he was surprised that he could
have forgotten it. The earth cannot be any one's property; it cannot be
bought or sold any more than water, air, or sunshine. All have an equal
right to the advantages it gives to men. And now he knew why he had felt
ashamed to remember the transaction at Kousminski. He had been deceiving
himself. He knew that no man could have a right to own land, yet he had
accepted this right as his, and had given the peasants something which,
in the depth of his heart, he knew he had no right to. Now he would not
act in this way, and would alter the arrangement in Kousminski also. And
he formed a project in his mind to let the land to the peasants, and to
acknowledge the rent they paid for it to be their property, to be kept
to pay the taxes and for communal uses. This was, of course, not the
single-tax system, still it was as near an approach to it as could be
had under existing circumstances. His chief consideration, however, was
that in this way he would no longer profit by the possession of landed
property.

When he returned to the house the foreman, with a specially pleasant
smile, asked him if he would not have his dinner now, expressing the
fear that the feast his wife was preparing, with the help of the girl
with the earrings, might be overdone.

The table was covered with a coarse, unbleached cloth and an embroidered
towel was laid on it in lieu of a napkin. A vieux-saxe soup tureen with
a broken handle stood on the table, full of potato soup, the stock made
of the fowl that had put out and drawn in his black leg, and was now
cut, or rather chopped, in pieces, which were here and there covered
with hairs. After the soup more of the same fowl with the hairs was
served roasted, and then curd pasties, very greasy, and with a great
deal of sugar. Little appetising as all this was, Nekhludoff hardly
noticed what he was eating; he was occupied with the thought which had
in a moment dispersed the sadness with which he had returned from the
village.

The foreman's wife kept looking in at the door, whilst the frightened
maid with the earrings brought in the dishes; and the foreman smiled
more and more joyfully, priding himself on his wife's culinary skill.
After dinner, Nekhludoff succeeded, with some trouble, in making the
foreman sit down. In order to revise his own thoughts, and to express
them to some one, he explained his project of letting the land to the
peasants, and asked the foreman for his opinion. The foreman, smiling
as if he had thought all this himself long ago, and was very pleased
to hear it, did not really understand it at all. This was not because
Nekhludoff did not express himself clearly, but because according to
this project it turned out that Nekhludoff was giving up his own
profit for the profit of others, and the thought that every one is only
concerned about his own profit, to the harm of others, was so deeply
rooted in the foreman's conceptions that he imagined he did not
understand something when Nekhludoff said that all the income from the
land must be placed to form the communal capital of the peasants.

"Oh, I see; then you, of course, will receive the percentages from that
capital," said the foreman, brightening up.

"Dear me! no. Don't you see, I am giving up the land altogether."

"But then you will not get any income," said the foreman, smiling no
longer.

"Yes, I am going to give it up."

The foreman sighed heavily, and then began smiling again. Now he
understood. He understood that Nekhludoff was not quite normal, and
at once began to consider how he himself could profit by Nekhludoff's
project of giving up the land, and tried to see this project in such a
way that he might reap some advantage from it. But when he saw that this
was impossible he grew sorrowful, and the project ceased to interest
him, and he continued to smile only in order to please the master.

Seeing that the foreman did not understand him, Nekhludoff let him go
and sat down by the window-sill, that was all cut about and inked over,
and began to put his project down on paper.

The sun went down behind the limes, that were covered with fresh green,
and the mosquitoes swarmed in, stinging Nekhludoff. Just as he finished
his notes, he heard the lowing of cattle and the creaking of opening
gates from the village, and the voices of the peasants gathering
together for the meeting. He told the foreman not to call the peasants
up to the office, as he meant to go into the village himself and meet
the men where they would assemble. Having hurriedly drank a cup of tea
offered him by the foreman, Nekhludoff went to the village.



CHAPTER VII.

THE DISINHERITED.

From the crowd assembled in front of the house of the village elder
came the sound of voices; but as soon as Nekhludoff came up the talking
ceased, and all the peasants took off their caps, just as those in
Kousminski had done. The peasants here were of a much poorer class than
those in Kousminski. The men wore shoes made of bark and homespun shirts
and coats. Some had come straight from their work in their shirts and
with bare feet.

Nekhludoff made an effort, and began his speech by telling the peasants
of his intention to give up his land to them altogether. The peasants
were silent, and the expression on their faces did not undergo any
change.

"Because I hold," said Nekhludoff, "and believe that every one has a
right to the use of the land."

"That's certain. That's so, exactly," said several voices.

Nekhludoff went on to say that the revenue from the land ought to be
divided among all, and that he would therefore suggest that they
should rent the land at a price fixed by themselves, the rent to form
a communal fund for their own use. Words of approval and agreement were
still to be heard, but the serious faces of the peasants grew still more
serious, and the eyes that had been fixed on the gentleman dropped, as
if they were unwilling to put him to shame by letting him see that every
one had understood his trick, and that no one would be deceived by him.

Nekhludoff spoke clearly, and the peasants were intelligent, but they
did not and could not understand him, for the same reason that the
foreman had so long been unable to understand him.

They were fully convinced that it is natural for every man to consider
his own interest. The experience of many generations had proved to them
that the landlords always considered their own interest to the detriment
of the peasants. Therefore, if a landlord called them to a meeting and
made them some kind of a new offer, it could evidently only be in order
to swindle them more cunningly than before.

"Well, then, what are you willing to rent the land at?" asked
Nekhludoff.

"How can we fix a price? We cannot do it. The land is yours, and the
power is in your hands," answered some voices from among the crowd.

"Oh, not at all. You will yourselves have the use of the money for
communal purposes."

"We cannot do it; the commune is one thing, and this is another."

"Don't you understand?" said the foreman, with a smile (he had followed
Nekhludoff to the meeting), "the Prince is letting the land to you
for money, and is giving you the money back to form a capital for the
commune."

"We understand very well," said a cross, toothless old man, without
raising his eyes. "Something like a bank; we should have to pay at a
fixed time. We do not wish it; it is hard enough as it is, and that
would ruin us completely."

"That's no go. We prefer to go on the old way," began several
dissatisfied, and even rude, voices.

The refusals grew very vehement when Nekhludoff mentioned that he would
draw up an agreement which would have to be signed by him and by them.

"Why sign? We shall go on working as we have done hitherto. What is all
this for? We are ignorant men."

"We can't agree, because this sort of thing is not what we have been
used to. As it was, so let it continue to be. Only the seeds we should
like to withdraw."

This meant that under the present arrangement the seeds had to be
provided by the peasants, and they wanted the landlord to provide them.

"Then am I to understand that you refuse to accept the land?" Nekhludoff
asked, addressing a middle-aged, barefooted peasant, with a tattered
coat, and a bright look on his face, who was holding his worn cap
with his left hand, in a peculiarly straight position, in the same way
soldiers hold theirs when commanded to take them off.

"Just so," said this peasant, who had evidently not yet rid himself of
the military hypnotism he had been subjected to while serving his time.

"It means that you have sufficient land," said Nekhludoff.

"No, sir, we have not," said the ex-soldier, with an artificially
pleased look, carefully holding his tattered cap in front of him, as if
offering it to any one who liked to make use of it.

"Well, anyhow, you'd better think over what I have said." Nekhludoff
spoke with surprise, and again repeated his offer.

"We have no need to think about it; as we have said, so it will be,"
angrily muttered the morose, toothless old man.

"I shall remain here another day, and if you change your minds, send to
let me know."

The peasants gave no answer.

So Nekhludoff did not succeed in arriving at any result from this
interview.

"If I might make a remark, Prince," said the foreman, when they got
home, "you will never come to any agreement with them; they are so
obstinate. At a meeting these people just stick in one place, and there
is no moving them. It is because they are frightened of everything. Why,
these very peasants--say that white-haired one, or the dark one, who
were refusing, are intelligent peasants. When one of them comes to the
office and one makes him sit down to cup of tea it's like in the Palace
of Wisdom--he is quite diplomatist," said the foreman, smiling; "he will
consider everything rightly. At a meeting it's a different man--he keeps
repeating one and the same . . ."

"Well, could not some of the more intelligent men be asked to come
here?" said Nekhludoff. "I would carefully explain it to them."

"That can be done," said the smiling foreman.

"Well, then, would you mind calling them here to-morrow?"

"Oh, certainly I will," said the foreman, and smiled still more
joyfully. "I shall call them to-morrow."

"Just hear him; he's not artful, not he," said a blackhaired peasant,
with an unkempt beard, as he sat jolting from side to side on a well-fed
mare, addressing an old man in a torn coat who rode by his side. The two
men were driving a herd of the peasants' horses to graze in the night,
alongside the highroad and secretly, in the landlord's forest.

"Give you the land for nothing--you need only sign--have they not
done the likes of us often enough? No, my friend, none of your humbug.
Nowadays we have a little sense," he added, and began shouting at a colt
that had strayed.

He stopped his horse and looked round, but the colt had not remained
behind; it had gone into the meadow by the roadside. "Bother that son
of a Turk; he's taken to getting into the landowner's meadows," said the
dark peasant with the unkempt beard, hearing the cracking of the sorrel
stalks that the neighing colt was galloping over as he came running back
from the scented meadow.

"Do you hear the cracking? We'll have to send the women folk to weed
the meadow when there's a holiday," said the thin peasant with the torn
coat, "or else we'll blunt our scythes."

"Sign," he says. The unkempt man continued giving his opinion of the
landlord's speech. "'Sign,' indeed, and let him swallow you up."

"That's certain," answered the old man. And then they were silent, and
the tramping of the horses' feet along the highroad was the only sound
to be heard.



CHAPTER VIII.

GOD'S PEACE IN THE HEART.

When Nekhludoff returned he found that the office had been arranged as
a bedroom for him. A high bedstead, with a feather bed and two large
pillows, had been placed in the room. The bed was covered with a dark
red doublebedded silk quilt, which was elaborately and finely quilted,
and very stiff. It evidently belonged to the trousseau of the foreman's
wife. The foreman offered Nekhludoff the remains of the dinner, which
the latter refused, and, excusing himself for the poorness of the fare
and the accommodation, he left Nekhludoff alone.

The peasants' refusal did not at all bother Nekhludoff. On the contrary,
though at Kousminski his offer had been accepted and he had even been
thanked for it, and here he was met with suspicion and even enmity, he
felt contented and joyful.

It was close and dirty in the office. Nekhludoff went out into the yard,
and was going into the garden, but he remembered: that night, the window
of the maid-servant's room, the side porch, and he felt uncomfortable,
and did not like to pass the spot desecrated by guilty memories. He
sat down on the doorstep, and breathing in the warm air, balmy with the
strong scent of fresh birch leaves, he sat for a long time looking into
the dark garden and listening to the mill, the nightingales, and some
other bird that whistled monotonously in the bush close by. The light
disappeared from the foreman's window; in the cast, behind the barn,
appeared the light of the rising moon, and sheet lightning began to
light up the dilapidated house, and the blooming, over-grown garden more
and more frequently. It began to thunder in the distance, and a black
cloud spread over one-third of the sky. The nightingales and the other
birds were silent. Above the murmur of the water from the mill came the
cackling of geese, and then in the village and in the foreman's yard
the first cocks began to crow earlier than usual, as they do on warm,
thundery nights. There is a saying that if the cocks crow early the
night will be a merry one. For Nekhludoff the night was more than merry;
it was a happy, joyful night. Imagination renewed the impressions of
that happy summer which he had spent here as an innocent lad, and he
felt himself as he had been not only at that but at all the best moments
of his life. He not only remembered but felt as he had felt when, at
the age of 14, he prayed that God would show him the truth; or when as
a child he had wept on his mother's lap, when parting from her, and
promising to be always good, and never give her pain; he felt as he did
when he and Nikolenka Irtenieff resolved always to support each other in
living a good life and to try to make everybody happy.

He remembered how he had been tempted in Kousminski, so that he had
begun to regret the house and the forest and the farm and the land, and
he asked himself if he regretted them now, and it even seemed strange to
think that he could regret them. He remembered all he had seen to-day;
the woman with the children, and without her husband, who was in prison
for having cut down trees in his (Nekhludoff's) forest, and the terrible
Matrona, who considered, or at least talked as if she considered,
that women of her position must give themselves to the gentlefolk; he
remembered her relation to the babies, the way in which they were taken
to the Foundlings' Hospital, and the unfortunate, smiling, wizened
baby with the patchwork cap, dying of starvation. And then he suddenly
remembered the prison, the shaved heads, the cells, the disgusting
smells, the chains, and, by the side of it all, the madly lavish city
lift of the rich, himself included.

The bright moon, now almost full, rose above the barn. Dark shadows fell
across the yard, and the iron roof of the ruined house shone bright.
As if unwilling to waste this light, the nightingales again began their
trills.

Nekhludoff called to mind how he had begun to consider his life in
the garden of Kousminski when deciding what he was going to do, and
remembered how confused he had become, how he could not arrive at any
decision, how many difficulties each question had presented. He asked
himself these questions now, and was surprised how simple it all was. It
was simple because he was not thinking now of what would be the results
for himself, but only thought of what he had to do. And, strange to say,
what he had to do for himself he could not decide, but what he had to do
for others he knew without any doubt. He had no doubt that he must
not leave Katusha, but go on helping her. He had no doubt that he must
study, investigate, clear up, understand all this business concerning
judgment and punishment, which he felt he saw differently to other
people. What would result from it all he did not know, but he knew for
certain that he must do it. And this firm assurance gave him joy.

The black cloud had spread all over the sky; the lightning flashed
vividly across the yard and the old house with its tumble-down porches,
the thunder growled overhead. All the birds were silent, but the leaves
rustled and the wind reached the step where Nekhludoff stood and played
with his hair. One drop came down, then another; then they came drumming
on the dock leaves and on the iron of the roof, and all the air was
filled by a bright flash, and before Nekhludoff could count three a
fearful crash sounded over head and spread pealing all over the sky.

Nekhludoff went in.

"Yes, yes," he thought. "The work that our life accomplishes, the whole
of this work, the meaning of it is not, nor can be, intelligible to
me. What were my aunts for? Why did Nikolenka Irtenieff die? Why am
I living? What was Katusha for? And my madness? Why that war? Why my
subsequent lawless life? To understand it, to understand the whole
of the Master's will is not in my power. But to do His will, that is
written down in my conscience, is in my power; that I know for certain.
And when I am fulfilling it I have sureness and peace."

The rain came down in torrents and rushed from the roof into a tub
beneath; the lightning lit up the house and yard less frequently.
Nekhludoff went into his room, undressed, and lay down, not without
fear of the bugs, whose presence the dirty, torn wall-papers made him
suspect.

"Yes, to feel one's self not the master but a servant," he thought, and
rejoiced at the thought. His fears were not vain. Hardly had he put out
his candle when the vermin attacked and stung him. "To give up the land
and go to Siberia. Fleas, bugs, dirt! Ah, well; if it must be borne, I
shall bear it." But, in spite of the best of intentions, he could not
bear it, and sat down by the open window and gazed with admiration at
the retreating clouds and the reappearing moon.



CHAPTER IX.

THE LAND SETTLEMENT.

It was morning before Nekhludoff could fall asleep, and therefore he
woke up late. At noon seven men, chosen from among the peasants at
the foreman's invitation, came into the orchard, where the foreman
had arranged a table and benches by digging posts into the ground,
and fixing boards on the top, under the apple trees. It took some time
before the peasants could be persuaded to put on their caps and to sit
down on the benches. Especially firm was the ex-soldier, who to-day had
bark shoes on. He stood erect, holding his cap as they do at
funerals, according to military regulation. When one of them, a
respectable-looking, broad-shouldered old man, with a curly, grizzly
beard like that of Michael Angelo's "Moses," and grey hair that curled
round the brown, bald forehead, put on his big cap, and, wrapping his
coat round him, got in behind the table and sat down, the rest followed
his example. When all had taken their places Nekhludoff sat down
opposite them, and leaning on the table over the paper on which he had
drawn up his project, he began explaining it.

Whether it was that there were fewer present, or that he was occupied
with the business in hand and not with himself, anyhow, this
time Nekhludoff felt no confusion. He involuntarily addressed the
broad-shouldered old man with white ringlets in his grizzly beard,
expecting approbation or objections from him. But Nekhludoff's
conjecture was wrong. The respectable-looking old patriarch, though he
nodded his handsome head approvingly or shook it, and frowned when the
others raised an objection, evidently understood with great difficulty,
and only when the others repeated what Nekhludoff had said in their own
words. A little, almost beardless old fellow, blind in one eye, who sat
by the side of the patriarch, and had a patched nankeen coat and old
boots on, and, as Nekhludoff found out later, was an oven-builder,
understood much better. This man moved his brows quickly, attending to
Nekhludoff's words with an effort, and at once repeated them in his
own way. An old, thick-set man with a white beard and intelligent eyes
understood as quickly, and took every opportunity to put in an ironical
joke, clearly wishing to show off. The ex-soldier seemed also to
understand matters, but got mixed, being used to senseless soldiers'
talk. A tall man with a small beard, a long nose, and a bass voice, who
wore clean, home-made clothes and new bark-plaited shoes, seemed to be
the one most seriously interested. This man spoke only when there
was need of it. The two other old men, the same toothless one who
had shouted a distinct refusal at the meeting the day before to every
proposal of Nekhludoff's, and a tall, white lame old man with a kind
face, his thin legs tightly wrapped round with strips of linen, said
little, though they listened attentively. First of all Nekhludoff
explained his views in regard to personal property in land. "The land,
according to my idea, can neither be bought nor sold, because if it
could be, he who has got the money could buy it all, and exact anything
he liked for the use of the land from those who have none."

"That's true," said the long-nosed man, in a deep bass.

"Just so," said the ex-soldier.

"A woman gathers a little grass for her cow; she's caught and
imprisoned," said the white-bearded old man.

"Our own land is five versts away, and as to renting any it's
impossible; the price is raised so high that it won't pay," added the
cross, toothless old man. "They twist us into ropes, worse than during
serfdom."

"I think as you do, and I count it a sin to possess land, so I wish to
give it away," said Nekhludoff.

"Well, that's a good thing," said the old man, with curls like Angelo's
"Moses," evidently thinking that Nekhludoff meant to let the land.

"I have come here because I no longer wish to possess any land, and now
we must consider the best way of dividing it."

"Just give it to the peasants, that's all," said the cross, toothless
old man.

Nekhludoff was abashed for a moment, feeling a suspicion of his not
being honest in these words, but he instantly recovered, and made use of
the remark, in order to express what was in his mind, in reply.

"I should be glad to give it them," he said, "but to whom, and how?
To which of the peasants? Why, to your commune, and not to that of
Deminsk." (That was the name of a neighbouring village with very little
land.) All were silent. Then the ex-soldier said, "Just so."

"Now, then, tell me how would you divide the land among the peasants if
you had to do it?" said Nekhludoff.

"We should divide it up equally, so much for every man," said the
oven-builder, quickly raising and lowering his brows.

"How else? Of course, so much per man," said the good natured lame man
with the white strips of linen round his legs.

Every one confirmed this statement, considering it satisfactory.

"So much per man? Then are the servants attached to the house also to
have a share?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Oh, no," said the ex-soldier, trying to appear bold and merry. But the
tall, reasonable man would not agree with him.

"If one is to divide, all must share alike," he said, in his deep bass,
after a little consideration.

"It can't be done," said Nekhludoff, who had already prepared his reply.
"If all are to share alike, then those who do not work themselves--do
not plough--will sell their shares to the rich. The rich will again get
at the land. Those who live by working the land will multiply, and land
will again be scarce. Then the rich will again get those who need land
into their power."

"Just so," quickly said the ex-soldier.

"Forbid to sell the land; let only him who ploughs it have it," angrily
interrupted the oven-builder.

To this Nekhludoff replied that it was impossible to know who was
ploughing for himself and who for another.

The tall, reasonable man proposed that an arrangement be made so that
they should all plough communally, and those who ploughed should get the
produce and those who did not should get nothing.

To this communistic project Nekhludoff had also an answer ready. He said
that for such an arrangement it would be necessary that all should have
ploughs, and that all the horses should be alike, so that none should
be left behind, and that ploughs and horses and all the implements would
have to be communal property, and that in order to get that, all the
people would have to agree.

"Our people could not be made to agree in a lifetime," said the cross
old man.

"We should have regular fights," said the white-bearded old man with the
laughing eyes. "So that the thing is not as simple as it looks,"
said Nekhludoff, "and this is a thing not only we but many have been
considering. There is an American, Henry George. This is what he has
thought out, and I agree with him."

"Why, you are the master, and you give it as you like. What's it to you?
The power is yours," said the cross old man.

This confused Nekhludoff, but he was pleased to see that not he alone
was dissatisfied with this interruption.

"You wait a bit, Uncle Simon; let him tell us about it," said the
reasonable man, in his imposing bass.

This emboldened Nekhludoff, and he began to explain Henry George's
single-tax system "The earth is no man's; it is God's," he began.

"Just so; that it is," several voices replied.

"The land is common to all. All have the same right to it, but there is
good land and bad land, and every one would like to take the good land.
How is one to do in order to get it justly divided? In this way: he that
will use the good land must pay those who have got no land the value of
the land he uses," Nekhludoff went on, answering his own question. "As
it would be difficult to say who should pay whom, and money is needed
for communal use, it should be arranged that he who uses the good land
should pay the amount of the value of his land to the commune for its
needs. Then every one would share equally. If you want to use land pay
for it--more for the good, less for the bad land. If you do not wish to
use land, don't pay anything, and those who use the land will pay the
taxes and the communal expenses for you."

"Well, he had a head, this George," said the oven-builder, moving his
brows. "He who has good land must pay more."

"If only the payment is according to our strength," said the tall man
with the bass voice, evidently foreseeing how the matter would end.

"The payment should be not too high and not too low. If it is too high
it will not get paid, and there will be a loss; and if it is too low it
will be bought and sold. There would be a trading in land. This is what
I wished to arrange among you here."

"That is just, that is right; yes, that would do," said the peasants.

"He has a head, this George," said the broad-shouldered old man with the
curls. "See what he has invented."

"Well, then, how would it be if I wished to take some land?" asked the
smiling foreman.

"If there is an allotment to spare, take it and work it," said
Nekhludoff.

"What do you want it for? You have sufficient as it is," said the old
man with the laughing eyes.

With this the conference ended.

Nekhludoff repeated his offer, and advised the men to talk it over with
the rest of the commune and to return with the answer.

The peasants said they would talk it over and bring an answer, and left
in a state of excitement. Their loud talk was audible as they went along
the road, and up to late in the night the sound of voices came along the
river from the village.

The next day the peasants did not go to work, but spent it in
considering the landlord's offer. The commune was divided into two
parties--one which regarded the offer as a profitable one to themselves
and saw no danger in agreeing with it, and another which suspected and
feared the offer it did not understand. On the third day, however, all
agreed, and some were sent to Nekhludoff to accept his offer. They were
influenced in their decision by the explanation some of the old men gave
of the landlord's conduct, which did away with all fear of deceit. They
thought the gentleman had begun to consider his soul, and was acting as
he did for its salvation. The alms which Nekhludoff had given away while
in Panovo made his explanation seem likely. The fact that Nekhludoff
had never before been face to face with such great poverty and so bare
a life as the peasants had come to in this place, and was so appalled
by it, made him give away money in charity, though he knew that this was
not reasonable. He could not help giving the money, of which he now had
a great deal, having received a large sum for the forest he had sold
the year before, and also the hand money for the implements and stock in
Kousminski. As soon as it was known that the master was giving money in
charity, crowds of people, chiefly women, began to come to ask him for
help. He did not in the least know how to deal with them, how to decide,
how much, and whom to give to. He felt that to refuse to give money, of
which he had a great deal, to poor people was impossible, yet to give
casually to those who asked was not wise. The last day he spent in
Panovo, Nekhludoff looked over the things left in his aunts' house, and
in the bottom drawer of the mahogany wardrobe, with the brass lions'
heads with rings through them, he found many letters, and amongst them a
photograph of a group, consisting of his aunts, Sophia Ivanovna and Mary
Ivanovna, a student, and Katusha. Of all the things in the house he took
only the letters and the photograph. The rest he left to the miller who,
at the smiling foreman's recommendation, had bought the house and all it
contained, to be taken down and carried away, at one-tenth of the real
value.

Recalling the feeling of regret at the loss of his property which he had
felt in Kousminski, Nekhludoff was surprised how he could have felt this
regret. Now he felt nothing but unceasing joy at the deliverance, and
a sensation of newness something like that which a traveller must
experience when discovering new countries.



CHAPTER X.

NEKHLUDOFF RETURNS TO TOWN.

The town struck Nekhludoff in a new and peculiar light on his return.
He came back in the evening, when the gas was lit, and drove from
the railway station to his house, where the rooms still smelt of
naphthaline. Agraphena Petrovna and Corney were both feeling tired and
dissatisfied, and had even had a quarrel over those things that seemed
made only to be aired and packed away. Nekhludoff's room was empty, but
not in order, and the way to it was blocked up with boxes, so that his
arrival evidently hindered the business which, owing to a curious kind
of inertia, was going on in this house. The evident folly of these
proceedings, in which he had once taken part, was so distasteful to
Nekhludoff after the impressions the misery of the life of the peasants
had made on him, that he decided to go to a hotel the next day, leaving
Agraphena Petrovna to put away the things as she thought fit until his
sister should come and finally dispose of everything in the house.

Nekhludoff left home early and chose a couple of rooms in a very modest
and not particularly clean lodging-house within easy reach of the
prison, and, having given orders that some of his things should be sent
there, he went to see the advocate. It was cold out of doors. After some
rainy and stormy weather it had turned out cold, as it often does in
spring. It was so cold that Nekhludoff felt quite chilly in his light
overcoat, and walked fast hoping to get warmer. His mind was filled
with thoughts of the peasants, the women, children, old men, and all the
poverty and weariness which he seemed to have seen for the first time,
especially the smiling, old-faced infant writhing with his calfless
little legs, and he could not help contrasting what was going on in the
town. Passing by the butchers', fishmongers', and clothiers' shops, he
was struck, as if he saw them for the first time, by the appearance
of the clean, well-fed shopkeepers, like whom you could not find one
peasant in the country. These men were apparently convinced that the
pains they took to deceive the people who did not know much about their
goods was not a useless but rather an important business. The coachmen
with their broad hips and rows of buttons down their sides, and the
door-keepers with gold cords on their caps, the servant-girls with their
aprons and curly fringes, and especially the smart isvostchiks with
the nape of their necks clean shaved, as they sat lolling back in their
traps, and examined the passers-by with dissolute and contemptuous
air, looked well fed. In all these people Nekhludoff could not now help
seeing some of these very peasants who had been driven into the town by
lack of land. Some of the peasants driven to the town had found means
of profiting by the conditions of town life and had become like the
gentlefolk and were pleased with their position; others were in a worse
position than they had been in the country and were more to be pitied
than the country people.

Such seemed the bootmakers Nekhludoff saw in the cellar, the pale,
dishevelled washerwomen with their thin, bare, arms ironing at an open
window, out of which streamed soapy steam; such the two house-painters
with their aprons, stockingless feet, all bespattered and smeared with
paint, whom Nekhludoff met--their weak, brown arms bared to above the
elbows--carrying a pailful of paint, and quarrelling with each other.
Their faces looked haggard and cross. The dark faces of the carters
jolting along in their carts bore the same expression, and so did the
faces of the tattered men and women who stood begging at the street
corners. The same kind of faces were to be seen at the open, windows of
the eating-houses which Nekhludoff passed. By the dirty tables on which
stood tea things and bottles, and between which waiters dressed in white
shirts were rushing hither and thither, sat shouting and singing red,
perspiring men with stupefied faces. One sat by the window with
lifted brows and pouting lips and fixed eyes as if trying to remember
something.

"And why are they all gathered here?" Nekhludoff thought, breathing
in together with the dust which the cold wind blew towards him the air
filled with the smell of rank oil and fresh paint.

In one street he met a row of carts loaded with something made of iron,
that rattled so on the uneven pavement that it made his ears and head
ache. He started walking still faster in order to pass the row of carts,
when he heard himself called by name. He stopped and saw an officer with
sharp pointed moustaches and shining face who sat in the trap of a swell
isvostchik and waved his hand in a friendly manner, his smile disclosing
unusually long, white teeth.

"Nekhludoff! Can it be you?"

Nekhludoff's first feeling was one of pleasure. "Ah, Schonbock!" he
exclaimed joyfully; but he knew the next moment that there was nothing
to be joyful about.

This was that Schonbock who had been in the house of Nekhludoff's aunts
that day, and whom Nekhludoff had quite lost out of sight, but about
whom he had heard that in spite of his debts he had somehow managed to
remain in the cavalry, and by some means or other still kept his place
among the rich. His gay, contented appearance corroborated this report.

"What a good thing that I have caught you. There is no one in town. Ah,
old fellow; you have grown old," he said, getting out of the trap and
moving his shoulders about. "I only knew you by your walk. Look here, we
must dine together. Is there any place where they feed one decently?"

"I don't think I can spare the time," Nekhludoff answered, thinking only
of how he could best get rid of his companion without hurting him.

"And what has brought you here?" he asked.

"Business, old fellow. Guardianship business. I am a guardian now. I am
managing Samanoff's affairs--the millionaire, you know. He has softening
of the brain, and he's got fifty-four thousand desiatins of land,"
he said, with peculiar pride, as if he had himself made all these
desiatins. "The affairs were terribly neglected. All the land was let
to the peasants. They did not pay anything. There were more than eighty
thousand roubles debts. I changed it all in one year, and have got 70
per cent. more out of it. What do you think of that?" he asked proudly.

Nekhludoff remembered having heard that this Schonbock, just because, he
had spent all he had, had attained by some special influence the post of
guardian to a rich old man who was squandering his property--and was now
evidently living by this guardianship.

"How am I to get rid of him without offending him?" thought Nekhludoff,
looking at this full, shiny face with the stiffened moustache and
listening to his friendly, good-humoured chatter about where one gets
fed best, and his bragging about his doings as a guardian.

"Well, then, where do we dine?"

"Really, I have no time to spare," said Nekhludoff, glancing at his
watch.

"Then, look here. To-night, at the races--will you be there?"

"No, I shall not be there."

"Do come. I have none of my own now, but I back Grisha's horses. You
remember; he has a fine stud. You'll come, won't you? And we'll have
some supper together."

"No, I cannot have supper with you either," said Nekhludoff with a
smile.

"Well, that's too bad! And where are you off to now? Shall I give you a
lift?"

"I am going to see an advocate, close to here round the corner."

"Oh, yes, of course. You have got something to do with the prisons--have
turned into a prisoners' mediator, I hear," said Schonbock, laughing.
"The Korchagins told me. They have left town already. What does it all
mean? Tell me."

"Yes, yes, it is quite true," Nekhludoff answered; "but I cannot tell
you about it in the street."

"Of course; you always were a crank. But you will come to the races?"

"No. I neither can nor wish to come. Please do not be angry with me."

"Angry? Dear me, no. Where do you live?" And suddenly his face became
serious, his eyes fixed, and he drew up his brows. He seemed to be
trying to remember something, and Nekhludoff noticed the same dull
expression as that of the man with the raised brows and pouting lips
whom he had seen at the window of the eating-house.

"How cold it is! Is it not? Have you got the parcels?" said Schonbock,
turning to the isvostchik.

"All right. Good-bye. I am very glad indeed to have met you," and
warmly pressing Nekhludoff's hand, he jumped into the trap and waved
his white-gloved hand in front of his shiny face, with his usual smile,
showing his exceptionally white teeth.

"Can I have also been like that?" Nekhludoff thought, as he continued
his way to the advocate's. "Yes, I wished to be like that, though I was
not quite like it. And I thought of living my life in that way."



CHAPTER XI.

AN ADVOCATE'S VIEWS ON JUDGES AND PROSECUTORS.

Nekhludoff was admitted by the advocate before his turn. The advocate at
once commenced to talk about the Menshoffs' case, which he had read with
indignation at the inconsistency of the accusation.

"This case is perfectly revolting," he said; "it is very likely that
the owner himself set fire to the building in order to get the insurance
money, and the chief thing is that there is no evidence to prove the
Menshoffs' guilt. There are no proofs whatever. It is all owing to the
special zeal of the examining magistrate and the carelessness of the
prosecutor. If they are tried here, and not in a provincial court, I
guarantee that they will be acquitted, and I shall charge nothing.
Now then, the next case, that of Theodosia Birukoff. The appeal to the
Emperor is written. If you go to Petersburg, you'd better take it with
you, and hand it in yourself, with a request of your own, or else they
will only make a few inquiries, and nothing will come of it. You must
try and get at some of the influential members of the Appeal Committee."

"Well, is this all?"

"No; here I have a letter . . . I see you have turned into a pipe--a
spout through which all the complaints of the prison are poured," said
the advocate, with a smile. "It is too much; you'll not be able to
manage it."

"No, but this is a striking case," said Nekhludoff, and gave a brief
outline of the case of a peasant who began to read the Gospels to the
peasants in the village, and to discuss them with his friends. The
priests regarded this as a crime and informed the authorities. The
magistrate examined him and the public prosecutor drew up an act of
indictment, and the law courts committed him for trial.

"This is really too terrible," Nekhludoff said. "Can it be true?"

"What are you surprised at?"

"Why, everything. I can understand the police-officer, who simply obeys
orders, but the prosecutor drawing up an act of that kind. An educated
man . . ."

"That is where the mistake lies, that we are in the habit of considering
that the prosecutors and the judges in general are some kind of liberal
persons. There was a time when they were such, but now it is quite
different. They are just officials, only troubled about pay-day.
They receive their salaries and want them increased, and there their
principles end. They will accuse, judge, and sentence any one you like."

"Yes; but do laws really exist that can condemn a man to Siberia for
reading the Bible with his friends?"

"Not only to be exiled to the less remote parts of Siberia, but even to
the mines, if you can only prove that reading the Bible they took the
liberty of explaining it to others not according to orders, and in this
way condemned the explanations given by the Church. Blaming the Greek
orthodox religion in the presence of the common people means, according
to Statute . . . the mines."

"Impossible!"

"I assure you it is so. I always tell these gentlemen, the judges,"
the advocate continued, "that I cannot look at them without gratitude,
because if I am not in prison, and you, and all of us, it is only owing
to their kindness. To deprive us of our privileges, and send us all to
the less remote parts of Siberia, would be an easy thing for them."

"Well, if it is so, and if everything depends on the Procureur and
others who can, at will, either enforce the laws or not, what are the
trials for?"

The advocate burst into a merry laugh. "You do put strange questions.
My dear sir, that is philosophy. Well, we might have a talk about that,
too. Could you come on Saturday? You will meet men of science, literary
men, and artists at my house, and then we might discuss these general
questions," said the advocate, pronouncing the words "general questions"
with ironical pathos. "You have met my wife? Do come."

"Thank you; I will try to," said Nekhludoff, and felt that he was saying
an untruth, and knew that if he tried to do anything it would be to keep
away froth the advocate's literary evening, and the circle of the men of
science, art, and literature.

The laugh with which the advocate met Nekhludoff's remark that trials
could have no meaning if the judges might enforce the laws or not,
according to their notion, and the tone with which he pronounced the
words "philosophy" and "general questions" proved to Nekhludoff how very
differently he and the advocate and, probably, the advocate's friends,
looked at things; and he felt that in spite of the distance that now
existed between himself and his former companions, Schonbock, etc.,
the difference between himself and the circle of the advocate and his
friends was still greater.



CHAPTER XII.

WHY THE PEASANTS FLOCK TO TOWN.

The prison was a long way off and it was getting late, so Nekhludoff
took an isvostchik. The isvostchik, a middle-aged man with an
intelligent and kind face, turned round towards Nekhludoff as they were
driving along one of the streets and pointed to a huge house that was
being built there.

"Just see what a tremendous house they have begun to build," he said, as
if he was partly responsible for the building of the house and proud of
it. The house was really immense and was being built in a very original
style. The strong pine beams of the scaffolding were firmly fixed
together with iron bands and a plank wall separated the building from
the street.

On the boards of the scaffolding workmen, all bespattered with plaster,
moved hither and thither like ants. Some were laying bricks, some hewing
stones, some carrying up the heavy hods and pails and bringing them down
empty. A fat and finely-dressed gentleman--probably the architect--stood
by the scaffolding, pointing upward and explaining something to a
contractor, a peasant from the Vladimir Government, who was respectfully
listening to him. Empty carts were coming out of the gate by which the
architect and the contractor were standing, and loaded ones were going
in. "And how sure they all are--those that do the work as well as those
that make them do it--that it ought to be; that while their wives at
home, who are with child, are labouring beyond their strength, and their
children with the patchwork caps, doomed soon to the cold grave, smile
with suffering and contort their little legs, they must be building this
stupid and useless palace for some stupid and useless person--one of
those who spoil and rob them," Nekhludoff thought, while looking at the
house.

"Yes, it is a stupid house," he said, uttering his thought out aloud.

"Why stupid?" replied the isvostchik, in an offended tone. "Thanks to
it, the people get work; it's not stupid."

"But the work is useless."

"It can't be useless, or why should it be done?" said the isvostchik.
"The people get bread by it."

Nekhludoff was silent, and it would have been difficult to talk because
of the clatter the wheels made.

When they came nearer the prison, and the isvostchik turned off the
paved on to the macadamised road, it became easier to talk, and he again
turned to Nekhludoff.

"And what a lot of these people are flocking to the town nowadays; it's
awful," he said, turning round on the box and pointing to a party of
peasant workmen who were coming towards them, carrying saws, axes,
sheepskins, coats, and bags strapped to their shoulders.

"More than in other years?" Nekhludoff asked.

"By far. This year every place is crowded, so that it's just terrible.
The employers just fling the workmen about like chaff. Not a job to be
got."

"Why is that?"

"They've increased. There's no room for them."

"Well, what if they have increased? Why do not they stay in the
village?"

"There's nothing for them to do in the village--no land to be had."

Nekhludoff felt as one does when touching a sore place. It feels as if
the bruised part was always being hit; yet it is only because the place
is sore that the touch is felt.

"Is it possible that the same thing is happening everywhere?" he
thought, and began questioning the isvostchik about the quantity of land
in his village, how much land the man himself had, and why he had left
the country.

"We have a desiatin per man, sir," he said. "Our family have three men's
shares of the land. My father and a brother are at home, and manage the
land, and another brother is serving in the army. But there's nothing to
manage. My brother has had thoughts of coming to Moscow, too."

"And cannot land be rented?"

"How's one to rent it nowadays? The gentry, such as they were, have
squandered all theirs. Men of business have got it all into their own
hands. One can't rent it from them. They farm it themselves. We have
a Frenchman ruling in our place; he bought the estate from our former
landlord, and won't let it--and there's an end of it."

"Who's that Frenchman?"

"Dufour is the Frenchman's name. Perhaps you've heard of him. He makes
wigs for the actors in the big theatre; it is a good business, so he's
prospering. He bought it from our lady, the whole of the estate, and now
he has us in his power; he just rides on us as he pleases. The Lord be
thanked, he is a good man himself; only his wife, a Russian, is such a
brute that--God have mercy on us. She robs the people. It's awful. Well,
here's the prison. Am I to drive you to the entrance? I'm afraid they'll
not let us do it, though."



CHAPTER XIII.

NURSE MASLOVA.

When he rang the bell at the front entrance Nekhludoff's heart stood
still with horror as he thought of the state he might find Maslova in
to-day, and at the mystery that he felt to be in her and in the people
that were collected in the prison. He asked the jailer who opened the
door for Maslova. After making the necessary inquiry the jailer informed
him that she was in the hospital. Nekhludoff went there. A kindly old
man, the hospital doorkeeper, let him in at once and, after asking
Nekhludoff whom he wanted, directed him to the children's ward. A young
doctor saturated with carbolic acid met Nekhludoff in the passage and
asked him severely what he wanted. This doctor was always making all
sorts of concessions to the prisoners, and was therefore continually
coming into conflict with the prison authorities and even with the head
doctor. Fearing lest Nekhludoff should demand something unlawful, and
wishing to show that he made no exceptions for any one, he pretended to
be cross. "There are no women here; it is the children's ward," he said.

"Yes, I know; but a prisoner has been removed here to be an assistant
nurse."

"Yes, there are two such here. Then whom do you want?"

"I am closely connected with one of them, named Maslova," Nekhludoff
answered, "and should like to speak to her. I am going to Petersburg to
hand in an appeal to the Senate about her case and should like to give
her this. It is only a photo," Nekhludoff said, taking an envelope out
of his pocket.

"All right, you may do that," said the doctor, relenting, and turning to
an old woman with a white apron, he told her to call the prisoner--Nurse
Maslova.

"Will you take a seat, or go into the waiting-room?"

"Thanks," said Nekhludoff, and profiting by the favourable change in
the manner of the doctor towards him asked how they were satisfied with
Maslova in the hospital.

"Oh, she is all right. She works fairly well, if you the conditions of
her former life into account. But here she is."

The old nurse came in at one of the doors, followed by Maslova, who wore
a blue striped dress, a white apron, a kerchief that quite covered her
hair. When she saw Nekhludoff her face flushed, and she stopped as if
hesitating, then frowned, and with downcast eyes went quickly towards
him along the strip of carpet in the middle of the passage. When she
came up to Nekhludoff she did not wish to give him her hand, and then
gave it, growing redder still. Nekhludoff had not seen her since the
day when she begged forgiveness for having been in a passion, and he
expected to find her the same as she was then. But to-day she was
quite different. There was something new in the expression of her face,
reserve and shyness, and, as it seemed to him, animosity towards him. He
told her what he had already said to the doctor, i.e., that he was going
to Petersburg, and he handed her the envelope with the photograph which
he had brought from Panovo.

"I found this in Panovo--it's an old photo; perhaps you would like it.
Take it."

Lifting her dark eyebrows, she looked at him with surprise in her
squinting eyes, as if asking, "What is this for?" took the photo
silently and put it in the bib of her apron.

"I saw your aunt there," said Nekhludoff.

"Did you?" she said, indifferently.

"Are you all right here?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Oh, yes, it's all right," she said.

"Not too difficult?"

"Oh, no. But I am not used to it yet."

"I am glad, for your sake. Anyhow, it is better than there."

"Than where--there?" she asked, her face flushing again.

"There--in the prison," Nekhludoff hurriedly answered.

"Why better?" she asked.

"I think the people are better. Here are none such as there must be
there."

"There are many good ones there," she said.

"I have been seeing about the Menshoffs, and hope they will be
liberated," said Nekhludoff.

"God grant they may. Such a splendid old woman," she said, again
repeating her opinion of the old woman, and slightly smiling.

"I am going to Petersburg to-day. Your case will come on soon, and I
hope the sentence will be repealed."

"Whether it is repealed or not won't matter now," she said.

"Why not now?"

"So," she said, looking with a quick, questioning glance into his eyes.

Nekhludoff understood the word and the look to mean that she wished
to know whether he still kept firm to his decision or had accepted her
refusal.

"I do not know why it does not matter to you," he said. "It certainly
does not matter as far as I am concerned whether you are acquitted or
not. I am ready to do what I told you in any case," he said decidedly.

She lifted her head and her black squinting eyes remained fixed on him
and beyond him, and her face beamed with joy. But the words she spoke
were very different from what her eyes said.

"You should not speak like that," she said.

"I am saying it so that you should know."

"Everything has been said about that, and there is no use speaking," she
said, with difficulty repressing a smile.

A sudden noise came from the hospital ward, and the sound of a child
crying.

"I think they are calling me," she said, and looked round uneasily.

"Well, good-bye, then," he said. She pretended not to see his extended
hand, and, without taking it, turned away and hastily walked along the
strip of carpet, trying to hide the triumph she felt.

"What is going on in her? What is she thinking? What does she feel? Does
she mean to prove me, or can she really not forgive me? Is it that she
cannot or that she will not express what she feels and thinks? Has she
softened or hardened?" he asked himself, and could find no answer. He
only knew that she had altered and that an important change was going on
in her soul, and this change united him not only to her but also to Him
for whose sake that change was being wrought. And this union brought on
a state of joyful animation and tenderness.

When she returned to the ward, in which there stood eight small beds,
Maslova began, in obedience to the nurse's order, to arrange one of the
beds; and, bending over too far with the sheet, she slipped and nearly
fell down.

A little convalescent boy with a bandaged neck, who was looking at her,
laughed. Maslova could no longer contain herself and burst into loud
laughter, and such contagious laughter that several of the children also
burst out laughing, and one of the sisters rebuked her angrily.

"What are you giggling at? Do you think you are where you used to be?
Go and fetch the food." Maslova obeyed and went where she was sent; but,
catching the eye of the bandaged boy who was not allowed to laugh, she
again burst out laughing.

Whenever she was alone Maslova again and again pulled the photograph
partly out of the envelope and looked at it admiringly; but only in the
evening when she was off duty and alone in the bedroom which she shared
with a nurse, did she take it quite out of the envelope and gaze long
at the faded yellow photograph, caressing with, her eyes every detail
of faces and clothing, the steps of the veranda, and the bushes which
served as a background to his and hers and his aunts' faces, and could
not cease from admiring especially herself--her pretty young face with
the curly hair round the forehead. She was so absorbed that she did not
hear her fellow-nurse come into the room.

"What is it that he's given you?" said the good-natured, fat nurse,
stooping over the photograph.

"Who's this? You?"

"Who else?" said Maslova, looking into her companion's face with a
smile.

"And who's this?"

"Himself."

"And is this his mother?"

"No, his aunt. Would you not have known me?"

"Never. The whole face is altered. Why, it must be 10 years since then."

"Not years, but a lifetime," said Maslova. And suddenly her animation
went, her face grew gloomy, and a deep line appeared between her brows.

"Why so? Your way of life must have been an easy one."

"Easy, indeed," Maslova reiterated, closing her eyes and shaking her
head. "It is hell."

"Why, what makes it so?"

"What makes it so! From eight till four in the morning, and every night
the same!"

"Then why don't they give it up?"

"They can't give it up if they want to. But what's the use of talking?"
Maslova said, jumping up and throwing the photograph into the drawer of
the table. And with difficulty repressing angry tears, she ran out into
the passage and slammed the door.

While looking at the group she imagined herself such as she was there
and dreamt of her happiness then and of the possibility of happiness
with him now. But her companion's words reminded her of what she was now
and what she had been, and brought back all the horrors of that life,
which she had felt but dimly, and not allowed herself to realise.

It was only now that the memory of all those terrible nights came
vividly back to her, especially one during the carnival when she was
expecting a student who had promised to buy her out. She remembered how
she--wearing her low necked silk dress stained with wine, a red bow in
her untidy hair, wearied, weak, half tipsy, having seen her visitors
off, sat down during an interval in the dancing by the piano beside the
bony pianiste with the blotchy face, who played the accompaniments
to the violin, and began complaining of her hard fate; and how this
pianiste said that she, too, was feeling how heavy her position was and
would like to change it; and how Clara suddenly came up to them; and how
they all three decided to change their life. They thought that the night
was over, and were about to go away, when suddenly the noise of tipsy
voices was heard in the ante-room. The violinist played a tune and the
pianiste began hammering the first figure of a quadrille on the piano,
to the tune of a most merry Russian song. A small, perspiring man,
smelling of spirits, with a white tie and swallow-tail coat, which he
took off after the first figure, came up to her, hiccoughing, and
caught her up, while another fat man, with a beard, and also wearing a
dress-coat (they had come straight from a ball) caught Clara up, and for
a long time they turned, danced, screamed, drank. . . . And so it
went on for another year, and another, and a third. How could she help
changing? And he was the cause of it all. And, suddenly, all her former
bitterness against him reawoke; she wished to scold, to reproach him.
She regretted having neglected the opportunity of repeating to him once
more that she knew him, and would not give in to him--would not let him
make use of her spiritually as he had done physically.

And she longed for drink in order to stifle the feeling of pity to
herself and the useless feeling of reproach to him. And she would have
broken her word if she had been inside the prison. Here she could not
get any spirits except by applying to the medical assistant, and she was
afraid of him because he made up to her, and intimate relations with
men were disgusting to her now. After sitting a while on a form in the
passage she returned to her little room, and without paying any heed to
her companion's words, she wept for a long time over her wrecked life.



CHAPTER XIV.

AN ARISTOCRATIC CIRCLE.

Nekhludoff had four matters to attend to in Petersburg. The first was
the appeal to the Senate in Maslova's case; the second, to hand in
Theodosia Birukoff's petition to the committee; the third, to comply
with Vera Doukhova's requests--i.e., try to get her friend Shoustova
released from prison, and get permission for a mother to visit her son
in prison. Vera Doukhova had written to him about this, and he was
going to the Gendarmerie Office to attend to these two matters, which he
counted as one.

The fourth matter he meant to attend to was the case of some sectarians
who had been separated from their families and exiled to the Caucasus
because they read and discussed the Gospels. It was not so much to
them as to himself he had promised to do all he could to clear up this
affair.

Since his last visit to Maslennikoff, and especially since he had been
in the country, Nekhludoff had not exactly formed a resolution but felt
with his whole nature a loathing for that society in which he had lived
till then, that society which so carefully hides the sufferings of
millions in order to assure ease and pleasure to a small number of
people, that the people belonging to this society do not and cannot
see these sufferings, nor the cruelty and wickedness of their life.
Nekhludoff could no longer move in this society without feeling ill at
ease and reproaching himself. And yet all the ties of relationship and
friendship, and his own habits, were drawing him back into this society.
Besides, that which alone interested him now, his desire to help Maslova
and the other sufferers, made it necessary to ask for help and service
from persons belonging to that society, persons whom he not only could
not respect, but who often aroused in him indignation and a feeling of
contempt.

When he came to Petersburg and stopped at his aunt's--his mother's
sister, the Countess Tcharsky, wife of a former minister--Nekhludoff at
once found himself in the very midst of that aristocratic circle which
had grown so foreign to him. This was very unpleasant, but there was no
possibility of getting out of it. To put up at an hotel instead of at
his aunt's house would have been to offend his aunt, and, besides, his
aunt had important connections and might be extremely useful in all
these matters he meant to attend to.

"What is this I hear about you? All sorts of marvels," said the Countess
Katerina Ivanovna Tcharsky, as she gave him his coffee immediately after
his arrival. "_Vous posez pour un Howard_. Helping criminals, going the
round of prisons, setting things right."

"Oh, no. I never thought of it."

"Why not? It is a good thing, only there seems to be some romantic story
connected with it. Let us hear all about it."

Nekhludoff told her the whole truth about his relations to Maslova.

"Yes, yes, I remember your poor mother telling me about it. That was
when you were staying with those old women. I believe they wished to
marry you to their ward (the Countess Katerina Ivanovna had always
despised Nekhludoff's aunts on his father's side). So it's she. _Elle
est encore jolie?_"

Katerina Ivanovna was a strong, bright, energetic, talkative woman of
60. She was tall and very stout, and had a decided black moustache
on her lip. Nekhludoff was fond of her and had even as a child been
infected by her energy and mirth.

"No, ma tante, that's at an end. I only wish to help her, because she is
innocently accused. I am the cause of it and the cause of her fate being
what it is. I feel it my duty to do all I can for her."

"But what is this I have heard about your intention of marrying her?"

"Yes, it was my intention, but she does not wish it."

Katerina Ivanovna looked at her nephew with raised brows and drooping
eyeballs, in silent amazement. Suddenly her face changed, and with a
look of pleasure she said: "Well, she is wiser than you. Dear me, you
are a fool. And you would have married her?"

"Most certainly."

"After her having been what she was?"

"All the more, since I was the cause of it."

"Well, you are a simpleton," said his aunt, repressing a smile, "a
terrible simpleton; but it is just because you are such a terrible
simpleton that I love you." She repeated the word, evidently liking it,
as it seemed to correctly convey to her mind the idea of her nephew's
moral state. "Do you know--What a lucky chance. Aline has a wonderful
home--the Magdalene Home. I went there once. They are terribly
disgusting. After that I had to pray continually. But Aline is devoted
to it, body and soul, so we shall place her there--yours, I mean."

"But she is condemned to Siberia. I have come on purpose to appeal about
it. This is one of my requests to you."

"Dear me, and where do you appeal to in this case?"

"To the Senate."

"Ah, the Senate! Yes, my dear Cousin Leo is in the Senate, but he is in
the heraldry department, and I don't know any of the real ones. They are
all some kind of Germans--Gay, Fay, Day--tout l'alphabet, or else all
sorts of Ivanoffs, Simenoffs, Nikitines, or else Ivanenkos, Simonenkos,
Nikitenkos, pour varier. Des gens de l'autre monde. Well, it is all the
same. I'll tell my husband, he knows them. He knows all sorts of people.
I'll tell him, but you will have to explain, he never understands me.
Whatever I may say, he always maintains he does not understand it. C'est
un parti pris, every one understands but only not he."

At this moment a footman with stockinged legs came in with a note on a
silver platter.

"There now, from Aline herself. You'll have a chance of hearing
Kiesewetter."

"Who is Kiesewetter?"

"Kiesewetter? Come this evening, and you will find out who he is. He
speaks in such a way that the most hardened criminals sink on their
knees and weep and repent."

The Countess Katerina Ivanovna, however strange it may seem, and however
little it seemed in keeping with the rest of her character, was a
staunch adherent to that teaching which holds that the essence of
Christianity lies in the belief in redemption. She went to meetings
where this teaching, then in fashion, was being preached, and assembled
the "faithful" in her own house. Though this teaching repudiated all
ceremonies, icons, and sacraments, Katerina Ivanovna had icons in every
room, and one on the wall above her bed, and she kept all that the
Church prescribed without noticing any contradiction in that.

"There now; if your Magdalene could hear him she would be converted,"
said the Countess. "Do stay at home to-night; you will hear him. He is a
wonderful man."

"It does not interest me, ma tante."

"But I tell you that it is interesting, and you must come home. Now you
may go. What else do you want of me? _Videz votre sac_."

"The next is in the fortress."

"In the fortress? I can give you a note for that to the Baron
Kriegsmuth. _Cest un tres brave homme_. Oh, but you know him; he was a
comrade of your father's. _Il donne dans le spiritisme_. But that does
not matter, he is a good fellow. What do you want there?"

"I want to get leave for a mother to visit her son who is imprisoned
there. But I was told that this did not depend on Kriegsmuth but on
Tcherviansky."

"I do not like Tcherviansky, but he is Mariette's husband; we might ask
her. She will do it for me. _Elle est tres gentille_."

"I have also to petition for a woman who is imprisoned there without
knowing what for."

"No fear; she knows well enough. They all know it very well, and it
serves them right, those short-haired [many advanced women wear their
hair short, like men] ones."

"We do not know whether it serves them right or not. But they suffer.
You are a Christian and believe in the Gospel teaching and yet you are
so pitiless."

"That has nothing to do with it. The Gospels are the Gospels, but what
is disgusting remains disgusting. It would be worse if I pretended to
love Nihilists, especially short-haired women Nihilists, when I cannot
bear them."

"Why can you not bear them?"

"You ask why, after the 1st of March?" [The Emperor Alexander II was
killed on the first of March, old style.]

"They did not all take part in it on the 1st of March."

"Never mind; they should not meddle with what is no business of theirs.
It's not women's business."

"Yet you consider that Mariette may take part in business."

"Mariette? Mariette is Mariette, and these are goodness knows what. Want
to teach everybody."

"Not to teach but simply to help the people."

"One knows whom to help and whom not to help without them."

"But the peasants are in great need. I have just returned from the
country. Is it necessary, that the peasants should work to the very
limits of their strength and never have sufficient to eat while we are
living in the greatest luxury?" said Nekhludoff, involuntarily led on by
his aunt's good nature into telling her what he was in his thoughts.

"What do you want, then? That I should work and not eat anything?"

"No, I do not wish you not to eat. I only wish that we should all work
and all eat." He could not help smiling as he said it.

Again raising her brow and drooping her eyeballs his aunt looked at him
curiously. "_Mon cher vous finirez mal_," she said.

Just then the general, and former minister, Countess Tcharsky's husband,
a tall, broad-shouldered man, came into the room.

"Ah, Dmitri, how d'you do?" he said, turning his freshly-shaved cheek to
Nekhludoff to be kissed. "When did you get here?" And he silently kissed
his wife on the forehead.

"_Non il est impayable_," the Countess said, turning to her husband.
"He wants me to go and wash clothes and live on potatoes. He is an awful
fool, but all the same do what he is going to ask of you. A terrible
simpleton," she added. "Have you heard? Kamenskaya is in such despair
that they fear for her life," she said to her husband. "You should go
and call there."

"Yes; it is dreadful," said her husband.

"Go along, then, and talk to him. I must write some letters."

Hardly had Nekhludoff stepped into the room next the drawing-room than
she called him back.

"Shall I write to Mariette, then?"

"Please, ma tante."

"I shall leave a blank for what you want to say about the short-haired
one, and she will give her husband his orders, and he'll do it. Do not
think me wicked; they are all so disgusting, your prologues, but _je
ne leur veux pas de mal_, bother them. Well, go, but be sure to stay at
home this evening to hear Kiesewetter, and we shall have some prayers.
And if only you do not resist _cela vous fera beaucoup de bien_. I
know your poor mother and all of you were always very backward in these
things."



CHAPTER XV.

AN AVERAGE STATESMAN.

Count Ivan Michaelovitch had been a minister, and was a man of strong
convictions. The convictions of Count Ivan Michaelovitch consisted in
the belief that, just as it was natural for a bird to feed on worms,
to be clothed in feathers and down, and to fly in the air, so it
was natural for him to feed on the choicest and most expensive food,
prepared by highly-paid cooks, to wear the most comfortable and most
expensive clothing, to drive with the best and fastest horses, and that,
therefore, all these things should be ready found for him. Besides this,
Count Ivan Michaelovitch considered that the more money he could get out
of the treasury by all sorts of means, the more orders he had, including
different diamond insignia of something or other, and the oftener he
spoke to highly-placed individuals of both sexes, so much the better it
was.

All the rest Count Ivan Michaelovitch considered insignificant and
uninteresting beside these dogmas. All the rest might be as it was, or
just the reverse. Count Ivan Michaelovitch lived and acted according
to these lights for 40 years, and at the end of 40 years reached the
position of a Minister of State. The chief qualities that enabled
Count Ivan Michaelovitch to reach this position were his capacity of
understanding the meaning of documents and laws and of drawing up,
though clumsily, intelligible State papers, and of spelling them
correctly; secondly, his very stately appearance, which enabled him,
when necessary, to seem not only extremely proud, but unapproachable
and majestic, while at other times he could be abjectly and almost
passionately servile; thirdly, the absence of any general principles
or rules, either of personal or administrative morality, which made it
possible for him either to agree or disagree with anybody according to
what was wanted at the time. When acting thus his only endeavour was
to sustain the appearance of good breeding and not to seem too plainly
inconsistent. As for his actions being moral or not, in themselves, or
whether they were going to result in the highest welfare or greatest
evil for the whole of the Russian Empire, or even the entire world, that
was quite indifferent to him. When he became minister, not only
those dependent on him (and there were great many of them) and people
connected with him, but many strangers and even he himself were
convinced that he was a very clever statesman. But after some time had
elapsed and he had done nothing and had nothing to show, and when in
accordance with the law of the struggle for existence others, like
himself, who had learnt to write and understand documents, stately and
unprincipled officials, had displaced him, he turned out to be not
only far from clever but very limited and badly educated. Though
self-assured, his views hardly reaching the level of those in the
leading articles of the Conservative papers, it became apparent
that there was nothing in him to distinguish him from those other
badly-educated and self-assured officials who had pushed him out, and
he himself saw it. But this did not shake his conviction that he had to
receive a great deal of money out of the Treasury every year, and new
decorations for his dress clothes. This conviction was so firm that no
one had the pluck to refuse these things to him, and he received yearly,
partly in form of a pension, partly as a salary for being a member in
a Government institution and chairman of all sorts of committees
and councils, several tens of thousands of roubles, besides the
right--highly prized by him--of sewing all sorts of new cords to his
shoulders and trousers, and ribbons to wear under and enamel stars
to fix on to his dress coat. In consequence of this Count Ivan
Michaelovitch had very high connections.

Count Ivan Michaelovitch listened to Nekhludoff as he was wont to listen
to the reports of the permanent secretary of his department, and, having
heard him, said he would give him two notes, one to the Senator Wolff,
of the Appeal Department. "All sorts of things are reported of him, but
dans tous les cas c'est un homme tres comme ii faut," he said. "He is
indebted to me, and will do all that is possible." The other note Count
Ivan Michaelovitch gave Nekhludoff was to an influential member of
the Petition Committee. The story of Theodosia Birukoff as told by
Nekhludoff interested him very much. When Nekhludoff said that he
thought of writing to the Empress, the Count replied that it certainly
was a very touching story, and might, if occasion presented itself, he
told her, but he could not promise. Let the petition be handed in in due
form.

Should there be an opportunity, and if a petit comite were called on
Thursday, he thought he would tell her the story. As soon as Nekhludoff
had received these two notes, and a note to Mariette from his aunt, he
at once set off to these different places.

First he went to Mariette's. He had known her as a half-grown girl, the
daughter of an aristocratic but not wealthy family, and had heard how
she had married a man who was making a career, whom Nekhludoff had heard
badly spoken of; and, as usual, he felt it hard to ask a favour of a man
he did not esteem. In these cases he always felt an inner dissension
and dissatisfaction, and wavered whether to ask the favour or not, and
always resolved to ask. Besides feeling himself in a false position
among those to whose set he no longer regarded himself as belonging, who
yet regarded him as belonging to them, he felt himself getting into the
old accustomed rut, and in spite of himself fell into the thoughtless
and immoral tone that reigned in that circle. He felt that from the
first, with his aunt, he involuntarily fell into a bantering tone while
talking about serious matters.

Petersburg in general affected him with its usual physically
invigorating and mentally dulling effect.

Everything so clean, so comfortably well-arranged and the people so
lenient in moral matters, that life seemed very easy.

A fine, clean, and polite isvostchik drove him past fine, clean, polite
policemen, along the fine, clean, watered streets, past fine, clean
houses to the house in which Mariette lived. At the front door stood
a pair of English horses, with English harness, and an English-looking
coachman on the box, with the lower part of his face shaved, proudly
holding a whip. The doorkeeper, dressed in a wonderfully clean livery,
opened the door into the hall, where in still cleaner livery with gold
cords stood the footman with his splendid whiskers well combed out,
and the orderly on duty in a brand-new uniform. "The general does not
receive, and the generaless does not receive either. She is just going
to drive out."

Nekhludoff took out Katerina Ivanovna's letter, and going up to a table
on which lay a visitors' book, began to write that he was sorry not to
have been able to see any one; when the footman went up the staircase
the doorkeeper went out and shouted to the coachman, and the orderly
stood up rigid with his arms at his sides following with his eyes a
little, slight lady, who was coming down the stairs with rapid steps not
in keeping with all the grandeur.

Mariette had a large hat on, with feathers, a black dress and cape, and
new black gloves. Her face was covered by a veil.

When she saw Nekhludoff she lifted the veil off a very pretty face with
bright eyes that looked inquiringly at him.

"Ah, Prince Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff," she said, with a soft,
pleasant voice. "I should have known--"

"What! you even remember my name?"

"I should think so. Why, I and my sisters have even been in love with
you," she said, in French. "But, dear me, how you have altered. Oh, what
a pity I have to go out. But let us go up again," she said and stopped
hesitatingly. Then she looked at the clock. "No, I can't. I am going to
Kamenskaya's to attend a mass for the dead. She is terribly afflicted."

"Who is this Kamenskaya?"

"Have you not heard? Her son was killed in a duel. He fought Posen. He
was the only son. Terrible I The mother is very much afflicted."

"Yes. I have heard of it."

"No, I had better go, and you must come again, to-night or to-morrow,"
she said, and went to the door with quick, light steps.

"I cannot come to-night," he said, going out after her; "but I have
a request to make you," and he looked at the pair of bays that were
drawing up to the front door.

"What is this?"

"This is a letter from aunt to you," said Nekhludoff, handing her
a narrow envelope, with a large crest. "You'll find all about it in
there."

"I know Countess Katerina Ivanovna thinks I have some influence with my
husband in business matters. She is mistaken. I can do nothing and do
not like to interfere. But, of course, for you I am willing to be false
to my principle. What is this business about?" she said, searching in
vain for her pocket with her little black gloved hand.

"There is a girl imprisoned in the fortress, and she is ill and
innocent."

"What is her name?"

"Lydia Shoustova. It's in the note."

"All right; I'll see what I can do," she said, and lightly jumped into
her little, softly upholstered, open carriage, its brightly-varnished
splash-guards glistening in the sunshine, and opened her parasol. The
footman got on the box and gave the coachman a sign. The carriage moved,
but at that moment she touched the coachman with her parasol and the
slim-legged beauties, the bay mares, stopped, bending their beautiful
necks and stepping from foot to foot.

"But you must come, only, please, without interested motives," and she
looked at him with a smile, the force of which she well knew, and, as if
the performance over and she were drawing the curtain, she dropped
the veil over her face again. "All right," and she again touched the
coachman.

Nekhludoff raised his hat, and the well-bred bays, slightly snorting,
set off, their shoes clattering on the pavement, and the carriage rolled
quickly and smoothly on its new rubber tyres, giving a jump only now and
then over some unevenness of the road.



CHAPTER XVI.

AN UP-TO-DATE SENATOR.

When Nekhludoff remembered the smiles that had passed between him and
Mariette, he shook his head.

"You have hardly time to turn round before you are again drawn into
this life," he thought, feeling that discord and those doubts which the
necessity to curry favour from people he did not esteem caused.

After considering where to go first, so as not to have to retrace his
steps, Nekhludoff set off for the Senate. There he was shown into the
office where he found a great many very polite and very clean officials
in the midst of a magnificent apartment. Maslova's petition was received
and handed on to that Wolf, to whom Nekhludoff had a letter from his
uncle, to be examined and reported on.

"There will be a meeting of the Senate this week," the official said to
Nekhludoff, "but Maslova's case will hardly come before that meeting."

"It might come before the meeting on Wednesday, by special request," one
of the officials remarked.

During the time Nekhludoff waited in the office, while some information
was being taken, he heard that the conversation in the Senate was all
about the duel, and he heard a detailed account of how a young man,
Kaminski, had been killed. It was here he first heard all the facts of
the case which was exciting the interest of all Petersburg. The story
was this: Some officers were eating oysters and, as usual, drinking very
much, when one of them said something ill-natured about the regiment to
which Kaminski belonged, and Kaminski called him a liar. The other hit
Kaminski. The next day they fought. Kaminski was wounded in the stomach
and died two hours later. The murderer and the seconds were arrested,
but it was said that though they were arrested and in the guardhouse
they would be set free in a fortnight.

From the Senate Nekhludoff drove to see an influential member of the
petition Committee, Baron Vorobioff, who lived in a splendid house
belonging to the Crown. The doorkeeper told Nekhludoff in a severe tone
that the Baron could not be seen except on his reception days; that he
was with His Majesty the Emperor to-day, and the next day he would again
have to deliver a report. Nekhludoff left his uncle's letter with the
doorkeeper and went on to see the Senator Wolf. Wolf had just had his
lunch, and was as usual helping digestion by smoking a cigar and pacing
up and down the room, when Nekhludoff came in. Vladimir Vasilievitch
Wolf was certainly _un homme tres comme il faut_, and prized this
quality very highly, and from that elevation he looked down at everybody
else. He could not but esteem this quality of his very highly, because
it was thanks to it alone that he had made a brilliant career, the very
career he desired, i.e., by marriage he obtained a fortune which brought
him in 18,000 roubles a year, and by his own exertions the post of a
senator. He considered himself not only _un homme tres comme il faut_,
but also a man of knightly honour. By honour he understood not accepting
secret bribes from private persons. But he did not consider it dishonest
to beg money for payment of fares and all sorts of travelling expenses
from the Crown, and to do anything the Government might require of him
in return. To ruin hundreds of innocent people, to cause them to be
imprisoned, to be exiled because of their love for their people and the
religion of their fathers, as he had done in one of the governments of
Poland when he was governor there. He did not consider it dishonourable,
but even thought it a noble, manly and patriotic action. Nor did he
consider it dishonest to rob his wife and sister-in-law, as he had
done, but thought it a wise way of arranging his family life. His family
consisted of his commonplace wife, his sister-in-law, whose fortune
he had appropriated by selling her estate and putting the money to his
account, and his meek, frightened, plain daughter, who lived a lonely,
weary life, from which she had lately begun to look for relaxation in
evangelicism, attending meetings at Aline's, and the Countess Katerina
Ivanovna. Wolf's son, who had grown a beard at the age of 15, and had at
that age begun to drink and lead a depraved life, which he continued to
do till the age of 20, when he was turned out by his father because
he never finished his studies, moved in a low set and made debts which
committed the father. The father had once paid a debt of 250 roubles for
his son, then another of 600 roubles, but warned the son that he did it
for the last time, and that if the son did not reform he would be turned
out of the house and all further intercourse between him and his family
would he put a stop to. The son did not reform, but made a debt of a
thousand roubles, and took the liberty of telling his father that life
at home was a torment anyhow. Then Wolf declared to his son that he
might go where he pleased--that he was no son of his any longer. Since
then Wolf pretended he had no son, and no one at home dared speak to him
about his son, and Vladimir Vasilievitch Wolf was firmly convinced that
he had arranged his family life in the best way. Wolf stopped pacing
up and down his study, and greeted Nekhludoff with a friendly though
slightly ironical smile. This was his way of showing how comme il faut
he was, and how superior to the majority of men. He read the note which
Nekhludoff handed to him.

"Please take a seat, and excuse me if I continue to walk up and down,
with your permission," he said, putting his hands into his coat pockets,
and began again to walk with light, soft steps across his large, quietly
and stylishly furnished study. "Very pleased to make your acquaintance
and of course very glad to do anything that Count Ivan Michaelovitch
wishes," he said, blowing the fragrant blue smoke out of his mouth and
removing his cigar carefully so as not to drop the ash.

"I should only like to ask that the case might come on soon, so that
if the prisoner has to go to Siberia she might set off early," said
Nekhludoff.

"Yes, yes, with one of the first steamers from Nijni. I know," said
Wolf, with his patronising smile, always knowing in advance whatever one
wanted to tell him.

"What is the prisoner's name?"

"Maslova."

Wolf went up to the table and looked at a paper that lay on a piece of
cardboard among other business papers.

"Yes, yes. Maslova. All right, I will ask the others. We shall hear the
case on Wednesday."

"Then may I telegraph to the advocate?"

"The advocate! What's that for? But if you like, why not?"

"The causes for appeal may be insufficient," said Nekhludoff, "but
I think the case will show that the sentence was passed owing to a
misunderstanding."

"Yes, yes; it may be so, but the Senate cannot decide the case on its
merits," said Wolf, looking seriously at the ash of his cigar. "The
Senate only considers the exactness of the application of the laws and
their right interpretation."

"But this seems to me to be an exceptional case."

"I know, I know! All cases are exceptional. We shall do our duty. That's
all." The ash was still holding on, but had began breaking, and was in
danger of falling.

"Do you often come to Petersburg?" said Wolf, holding his cigar so that
the ash should not fall. But the ash began to shake, and Wolf carefully
carried it to the ashpan, into which it fell.

"What a terrible thing this is with regard to Kaminski," he said. "A
splendid young man. The only son. Especially the mother's position," he
went on, repeating almost word for word what every one in Petersburg
was at that time saying about Kaminski. Wolf spoke a little about the
Countess Katerina Ivanovna and her enthusiasm for the new religious
teaching, which he neither approved nor disapproved of, but which was
evidently needless to him who was so comme il faut, and then rang the
bell.

Nekhludoff bowed.

"If it is convenient, come and dine on Wednesday, and I will give you a
decisive answer," said Wolf, extending his hand.

It was late, and Nekhludoff returned to his aunt's.



CHAPTER XVII.

COUNTESS KATERINA IVANOVNA'S DINNER PARTY.

Countess Katerina Ivanovna's dinner hour was half-past seven, and the
dinner was served in a new manner that Nekhludoff had not yet seen
anywhere. After they had placed the dishes on the table the waiters left
the room and the diners helped themselves. The men would not let the
ladies take the trouble of moving, and, as befitted the stronger sex,
they manfully took on themselves the burden of putting the food on
the ladies' plates and of filling their glasses. When one course was
finished, the Countess pressed the button of an electric bell fitted
to the table and the waiters stepped in noiselessly and quickly carried
away the dishes, changed the plates, and brought in the next course.
The dinner was very refined, the wines very costly. A French chef was
working in the large, light kitchens, with two white-clad assistants.
There were six persons at dinner, the Count and Countess, their son
(a surly officer in the Guards who sat with his elbows on the table),
Nekhludoff, a French lady reader, and the Count's chief steward, who
had come up from the country. Here, too, the conversation was about the
duel, and opinions were given as to how the Emperor regarded the case.
It was known that the Emperor was very much grieved for the mother's
sake, and all were grieved for her, and as it was also known that the
Emperor did not mean to be very severe to the murderer, who defended
the honour of his uniform, all were also lenient to the officer who had
defended the honour of his uniform. Only the Countess Katerina Ivanovna,
with her free thoughtlessness, expressed her disapproval.

"They get drunk, and kill unobjectionable young men. I should not
forgive them on any account," she said.

"Now, that's a thing I cannot understand," said the Count.

"I know that you never can understand what I say," the Countess began,
and turning to Nekhludoff, she added:

"Everybody understands except my husband. I say I am sorry for the
mother, and I do not wish him to be contented, having killed a man."
Then her son, who had been silent up to then, took the murderer's part,
and rudely attacked his mother, arguing that an officer could not behave
in any other way, because his fellow-officers would condemn him and turn
him out of the regiment. Nekhludoff listened to the conversation without
joining in. Having been an officer himself, he understood, though he
did not agree with, young Tcharsky's arguments, and at the same time
he could not help contrasting the fate of the officer with that of a
beautiful young convict whom he had seen in the prison, and who was
condemned to the mines for having killed another in a fight. Both had
turned murderers through drunkenness. The peasant had killed a man in
a moment of irritation, and he was parted from his wife and family, had
chains on his legs, and his head shaved, and was going to hard labour in
Siberia, while the officer was sitting in a fine room in the guardhouse,
eating a good dinner, drinking good wine, and reading books, and would
be set free in a day or two to live as he had done before, having only
become more interesting by the affair. Nekhludoff said what he had been
thinking, and at first his aunt, Katerina Ivanovna, seemed to agree with
him, but at last she became silent as the rest had done, and Nekhludoff
felt that he had committed something akin to an impropriety. In the
evening, soon after dinner, the large hall, with high-backed carved
chairs arranged in rows as for a meeting, and an armchair next to a
little table, with a bottle of water for the speaker, began to fill
with people come to hear the foreigner, Kiesewetter, preach. Elegant
equipages stopped at the front entrance. In the hall sat richly-dressed
ladies in silks and velvets and lace, with false hair and false busts
and drawn-in waists, and among them men in uniform and evening dress,
and about five persons of the common class, i.e., two men-servants, a
shop-keeper, a footman, and a coachman. Kiesewetter, a thick-set, grisly
man, spoke English, and a thin young girl, with a pince-nez, translated
it into Russian promptly and well. He was saying that our sins were so
great, the punishment for them so great and so unavoidable, that it was
impossible to live anticipating such punishment. "Beloved brothers and
sisters, let us for a moment consider what we are doing, how we are
living, how we have offended against the all-loving Lord, and how
we make Christ suffer, and we cannot but understand that there is no
forgiveness possible for us, no escape possible, that we are all doomed
to perish. A terrible fate awaits us---everlasting torment," he said,
with tears in his trembling voice. "Oh, how can we be saved, brothers?
How can we be saved from this terrible, unquenchable fire? The house is
in flames; there is no escape."

He was silent for a while, and real tears flowed down his cheeks. It
was for about eight years that each time when he got to this part of his
speech, which he himself liked so well, he felt a choking in his throat
and an irritation in his nose, and the tears came in his eyes, and these
tears touched him still more. Sobs were heard in the room. The Countess
Katerina Ivanovna sat with her elbows on an inlaid table, leaning her
head on her hands, and her shoulders were shaking. The coachman looked
with fear and surprise at the foreigner, feeling as if he was about to
run him down with the pole of his carriage and the foreigner would
not move out of his way. All sat in positions similar to that Katerina
Ivanovna had assumed. Wolf's daughter, a thin, fashionably-dressed girl,
very like her father, knelt with her face in her hands.

The orator suddenly uncovered his face, and smiled a very real-looking
smile, such as actors express joy with, and began again with a sweet,
gentle voice:

"Yet there is a way to be saved. Here it is--a joyful, easy way. The
salvation is the blood shed for us by the only son of God, who gave
himself up to torments for our sake. His sufferings, His blood, will
save us. Brothers and sisters," he said, again with tears in his voice,
"let us praise the Lord, who has given His only begotten son for the
redemption of mankind. His holy blood . . ."

Nekhludoff felt so deeply disgusted that he rose silently, and frowning
and keeping back a groan of shame, he left on tiptoe, and went to his
room.



CHAPTER XVIII.

OFFICIALDOM.

Hardly had Nekhludoff finished dressing the next morning, just as he
was about to go down, the footman brought him a card from the Moscow
advocate. The advocate had come to St. Petersburg on business of his
own, and was going to be present when Maslova's case was examined in the
Senate, if that would be soon. The telegram sent by Nekhludoff crossed
him on the way. Having found out from Nekhludoff when the case was going
to be heard, and which senators were to be present, he smiled. "Exactly,
all the three types of senators," he said. "Wolf is a Petersburg
official; Skovorodnikoff is a theoretical, and Bay a practical lawyer,
and therefore the most alive of them all," said the advocate. "There is
most hope of him. Well, and how about the Petition Committee?"

"Oh, I'm going to Baron Vorobioff to-day. I could not get an audience
with him yesterday."

"Do you know why he is _Baron_ Vorobioff?" said the advocate, noticing
the slightly ironical stress that Nekhludoff put on this foreign title,
followed by so very Russian a surname.

"That was because the Emperor Paul rewarded the grandfather--I think he
was one of the Court footmen--by giving him this title. He managed to
please him in some way, so he made him a baron. 'It's my wish, so don't
gainsay me!' And so there's a _Baron_ Vorobioff, and very proud of the
title. He is a dreadful old humbug."

"Well, I'm going to see him," said Nekhludoff.

"That's good; we can go together. I shall give you a lift."

As they were going to start, a footman met Nekhludoff in the ante-room,
and handed him a note from Mariette:

_Pour vous faire plaisir, f'ai agi tout a fait contre mes principes et
j'ai intercede aupres de mon mari pour votre protegee. Il se trouve
que cette personne pout etre relaxee immediatement. Mon mari a ecrit au
commandant. Venez donc disinterestedly. Je vous attends._

                          _M._

"Just fancy!" said Nekhludoff to the advocate. "Is this not dreadful?
A woman whom they are keeping in solitary confinement for seven months
turns out to be quite innocent, and only a word was needed to get her
released."

"That's always so. Well, anyhow, you have succeeded in getting what you
wanted."

"Yes, but this success grieves me. Just think what must be going on
there. Why have they been keeping her?"

"Oh, it's best not to look too deeply into it. Well, then, I shall give
you a lift, if I may," said the advocate, as they left the house, and
a fine carriage that the advocate had hired drove up to the door. "It's
Baron Vorobioff you are going to see?"

The advocate gave the driver his directions, and the two good horses
quickly brought Nekhludoff to the house in which the Baron lived. The
Baron was at home. A young official in uniform, with a long, thin neck,
a much protruding Adam's apple, and an extremely light walk, and two
ladies were in the first room.

"Your name, please?" the young man with the Adam's apple asked, stepping
with extreme lightness and grace across from the ladies to Nekhludoff.

Nekhludoff gave his name.

"The Baron was just mentioning you," said the young man, the Baron's
adjutant, and went out through an inner door. He returned, leading a
weeping lady dressed in mourning. With her bony fingers the lady was
trying to pull her tangled veil over her face in order to hide her
tears.

"Come in, please," said the young man to Nekhludoff, lightly stepping up
to the door of the study and holding it open. When Nekhludoff came in,
he saw before him a thick-set man of medium height, with short hair,
in a frock coat, who was sitting in an armchair opposite a large
writing-table, and looking gaily in front of himself. The kindly, rosy
red face, striking by its contrast with the white hair, moustaches, and
beard, turned towards Nekhludoff with a friendly smile.

"Very glad to see you. Your mother and I were old acquaintances and
friends. I have seen you as a boy, and later on as an officer. Sit
down and tell me what I can do for you. Yes, yes," he said, shaking his
cropped white head, while Nekhludoff was telling him Theodosia's story.
"Go on, go on. I quite understand. It is certainly very touching. And
have you handed in the petition?"

"I have got the petition ready," Nekhludoff said, getting it out of his
pocket; "but I thought of speaking to you first in hopes that the case
would then get special attention paid to it."

"You have done very well. I shall certainly report it myself," said the
Baron, unsuccessfully trying to put an expression of pity on his merry
face. "Very touching! It is clear she was but a child; the husband
treated her roughly, this repelled her, but as time went on they fell in
love with each other. Yes I will report the case."

"Count Ivan Michaelovitch was also going to speak about it."

Nekhludoff had hardly got these words out when the Baron's face changed.

"You had better hand in the petition into the office, after all, and I
shall do what I can," he said.

At this moment the young official again entered the room, evidently
showing off his elegant manner of walking.

"That lady is asking if she may say a few words more."

"Well, ask her in. Ah, mon cher, how many tears we have to see shed! If
only we could dry them all. One does all that lies within one's power."

The lady entered.

"I forgot to ask you that he should not be allowed to give up the
daughter, because he is ready . . ."

"But I have already told you that I should do all I can."

"Baron, for the love of God! You will save the mother?"

She seized his hand, and began kissing it.

"Everything shall be done."

When the lady went out Nekhludoff also began to take leave.

"We shall do what we can. I shall speak about it at the Ministry of
Justice, and when we get their answer we shall do what we can."

Nekhludoff left the study, and went into the office again. Just as in
the Senate office, he saw, in a splendid apartment, a number of very
elegant officials, clean, polite, severely correct and distinguished in
dress and in speech.

"How many there are of them; how very many and how well fed they all
look! And what clean shirts and hands they all have, and how well all
their boots are polished! Who does it for them? How comfortable they
all are, as compared not only with the prisoners, but even with the
peasants!" These thoughts again involuntarily came to Nekhludoff's mind.



CHAPTER XIX.

AN OLD GENERAL OF REPUTE.

The man on whom depended the easing of the fate of the Petersburg
prisoners was an old General of repute--a baron of German descent,
who, as it was said of him, had outlived his wits. He had received a
profusion of orders, but only wore one of them, the Order of the White
Cross. He had received this order, which he greatly valued, while
serving in the Caucasus, because a number of Russian peasants, with
their hair cropped, and dressed in uniform and armed with guns and
bayonets, had killed at his command more than a thousand men who were
defending their liberty, their homes, and their families. Later on
he served in Poland, and there also made Russian peasants commit many
different crimes, and got more orders and decorations for his uniform.
Then he served somewhere else, and now that he was a weak, old man
he had this position, which insured him a good house, an income and
respect. He strictly observed all the regulations which were prescribed
"from above," and was very zealous in the fulfilment of these
regulations, to which he ascribed a special importance, considering that
everything else in the world might be changed except the regulations
prescribed "from above." His duty was to keep political prisoners,
men and women, in solitary confinement in such a way that half of them
perished in 10 years' time, some going out of their minds, some dying
of consumption, some committing suicide by starving themselves to death,
cutting their veins with bits of glass, hanging, or burning themselves
to death.

The old General was not ignorant of this; it all happened within his
knowledge; but these cases no more touched his conscience than accidents
brought on by thunderstorms, floods, etc. These cases occurred as a
consequence of the fulfilment of regulations prescribed "from above" by
His Imperial Majesty. These regulations had to be carried out
without fail, and therefore it was absolutely useless to think of the
consequences of their fulfilment. The old General did not even allow
himself to think of such things, counting it his patriotic duty as a
soldier not to think of them for fear of getting weak in the carrying
out of these, according to his opinion, very important obligations. Once
a week the old General made the round of the cells, one of the duties of
his position, and asked the prisoners if they had any requests to make.
The prisoners had all sorts of requests. He listened to them quietly, in
impenetrable silence, and never fulfilled any of their requests, because
they were all in disaccord with the regulations. Just as Nekhludoff
drove up to the old General's house, the high notes of the bells on the
belfry clock chimed "Great is the Lord," and then struck two. The sound
of these chimes brought back to Nekhludoff's mind what he had read
in the notes of the Decembrists [the Decembrists were a group who
attempted, but failed, to put an end to absolutism in Russia at the time
of the accession of Nicholas the First] about the way this sweet music
repeated every hour re-echoes in the hearts of those imprisoned for
life.

Meanwhile the old General was sitting in his darkened drawing-room at
an inlaid table, turning a saucer on a piece of paper with the aid of
a young artist, the brother of one of his subordinates. The thin,
weak, moist fingers of the artist were pressed against the wrinkled and
stiff-jointed fingers of the old General, and the hands joined in this
manner were moving together with the saucer over a paper that had all
the letters of the alphabet written on it. The saucer was answering the
questions put by the General as to how souls will recognise each other
after death.

When Nekhludoff sent in his card by an orderly acting as footman, the
soul of Joan of Arc was speaking by the aid of the saucer. The soul of
Joan of Arc had already spelt letter by letter the words: "They well
knew each other," and these words had been written down. When the
orderly came in the saucer had stopped first on b, then on y, and began
jerking hither and thither. This jerking was caused by the General's
opinion that the next letter should be b, i.e., Joan of Arc ought to
say that the souls will know each other by being cleansed of all that
is earthly, or something of the kind, clashing with the opinion of the
artist, who thought the next letter should be l, i.e., that the souls
should know each other by light emanating from their astral bodies. The
General, with his bushy grey eyebrows gravely contracted, sat gazing at
the hands on the saucer, and, imagining that it was moving of its own
accord, kept pulling the saucer towards b. The pale-faced young artist,
with his thin hair combed back behind his cars, was looking with his
lifeless blue eyes into a dark corner of the drawing-room, nervously
moving his lips and pulling the saucer towards l.

The General made a wry face at the interruption, but after a moment's
pause he took the card, put on his pince-nez, and, uttering a groan,
rose, in spite of the pain in his back, to his full height, rubbing his
numb fingers.

"Ask him into the study."

"With your excellency's permission I will finish it alone," said the
artist, rising. "I feel the presence."

"All right, finish alone," the General said, severely and decidedly, and
stepped quickly, with big, firm and measured strides, into his study.

"Very pleased to see you," said the General to Nekhludoff, uttering the
friendly words in a gruff tone, and pointing to an armchair by the side
of the writing-table. "Have you been in Petersburg long?"

Nekhludoff replied that he had only lately arrived.

"Is the Princess, your mother, well?"

"My mother is dead."

"Forgive me; I am very sorry. My son told me he had met you."

The General's son was making the same kind of career for himself that
the father had done, and, having passed the Military Academy, was now
serving in the Inquiry Office, and was very proud of his duties there.
His occupation was the management of Government spies.

"Why, I served with your father. We were friends--comrades. And you; are
you also in the Service?"

"No, I am not."

The General bent his head disapprovingly.

"I have a request to make, General."

"Very pleased. In what way can I be of service to you?"

"If my request is out of place pray pardon me. But I am obliged to make
it."

"What is it?"

"There is a certain Gourkevitch imprisoned in the fortress; his mother
asks for an interview with him, or at least to be allowed to send him
some books."

The General expressed neither satisfaction nor dissatisfaction at
Nekhludoff's request, but bending his head on one side he closed his
eyes as if considering. In reality he was not considering anything, and
was not even interested in Nekhludoff's questions, well knowing that he
would answer them according to the law. He was simply resting mentally
and not thinking at all.

"You see," he said at last, "this does not depend on me. There is a
regulation, confirmed by His Majesty, concerning interviews; and as to
books, we have a library, and they may have what is permitted."

"Yes, but he wants scientific books; he wishes to study."

"Don't you believe it," growled the General. "It's not study he wants;
it is just only restlessness."

"But what is to be done? They must occupy their time somehow in their
hard condition," said Nekhludoff.

"They are always complaining," said the General. "We know them."

He spoke of them in a general way, as if they were all a specially bad
race of men. "They have conveniences here which can be found in few
places of confinement," said the General, and he began to enumerate the
comforts the prisoners enjoyed, as if the aim of the institution was to
give the people imprisoned there a comfortable home.

"It is true it used to be rather rough, but now they are very well kept
here," he continued. "They have three courses for dinner--and one of
them meat--cutlets, or rissoles; and on Sundays they get a fourth--a
sweet dish. God grant every Russian may eat as well as they do."

Like all old people, the General, having once got on to a familiar
topic, enumerated the various proofs he had often given before of the
prisoners being exacting and ungrateful.

"They get books on spiritual subjects and old journals. We have a
library. Only they rarely read. At first they seem interested, later on
the new books remain uncut, and the old ones with their leaves unturned.
We tried them," said the old General, with the dim likeness of a smile.
"We put bits of paper in on purpose, which remained just as they had
been placed. Writing is also not forbidden," he continued. "A slate is
provided, and a slate pencil, so that they can write as a pastime. They
can wipe the slate and write again. But they don't write, either. Oh,
they very soon get quite tranquil. At first they seem restless, but
later on they even grow fat and become very quiet." Thus spoke the
General, never suspecting the terrible meaning of his words.

Nekhludoff listened to the hoarse old voice, looked at the stiff limbs,
the swollen eyelids under the grey brows, at the old, clean-shaved,
flabby jaw, supported by the collar of the military uniform, at the
white cross that this man was so proud of, chiefly because he had gained
it by exceptionally cruel and extensive slaughter, and knew that it was
useless to reply to the old man or to explain the meaning of his own
words to him.

He made another effort, and asked about the prisoner Shoustova, for
whose release, as he had been informed that morning, orders were given.

"Shoustova--Shoustova? I cannot remember all their names, there are so
many of them," he said, as if reproaching them because there were so
many. He rang, and ordered the secretary to be called. While waiting for
the latter, he began persuading Nekhludoff to serve, saying that "honest
noblemen," counting himself among the number, "were particularly needed
by the Tsar and--the country," he added, evidently only to round off
his sentence. "I am old, yet I am serving still, as well as my strength
allows."

The secretary, a dry, emaciated man, with restless, intelligent eyes,
came in and reported that Shoustova was imprisoned in some queer,
fortified place, and that he had received no orders concerning her.

"When we get the order we shall let her out the same day. We do not keep
them; we do not value their visits much," said the General, with another
attempt at a playful smile, which only distorted his old face.

Nekhludoff rose, trying to keep from expressing the mixed feelings of
repugnance and pity which he felt towards this terrible old man. The
old man on his part considered that he should not be too severe on the
thoughtless and evidently misguided son of his old comrade, and should
not leave him without advice.

"Good-bye, my dear fellow; do not take it amiss. It is my affection that
makes me say it. Do not keep company with such people as we have at our
place here. There are no innocent ones among them. All these people
are most immoral. We know them," he said, in a tone that admitted no
possibility of doubt. And he did not doubt, not because the thing was
so, but because if it was not so, he would have to admit himself to
be not a noble hero living out the last days of a good life, but a
scoundrel, who sold, and still continued in his old age to sell, his
conscience.

"Best of all, go and serve," he continued; "the Tsar needs honest
men--and the country," he added. "Well, supposing I and the others
refused to serve, as you are doing? Who would be left? Here we are,
finding fault with the order of things, and yet not wishing to help the
Government."

With a deep sigh Nekhludoff made a low bow, shook the large, bony hand
condescendingly stretched out to him and left the room.

The General shook his head reprovingly, and rubbing his back, he again
went into the drawing-room where the artist was waiting for him. He had
already written down the answer given by the soul of Joan of Arc. The
General put on his pince-nez and read, "Will know one another by light
emanating from their astral bodies."

"Ah," said the General, with approval, and closed his eyes. "But how is
one to know if the light of all is alike?" he asked, and again crossed
fingers with the artist on the saucer.

The isvostchik drove Nekhludoff out of the gate.

It is dull here, sir, he said, turning to Nekhludoff. "I almost wished
to drive off without waiting for you."

Nekhludoff agreed. "Yes, it is dull," and he took a deep breath, and
looked up with a sense of relief at the grey clouds that were floating
in the sky, and at the glistening ripples made by the boats and steamers
on the Neva.



CHAPTER XX.

MASLOVA'S APPEAL.

The next day Maslova's case was to be examined at the Senate, and
Nekhludoff and the advocate met at the majestic portal of the building,
where several carriages were waiting. Ascending the magnificent and
imposing staircase to the first floor, the advocate, who knew all the
ins and outs of the place, turned to the left and entered through a door
which had the date of the introduction of the Code of Laws above it.

After taking off his overcoat in the first narrow room, he found out
from the attendant that the Senators had all arrived, and that the last
had just come in. Fanarin, in his swallow-tail coat, a white tie above
the white shirt-front, and a self-confident smile on his lips, passed
into the next room. In this room there were to the right a large
cupboard and a table, and to the left a winding staircase, which an
elegant official in uniform was descending with a portfolio under his
arm. In this room an old man with long, white hair and a patriarchal
appearance attracted every one's attention. He wore a short coat and
grey trousers. Two attendants stood respectfully beside him. The old man
with white hair entered the cupboard and shut himself in.

Fanarin noticed a fellow-advocate dressed in the same way as himself,
with a white tie and dress coat, and at once entered into an animated
conversation with him.

Nekhludoff was meanwhile examining the people in the room. The public
consisted of about 15 persons, of whom two were ladies--a young one with
a pince-nez, and an old, grey-haired one.

A case of libel was to be heard that day, and therefore the public were
more numerous than usual--chiefly persons belonging to the journalistic
world.

The usher, a red-cheeked, handsome man in a fine uniform, came up to
Fanarin and asked him what his business was. When he heard that it was
the case of Maslova, he noted something down and walked away. Then the
cupboard door opened and the old man with the patriarchal appearance
stepped out, no longer in a short coat but in a gold-trimmed attire,
which made him look like a bird, and with metal plates on his
breast. This funny costume seemed to make the old man himself feel
uncomfortable, and, walking faster than his wont, he hurried out of the
door opposite the entrance.

"That is Bay, a most estimable man," Fanarin said to Nekhludoff, and
then having introduced him to his colleague, he explained the case that
was about to be heard, which he considered very interesting.

The hearing of the case soon commenced, and Nekhludoff, with the
public, entered the left side of the Senate Chamber. They all, including
Fanarin, took their places behind a grating. Only the Petersburg
advocate went up to a desk in front of the grating.

The Senate Chamber was not so big as the Criminal Court; and was more
simply furnished, only the table in front of the senators was covered
with crimson, gold-trimmed velvet, instead of green cloth; but the
attributes of all places of judgment, i.e., the mirror of justice, the
icon, the emblem of hypocrisy, and the Emperor's portrait, the emblem of
servility, were there.

The usher announced, in the same solemn manner: "The Court is coming."
Every one rose in the same way, and the senators entered in their
uniforms and sat down on highbacked chairs and leant on the table,
trying to appear natural, just in the same way as the judges in the
Court of Law. There were four senators present--Nikitin, who took the
chair, a clean-shaved man with a narrow face and steely eyes; Wolf, with
significantly compressed lips, and little white hands, with which he
kept turning over the pages of the business papers; Skovorodnikoff,
a heavy, fat, pockmarked man--the learned lawyer; and Bay, the
patriarchal-looking man who had arrived last.

With the advocates entered the chief secretary and public prosecutor, a
lean, clean-shaven young man of medium height, a very dark complexion,
and sad, black eyes. Nekhludoff knew him at once, in spite of his
curious uniform and the fact that he had not seen him for six years. He
had been one of his best friends in Nekhludoff's student days.

"The public prosecutor Selenin?" Nekhludoff asked, turning to the
advocate.

"Yes. Why?"

"I know him well. He is a fine fellow."

"And a good public prosecutor; business-like. Now he is the man you
should have interested."

"He will act according to his conscience in any case," said Nekhludoff,
recalling the intimate relations and friendship between himself and
Selenin, and the attractive qualities of the latter--purity, honesty,
and good breeding in its best sense.

"Yes, there is no time now," whispered Fanarin, who was listening to the
report of the case that had commenced.

The Court of Justice was accused of having left a decision of the Court
of Law unaltered.

Nekhludoff listened and tried to make out the meaning of what was going
on; but, just as in the Criminal Court, his chief difficulty was
that not the evidently chief point, but some side issues, were being
discussed. The case was that of a newspaper which had published the
account of a swindle arranged by a director of a limited liability
company. It seemed that the only important question was whether the
director of the company really abused his trust, and how to stop him
from doing it. But the questions under consideration were whether the
editor had a right to publish this article of his contributor, and what
he had been guilty of in publishing it: slander or libel, and in what
way slander included libel, or libel included slander, and something
rather incomprehensible to ordinary people about all sorts of statutes
and resolutions passed by some General Department.

The only thing clear to Nekhludoff was that, in spite of what Wolf had
so strenuously insisted on, the day before, i.e., that the Senate could
not try a case on its merits, in this case he was evidently strongly
in favour of repealing the decision of the Court of Justice, and that
Selenin, in spite of his characteristic reticence, stated the opposite
opinion with quite unexpected warmth. The warmth, which surprised
Nekhludoff, evinced by the usually self-controlled Selenin, was due to
his knowledge of the director's shabbiness in money matters, and the
fact, which had accidentally come to his cars, that Wolf had been to a
swell dinner party at the swindler's house only a few days before.

Now that Wolf spoke on the case, guardedly enough, but with evident
bias, Selenin became excited, and expressed his opinion with too much
nervous irritation for an ordinary business transaction.

It was clear that Selenin's speech had offended Wolf. He grew red, moved
in his chair, made silent gestures of surprise, and at last rose, with
a very dignified and injured look, together with the other senators, and
went out into the debating-room.

"What particular case have you come about?" the usher asked again,
addressing Fanarin.

"I have already told you: Maslova's case."

"Yes, quite so. It is to be heard to-day, but--"

"But what?" the advocate asked.

"Well, you see, this case was to be examined without taking sides,
so that the senators will hardly come out again after passing the
resolution. But I will inform them."

"What do you mean?"

"I'll inform them; I'll inform them." And the usher again put something
down on his paper.

The Senators really meant to pronounce their decision concerning the
libel case, and then to finish the other business, Maslova's case among
it, over their tea and cigarettes, without leaving the debating-room.



CHAPTER XXI.

THE APPEAL DISMISSED.

As soon as the Senators were seated round the table in the
debating-room, Wolf began to bring forward with great animation all the
motives in favour of a repeal. The chairman, an ill-natured man at
best, was in a particularly bad humour that day. His thoughts were
concentrated on the words he had written down in his memoranda on the
occasion when not he but Viglanoff was appointed to the important post
he had long coveted. It was the chairman, Nikitin's, honest conviction
that his opinions of the officials of the two upper classes with which
he was in connection would furnish valuable material for the historians.
He had written a chapter the day before in which the officials of the
upper classes got it hot for preventing him, as he expressed it, from
averting the ruin towards which the present rulers of Russia were
driving it, which simply meant that they had prevented his getting a
better salary. And now he was considering what a new light to posterity
this chapter would shed on events.

"Yes, certainly," he said, in reply to the words addressed to him by
Wolf, without listening to them.

Bay was listening to Wolf with a sad face and drawing a garland on the
paper that lay before him. Bay was a Liberal of the very first water. He
held sacred the Liberal traditions of the sixth decade of this century,
and if he ever overstepped the limits of strict neutrality it was always
in the direction of Liberalism. So in this case; beside the fact that
the swindling director, who was prosecuting for libel, was a bad lot,
the prosecution of a journalist for libel in itself tending, as it did,
to restrict the freedom of the press, inclined Bay to reject the appeal.

When Wolf concluded his arguments Bay stopped drawing his garland and
began in a sad and gentle voice (he was sad because he was obliged to
demonstrate such truisms) concisely, simply and convincingly to show
how unfounded the accusation was, and then, bending his white head, he
continued drawing his garland.

Skovorodnikoff, who sat opposite Wolf, and, with his fat fingers, kept
shoving his beard and moustaches into his mouth, stopped chewing his
beard as soon as Bay was silent, and said with a loud, grating voice,
that, notwithstanding the fact of the director being a terrible
scoundrel, he would have been for the repeal of the sentence if there
were any legal reasons for it; but, as there were none, he was of Bay's
opinion. He was glad to put this spoke in Wolf's wheel.

The chairman agreed with Skovorodnikoff, and the appeal was rejected.

Wolf was dissatisfied, especially because it was like being caught
acting with dishonest partiality; so he pretended to be indifferent,
and, unfolding the document which contained Maslova's case, he became
engrossed in it. Meanwhile the Senators rang and ordered tea, and began
talking about the event that, together with the duel, was occupying the
Petersburgers.

It was the case of the chief of a Government department, who was accused
of the crime provided for in Statute 995.

"What nastiness," said Bay, with disgust.

"Why; where is the harm of it? I can show you a Russian book containing
the project of a German writer, who openly proposes that it should not
be considered a crime," said Skovorodnikoff, drawing in greedily the
fumes of the crumpled cigarette, which he held between his fingers close
to the palm, and he laughed boisterously.

"Impossible!" said Bay.

"I shall show it you," said Skovorodnikoff, giving the full title of the
book, and even its date and the name of its editor.

"I hear he has been appointed governor to some town in Siberia."

"That's fine. The archdeacon will meet him with a crucifix. They ought
to appoint an archdeacon of the same sort," said Skovorodnikoff. "I
could recommend them one," and he threw the end of his cigarette into
his saucer, and again shoved as much of his beard and moustaches as he
could into his mouth and began chewing them.

The usher came in and reported the advocate's and Nekhludoff's desire to
be present at the examination of Maslova's case.

"This case," Wolf said, "is quite romantic," and he told them what he
knew about Nekhludoff's relations with Maslova. When they had spoken
a little about it and finished their tea and cigarettes, the Senators
returned into the Senate Chamber and proclaimed their decision in the
libel case, and began to hear Maslova's case.

Wolf, in his thin voice, reported Maslova's appeal very fully, but
again not without some bias and an evident wish for the repeal of the
sentence.

"Have you anything to add?" the chairman said, turning to Fanarin.
Fanarin rose, and standing with his broad white chest expanded, proved
point by point, with wonderful exactness and persuasiveness, how the
Court had in six points strayed from the exact meaning of the law; and
besides this he touched, though briefly, on the merits of the case, and
on the crying injustice of the sentence. The tone of his speech was one
of apology to the Senators, who, with their penetration and judicial
wisdom, could not help seeing and understanding it all better than he
could. He was obliged to speak only because the duty he had undertaken
forced him to do so.

After Fanarin's speech one might have thought that there could not
remain the least doubt that the Senate ought to repeal the decision of
the Court. When he had finished his speech, Fanarin looked round with a
smile of triumph, seeing which Nekhludoff felt certain that the case was
won. But when he looked at the Senators he saw that Fanarin smiled and
triumphed all alone. The Senators and the Public Prosecutor did not
smile nor triumph, but looked like people wearied, and who were thinking
"We have often heard the like of you; it is all in vain," and were only
too glad when he stopped and ceased uselessly detaining them there.
Immediately after the end of the advocate's speech the chairman turned
to the Public Prosecutor. Selenin briefly and clearly expressed
himself in favour of leaving the decision of the Court unaltered, as
he considered all the reasons for appealing inadequate. After this the
Senators went out into the debating-room. They were divided in their
opinions. Wolf was in favour of altering the decision. Bay, when he
had understood the case, took up the same side with fervour, vividly
presenting the scene at the court to his companions as he clearly saw it
himself. Nikitin, who always was on the side of severity and formality,
took up the other side. All depended on Skovorodnikoff's vote, and he
voted for rejecting the appeal, because Nekhludoff's determination to
marry the woman on moral grounds was extremely repugnant to him.

Skovorodnikoff was a materialist, a Darwinian, and counted every
manifestation of abstract morality, or, worse still, religion, not only
as a despicable folly, but as a personal affront to himself. All this
bother about a prostitute, and the presence of a celebrated advocate and
Nekhludoff in the Senate were in the highest degree repugnant to him.
So he shoved his beard into his mouth and made faces, and very skilfully
pretended to know nothing of this case, excepting that the reasons for
an appeal were insufficient, and that he, therefore, agreed with the
chairman to leave the decision of the Court unaltered.

So the sentence remained unrepealed.



CHAPTER XXII.

AN OLD FRIEND.

"Terrible," said Nekhludoff, as he went out into the waiting-room with
the advocate, who was arranging the papers in his portfolio. "In a
matter which is perfectly clear they attach all the importance to the
form and reject the appeal. Terrible!"

"The case was spoiled in the Criminal Court," said the advocate.

"And Selenin, too, was in favour of the rejection. Terrible! terrible!"
Nekhludoff repeated. "What is to be done now?"

"We will appeal to His Majesty, and you can hand in the petition
yourself while you are here. I will write it for you."

At this moment little Wolf, with his stars and uniform, came out into
the waiting-room and approached Nekhludoff. "It could not be helped,
dear Prince. The reasons for an appeal were not sufficient," he said,
shrugging his narrow shoulders and closing his eyes, and then he went
his way.

After Wolf, Selenin came out too, having heard from the Senators that
his old friend Nekhludoff was there.

"Well, I never expected to see you here," he said, coming up to
Nekhludoff, and smiling only with his lips while his eyes remained sad.
"I did not know you were in Petersburg."

"And I did not know you were Public Prosecutor-in-Chief."

"How is it you are in the Senate?" asked Selenin. "I had heard, by the
way, that you were in Petersburg. But what are you doing here?"

"Here? I am here because I hoped to find justice and save a woman
innocently condemned."

"What woman?"

"The one whose case has just been decided."

"Oh! Maslova's case," said Selenin, suddenly remembering it. "The appeal
had no grounds whatever."

"It is not the appeal; it's the woman who is innocent, and is being
punished."

Selenin sighed. "That may well be, but----"

"Not _may be_, but is."

"How do you know?"

"Because I was on the jury. I know how we made the mistake."

Selenin became thoughtful. "You should have made a statement at the
time," he said.

"I did make the statement."

"It should have been put down in an official report. If this had been
added to the petition for the appeal--"

"Yes, but still, as it is, the verdict is evidently absurd."

"The Senate has no right to say so. If the Senate took upon itself to
repeal the decision of the law courts according to its own views as
to the justice of the decisions in themselves, the verdict of the jury
would lose all its meaning, not to mention that the Senate would have
no basis to go upon, and would run the risk of infringing justice rather
than upholding it," said Selenin, calling to mind the case that had just
been heard.

"All I know is that this woman is quite innocent, and that the last
hope of saving her from an unmerited punishment is gone. The grossest
injustice has been confirmed by the highest court."

"It has not been confirmed. The Senate did not and cannot enter into
the merits of the case in itself," said Selenin. Always busy and rarely
going out into society, he had evidently heard nothing of Nekhludoff's
romance. Nekhludoff noticed it, and made up his mind that it was best to
say nothing about his special relations with Maslova.

"You are probably staying with your aunt," Selenin remarked, apparently
wishing to change the subject. "She told me you were here yesterday, and
she invited me to meet you in the evening, when some foreign preacher
was to lecture," and Selenin again smiled only with his lips.

"Yes, I was there, but left in disgust," said Nekhludoff angrily, vexed
that Selenin had changed the subject.

"Why with disgust? After all, it is a manifestation of religious
feeling, though one-sided and sectarian," said Selenin.

"Why, it's only some kind of whimsical folly."

"Oh, dear, no. The curious thing is that we know the teaching of our
church so little that we see some new kind of revelation in what are,
after all, our own fundamental dogmas," said Selenin, as if hurrying to
let his old friend know his new views.

Nekhludoff looked at Selenin scrutinisingly and with surprise, and
Selenin dropped his eyes, in which appeared an expression not only of
sadness but also of ill-will.

"Do you, then, believe in the dogmas of the church?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Of course I do," replied Selenin, gazing straight into Nekhludoff's
eyes with a lifeless look.

Nekhludoff sighed. "It is strange," he said.

"However, we shall have a talk some other time," said Selenin. "I
am coming," he added, in answer to the usher, who had respectfully
approached him. "Yes, we must meet again," he went on with a sigh. "But
will it be possible for me to find you? You will always find me in at
seven o'clock. My address is Nadejdinskaya," and he gave the number.
"Ah, time does not stand still," and he turned to go, smiling only with
his lips.

"I will come if I can," said Nekhludoff, feeling that a man once
near and dear to him had, by this brief conversation, suddenly become
strange, distant, and incomprehensible, if not hostile to him.



CHAPTER XXIII.

THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR.

When Nekhludoff knew Selenin as a student, he was a good son, a true
friend, and for his years an educated man of the world, with much tact;
elegant, handsome, and at the same time truthful and honest. He learned
well, without much exertion and with no pedantry, receiving gold medals
for his essays. He considered the service of mankind, not only in words
but in acts, to be the aim of his young life. He saw no other way of
being useful to humanity than by serving the State. Therefore, as soon
as he had completed his studies, he systematically examined all the
activities to which he might devote his life, and decided to enter the
Second Department of the Chancellerie, where the laws are drawn up, and
he did so. But, in spite of the most scrupulous and exact discharge of
the duties demanded of him, this service gave no satisfaction to his
desire of being useful, nor could he awake in himself the consciousness
that he was doing "the right thing."

This dissatisfaction was so much increased by the friction with his very
small-minded and vain fellow officials that he left the Chancellerie and
entered the Senate. It was better there, but the same dissatisfaction
still pursued him; he felt it to be very different from what he had
expected, and from what ought to be.

And now that he was in the Senate his relatives obtained for him the
post of Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and he had to go in a carriage,
dressed in an embroidered uniform and a white linen apron, to thank
all sorts of people for having placed him in the position of a lackey.
However much he tried he could find no reasonable explanation for the
existence of this post, and felt, more than in the Senate, that it
was not "the right thing," and yet he could not refuse it for fear of
hurting those who felt sure they were giving him much pleasure by this
appointment, and because it flattered the lowest part of his nature. It
pleased him to see himself in a mirror in his gold-embroidered uniform,
and to accept the deference paid him by some people because of his
position.

Something of the same kind happened when he married. A very brilliant
match, from a worldly point of view, was arranged for him, and he
married chiefly because by refusing he would have had to hurt the
young lady who wished to be married to him, and those who arranged the
marriage, and also because a marriage with a nice young girl of noble
birth flattered his vanity and gave him pleasure. But this marriage
very soon proved to be even less "the right thing" than the Government
service and his position at Court.

After the birth of her first child the wife decided to have no more,
and began leading that luxurious worldly life in which he now had to
participate whether he liked or not.

She was not particularly handsome, and was faithful to him, and she
seemed, in spite of all the efforts it cost her, to derive nothing but
weariness from the life she led, yet she perseveringly continued to live
it, though it was poisoning her husband's life. And all his efforts
to alter this life was shattered, as against a stone wall, by her
conviction, which all her friends and relatives supported, that all was
as it should be.

The child, a little girl with bare legs and long golden curls, was a
being perfectly foreign to him, chiefly because she was trained quite
otherwise than he wished her to be. There sprung up between the husband
and wife the usual misunderstanding, without even the wish to understand
each other, and then a silent warfare, hidden from outsiders and
tempered by decorum. All this made his life at home a burden, and became
even less "the right thing" than his service and his post.

But it was above all his attitude towards religion which was not "the
right thing." Like every one of his set and his time, by the growth of
his reason he broke without the least effort the nets of the religious
superstitions in which he was brought up, and did not himself exactly
know when it was that he freed himself of them. Being earnest and
upright, he did not, during his youth and intimacy with Nekhludoff as a
student, conceal his rejection of the State religion. But as years
went on and he rose in the service, and especially at the time of the
reaction towards conservatism in society, his spiritual freedom stood in
his way.

At home, when his father died, he had to be present at the masses
said for his soul, and his mother wished him to go to confession or to
communion, and it was in a way expected, by public opinion, but above
all, Government service demanded that he should be present at all sorts
of services, consecrations, thanksgivings, and the like. Hardly a day
passed without some outward religious form having to be observed.

When present at these services he had to pretend that he believed in
something which he did not believe in, and being truthful he could not
do this. The alternative was, having made up his mind that all these
outward signs were deceitful, to alter his life in such a way that he
would not have to be present at such ceremonials. But to do what
seemed so simple would have cost a great deal. Besides encountering the
perpetual hostility of all those who were near to him, he would have to
give up the service and his position, and sacrifice his hopes of being
useful to humanity by his service, now and in the future. To make such a
sacrifice one would have to be firmly convinced of being right.

And he was firmly convinced he was right, as no educated man of our
time can help being convinced who knows a little history and how the
religions, and especially Church Christianity, originated.

But under the stress of his daily life he, a truthful man, allowed a
little falsehood to creep in. He said that in order to do justice to
an unreasonable thing one had to study the unreasonable thing. It was a
little falsehood, but it sunk him into the big falsehood in which he was
now caught.

Before putting to himself the question whether the orthodoxy in which
he was born and bred, and which every one expected him to accept, and
without which he could not continue his useful occupation, contained the
truth, he had already decided the answer. And to clear up the question
he did not read Voltaire, Schopenhauer, Herbert Spencer, or Comte, but
the philosophical works of Hegel and the religious works of Vinet and
Khomyakoff, and naturally found in them what he wanted, i.e., something
like peace of mind and a vindication of that religious teaching in which
he was educated, which his reason had long ceased to accept, but without
which his whole life was filled with unpleasantness which could all be
removed by accepting the teaching.

And so he adopted all the usual sophistries which go to prove that
a single human reason cannot know the truth, that the truth is only
revealed to an association of men, and can only be known by revelation,
that revelation is kept by the church, etc. And so he managed to be
present at prayers, masses for the dead, to confess, make signs of the
cross in front of icons, with a quiet mind, without being conscious of
the lie, and to continue in the service which gave him the feeling of
being useful and some comfort in his joyless family life. Although he
believed this, he felt with his entire being that this religion of his,
more than all else, was not "the right thing," and that is why his eyes
always looked sad.

And seeing Nekhludoff, whom he had known before all these lies had
rooted themselves within him, reminded him of what he then was. It was
especially after he had hurried to hint at his religious views that he
had most strongly felt all this "not the right thing," and had become
painfully sad. Nekhludoff felt it also after the first joy of meeting
his old friend had passed, and therefore, though they promised each
other to meet, they did not take any steps towards an interview, and did
not again see each other during this stay of Nekhludoff's in Petersburg.



CHAPTER XXIV.

MARIETTE TEMPTS NEKHLUDOFF.

When they left the Senate, Nekhludoff and the advocate walked on
together, the advocate having given the driver of his carriage orders
to follow them. The advocate told Nekhludoff the story of the chief of a
Government department, about whom the Senators had been talking: how the
thing was found out, and how the man, who according to law should
have been sent to the mines, had been appointed Governor of a town
in Siberia. Then he related with particular pleasure how several
high-placed persons stole a lot of money collected for the erection of
the still unfinished monument which they had passed that morning; also,
how the mistress of So-and-so got a lot of money at the Stock Exchange,
and how So-and-so agreed with So-and-so to sell him his wife. The
advocate began another story about a swindle, and all sorts of crimes
committed by persons in high places, who, instead of being in prison,
sat on presidential chairs in all sorts of Government institutions.
These tales, of which the advocate seemed to have an unending supply,
gave him much pleasure, showing as they did, with perfect clearness,
that his means of getting money were quite just and innocent compared
to the means which the highest officials in Petersburg made use of.
The advocate was therefore surprised when Nekhludoff took an isvostchik
before hearing the end of the story, said good-bye, and left him.
Nekhludoff felt very sad. It was chiefly the rejection of the appeal by
the Senate, confirming the senseless torments that the innocent Maslova
was enduring, that saddened him, and also the fact that this rejection
made it still harder for him to unite his fate with hers. The stories
about existing evils, which the advocate recounted with such relish,
heightened his sadness, and so did the cold, unkind look that the
once sweet-natured, frank, noble Selenin had given him, and which kept
recurring to his mind.

On his return the doorkeeper handed him a note, and said, rather
scornfully, that some kind of woman had written it in the hall. It was
a note from Shoustova's mother. She wrote that she had come to thank
her daughter's benefactor and saviour, and to implore him to come to see
them on the Vasilievsky, 5th Line, house No. --. This was very necessary
because of Vera Doukhova. He need not be afraid that they would weary
him with expressions of gratitude. They would not speak their gratitude,
but be simply glad to see him. Would he not come next morning, if he
could?

There was another note from Bogotyreff, a former fellow-officer,
aide-de-camp to the Emperor, whom Nekhludoff had asked to hand
personally to the Emperor his petition on behalf of the sectarians.
Bogotyreff wrote, in his large, firm hand, that he would put the
petition into the Emperor's own hands, as he had promised; but that it
had occurred to him that it might be better for Nekhludoff first to go
and see the person on whom the matter depended.

After the impressions received during the last few days, Nekhludoff felt
perfectly hopeless of getting anything done. The plans he had formed
in Moscow seemed now something like the dreams of youth, which are
inevitably followed by disillusion when life comes to be faced. Still,
being now in Petersburg, he considered it his duty to do all he had
intended, and he resolved next day, after consulting Bogotyreff, to
act on his advice and see the person on whom the case of the sectarians
depended.

He got out the sectarians' petition from his portfolio, and began
reading it over, when there was a knock at his door, and a footman came
in with a message from the Countess Katerina Ivanovna, who asked him to
come up and have a cup of tea with her.

Nekhludoff said he would come at once, and having put the papers back
into the portfolio, he went up to his aunt's. He looked out of a window
on his way, and saw Mariette's pair of bays standing in front of the
house, and he suddenly brightened and felt inclined to smile.

Mariette, with a hat on her head, not in black but with a light dress
of many shades, sat with a cup in her hand beside the Countess's easy
chair, prattling about something while her beautiful, laughing
eyes glistened. She had said something funny--something indecently
funny--just as Nekhludoff entered the room. He knew it by the way she
laughed, and by the way the good-natured Countess Katerina Ivanovna's
fat body was shaking with laughter; while Mariette, her smiling mouth
slightly drawn to one side, her head a little bent, a peculiarly
mischievous expression in her merry, energetic face, sat silently
looking at her companion. From a few words which he overheard,
Nekhludoff guessed that they were talking of the second piece of
Petersburg news, the episode of the Siberian Governor, and that it was
in reference to this subject that Mariette had said something so funny
that the Countess could not control herself for a long time.

"You will kill me," she said, coughing.

After saying "How d'you do?" Nekhludoff sat down. He was about to
censure Mariette in his mind for her levity when, noticing the serious
and even slightly dissatisfied look in his eyes, she suddenly, to please
him, changed not only the expression of her face, but also the attitude
of her mind; for she felt the wish to please him as soon as she looked
at him. She suddenly turned serious, dissatisfied with her life, as if
seeking and striving after something; it was not that she pretended, but
she really reproduced in herself the very same state of mind that he was
in, although it would have been impossible for her to express in words
what was the state of Nekhludoff's mind at that moment.

She asked him how he had accomplished his tasks. He told her about his
failure in the Senate and his meeting Selenin.

"Oh, what a pure soul! He is, indeed, a chevalier sans peur et sans
reproche. A pure soul!" said both ladies, using the epithet commonly
applied to Selenin in Petersburg society.

"What is his wife like?" Nekhludoff asked.

"His wife? Well, I do not wish to judge, but she does not understand
him."

"Is it possible that he, too, was for rejecting the appeal?" Mariette
asked with real sympathy. "It is dreadful. How sorry I am for her," she
added with a sigh.

He frowned, and in order to change the subject began to speak about
Shoustova, who had been imprisoned in the fortress and was now set free
through the influence of Mariette's husband. He thanked her for her
trouble, and was going on to say how dreadful he thought it, that this
woman and the whole of her family had suffered merely, because no one
had reminded the authorities about them, but Mariette interrupted him
and expressed her own indignation.

"Say nothing about it to me," she said. "When my husband told me she
could be set free, it was this that struck me, 'What was she kept in
prison for if she is innocent?'" She went on expressing what Nekhludoff
was about to say.

"It is revolting--revolting."

Countess Katerina Ivanovna noticed that Mariette was coquetting with her
nephew, and this amused her. "What do you think?" she said, when they
were silent. "Supposing you come to Aline's to-morrow night. Kiesewetter
will be there. And you, too," she said, turning to Mariette. "_Il vous a
remarque_," she went on to her nephew. "He told me that what you say (I
repeated it all to him) is a very good sign, and that you will certainly
come to Christ. You must come absolutely. Tell him to, Mariette, and
come yourself."

"Countess, in the first place, I have no right whatever to give any kind
of advice to the Prince," said Mariette, and gave Nekhludoff a look that
somehow established a full comprehension between them of their attitude
in relation to the Countess's words and evangelicalism in general.
"Secondly, I do not much care, you know."

"Yes, I know you always do things the wrong way round, and according to
your own ideas."

"My own ideas? I have faith like the most simple peasant woman," said
Mariette with a smile. "And, thirdly, I am going to the French Theatre
to-morrow night."

"Ah! And have you seen that--What's her name?" asked Countess Katerina
Ivanovna. Mariette gave the name of a celebrated French actress.

"You must go, most decidedly; she is wonderful."

"Whom am I to see first, ma tante--the actress or the preacher?"
Nekhludoff said with a smile.

"Please don't catch at my words."

"I should think the preacher first and then the actress, or else the
desire for the sermon might vanish altogether," said Nekhludoff.

"No; better begin with the French Theatre, and do penance afterwards."

"Now, then, you are not to hold me up for ridicule. The preacher is the
preacher and the theatre is the theatre. One need not weep in order to
be saved. One must have faith, and then one is sure to be gay."

"You, ma tante, preach better than any preacher."

"Do you know what?" said Mariette. "Come into my box to-morrow."

"I am afraid I shall not be able to."

The footman interrupted the conversation by announcing a visitor. It
was the secretary of a philanthropic society of which the Countess was
president.

"Oh, that is the dullest of men. I think I shall receive him out there,
and return to you later on. Mariette, give him his tea," said the
Countess, and left the room, with her quick, wriggling walk.

Mariette took the glove off her firm, rather flat hand, the fourth
finger of which was covered with rings.

"Want any?" she said, taking hold of the silver teapot, under which a
spirit lamp was burning, and extending her little finger curiously. Her
face looked sad and serious.

"It is always terribly painful to me to notice that people whose opinion
I value confound me with the position I am placed in." She seemed ready
to cry as she said these last words. And though these words had no
meaning, or at any rate a very indefinite meaning, they seemed to be of
exceptional depth, meaning, or goodness to Nekhludoff, so much was he
attracted by the look of the bright eyes which accompanied the words of
this young, beautiful, and well-dressed woman.

Nekhludoff looked at her in silence, and could not take his eyes from
her face.

"You think I do not understand you and all that goes on in you. Why,
everybody knows what you are doing. _C'est le secret de polichinelle_.
And I am delighted with your work, and think highly of you."

"Really, there is nothing to be delighted with; and I have done so
little as Yet."

"No matter. I understand your feelings, and I understand her. All
right, all right. I will say nothing more about it," she said, noticing
displeasure on his face. "But I also understand that after seeing all
the suffering and the horror in the prisons," Mariette went on, her only
desire that of attracting him, and guessing with her woman's instinct
what was dear and important to him, "you wish to help the sufferers,
those who are made to suffer so terribly by other men, and their cruelty
and indifference. I understand the willingness to give one's life, and
could give mine in such a cause, but we each have our own fate."

"Are you, then, dissatisfied with your fate?"

"I?" she asked, as if struck with surprise that such a question could
be put to her. "I have to be satisfied, and am satisfied. But there is a
worm that wakes up--"

"And he must not be allowed to fall asleep again. It is a voice that
must be obeyed," Nekhludoff said, falling into the trap.

Many a time later on Nekhludoff remembered with shame his talk with her.
He remembered her words, which were not so much lies as imitations of
his own, and her face, which seemed looking at him with sympathetic
attention when he told her about the terrors of the prison and of his
impressions in the country.

When the Countess returned they were talking not merely like old, but
like exclusive friends who alone understood one another. They were
talking about the injustice of power, of the sufferings of the
unfortunate, the poverty of the people, yet in reality in the midst of
the sound of their talk their eyes, gazing at each other, kept asking,
"Can you love me?" and answering, "I can," and the sex-feeling, taking
the most unexpected and brightest forms, drew them to each other. As she
was going away she told him that she would always be willing to serve
him in any way she could, and asked him to come and see her, if only for
a moment, in the theatre next day, as she had a very important thing to
tell him about.

"Yes, and when shall I see you again?" she added, with a sigh, carefully
drawing the glove over her jewelled hand.

"Say you will come."

Nekhludoff promised.

That night, when Nekhludoff was alone in his room, and lay down after
putting out his candle, he could not sleep. He thought of Maslova, of
the decision of the Senate, of his resolve to follow her in any case, of
his having given up the land. The face of Mariette appeared to him as if
in answer to those thoughts--her look, her sigh, her words, "When shall
I see you again?" and her smile seemed vivid as if he really saw her,
and he also smiled. "Shall I be doing right in going to Siberia? And
have I done right in divesting myself of my wealth?" And the answers to
the questions on this Petersburg night, on which the daylight streamed
into the window from under the blind, were quite indefinite. All seemed
mixed in his head. He recalled his former state of mind, and the former
sequence of his thoughts, but they had no longer their former power or
validity.

"And supposing I have invented all this, and am unable to live it
through--supposing I repent of having acted right," he thought; and
unable to answer he was seized with such anguish and despair as he had
long not felt. Unable to free himself from his perplexity, he fell into
a heavy sleep, such as he had slept after a heavy loss at cards.



CHAPTER XXV.

LYDIA SHOUSTOVA'S HOME.

Nekhludoff awoke next morning feeling as if he had been guilty of some
iniquity the day before. He began considering. He could not remember
having done anything wrong; he had committed no evil act, but he had had
evil thoughts. He had thought that all his present resolutions to marry
Katusha and to give up his land were unachievable dreams; that he should
be unable to bear it; that it was artificial, unnatural; and that he
would have to go on living as he lived.

He had committed no evil action, but, what was far worse than an
evil action, he had entertained evil thoughts whence all evil actions
proceed. An evil action may not be repeated, and can be repented of; but
evil thoughts generate all evil actions.

An evil action only smooths the path for other evil acts; evil thoughts
uncontrollably drag one along that path.

When Nekhludoff repeated in his mind the thoughts of the day before, he
was surprised that he could for a moment have believed these thoughts.
However new and difficult that which he had decided to do might be, he
knew that it was the only possible way of life for him now, and however
easy and natural it might have been to return to his former state, he
knew that state to be death.

Yesterday's temptation seemed like the feeling when one awakes from deep
sleep, and, without feeling sleepy, wants to lie comfortably in bed a
little longer, yet knows that it is time to rise and commence the glad
and important work that awaits one.

On that, his last day in Petersburg, he went in the morning to the
Vasilievski Ostrov to see Shoustova. Shoustova lived on the second
floor, and having been shown the back stairs, Nekhludoff entered
straight into the hot kitchen, which smelt strongly of food. An elderly
woman, with turned-up sleeves, with an apron and spectacles, stood by
the fire stirring something in a steaming pan.

"Whom do you want?" she asked severely, looking at him over her
spectacles.

Before Nekhludoff had time to answer, an expression of fright and joy
appeared on her face.

"Oh, Prince!" she exclaimed, wiping her hands on her apron. "But why
have you come the back way? Our Benefactor! I am her mother. They have
nearly killed my little girl. You have saved us," she said, catching
hold of Nekhludoff's hand and trying to kiss it.

"I went to see you yesterday. My sister asked me to. She is here. This
way, this way, please," said Shoustova's mother, as she led the way
through a narrow door, and a dark passage, arranging her hair and
pulling at her tucked-up skirt. "My sister's name is Kornilova. You must
have heard of her," she added, stopping before a closed door. "She was
mixed up in a political affair. An extremely clever woman!"

Shoustova's mother opened the door and showed Nekhludoff into a little
room where on a sofa with a table before it sat a plump, short girl with
fair hair that curled round her pale, round face, which was very like
her mother's. She had a striped cotton blouse on.

Opposite her, in an armchair, leaning forward, so that he was nearly
bent double, sat a young fellow with a slight, black beard and
moustaches.

"Lydia, Prince Nekhludoff!" he said.

The pale girl jumped up, nervously pushing back a lock of hair behind
her ear, and gazing at the newcomer with a frightened look in her large,
grey eyes.

"So you are that dangerous woman whom Vera Doukhova wished me to
intercede for?" Nekhludoff asked, with a smile.

"Yes, I am," said Lydia Shoustova, her broad, kind, child-like smile
disclosing a row of beautiful teeth. "It was aunt who was so anxious to
see you. Aunt!" she called out, in a pleasant, tender voice through a
door.

"Your imprisonment grieved Vera Doukhova very much," said Nekhludoff.

"Take a seat here, or better here," said Shoustova, pointing to the
battered easy-chair from which the young man had just risen.

"My cousin, Zakharov," she said, noticing that Nekhludoff looked at the
young man.

The young man greeted the visitor with a smile as kindly as Shoustova's,
and when Nekhludoff sat down he brought himself another chair, and sat
by his side. A fair-haired schoolboy of about 10 also came into the room
and silently sat down on the window-sill.

"Vera Doukhova is a great friend of my aunt's, but I hardly know her,"
said Shoustova.

Then a woman with a very pleasant face, with a white blouse and leather
belt, came in from the next room.

"How do you do? Thanks for coming," she began as soon as she had taken
the place next Shoustova's on the sofa.

"Well, and how is Vera. You have seen her? How does she bear her fate?"

"She does not complain," said Nekhludoff. "She says she feels perfectly
happy."'

"Ah, that's like Vera. I know her," said the aunt, smiling and shaking
her head. "One must know her. She has a fine character. Everything for
others; nothing for herself."

"No, she asked nothing for herself, but only seemed concerned about your
niece. What seemed to trouble her most was, as she said, that your niece
was imprisoned for nothing."

"Yes, that's true," said the aunt. "It is a dreadful business. She
suffered, in reality, because of me."

"Not at all, aunt. I should have taken the papers without you all the
same."

"Allow me to know better," said the aunt. "You see," she went on to
Nekhludoff, "it all happened because a certain person asked me to keep
his papers for a time, and I, having no house at the time, brought them
to her. And that very night the police searched her room and took her
and the papers, and have kept her up to now, demanding that she should
say from whom she had them."

"But I never told them," said Shoustova quickly, pulling nervously at a
lock that was not even out of place.

"I never said you did," answered the aunt.

"If they took Mitin up it was certainly not through me," said Shoustova,
blushing, and looking round uneasily.

"Don't speak about it, Lydia dear," said her mother.

"Why not? I should like to relate it," said Shoustova, no longer smiling
nor pulling her lock, but twisting it round her finger and getting
redder.

"Don't forget what happened yesterday when you began talking about it."

"Not at all---Leave me alone, mamma. I did not tell, I only kept quiet.
When he examined me about Mitin and about aunt, I said nothing, and told
him I would not answer."

"Then this--Petrov--"

"Petrov is a spy, a gendarme, and a blackguard," put in the aunt, to
explain her niece's words to Nekhludoff.

"Then he began persuading," continued Shoustova, excitedly and
hurriedly. "'Anything you tell me,' he said, 'can harm no one; on the
contrary, if you tell me, we may be able to set free innocent people
whom we may be uselessly tormenting.' Well, I still said I would not
tell. Then he said, 'All right, don't tell, but do not deny what I am
going to say.' And he named Mitin."

"Don't talk about it," said the aunt.

"Oh, aunt, don't interrupt," and she went on pulling the lock of hair
and looking round. "And then, only fancy, the next day I hear--they let
me know by knocking at the wall--that Mitin is arrested. Well, I think
I have betrayed him, and this tormented me so--it tormented me so that I
nearly went mad."

"And it turned out that it was not at all because of you he was taken
up?"

"Yes, but I didn't know. I think, 'There, now, I have betrayed him.' I
walk and walk up and down from wall to wall, and cannot help thinking.
I think, 'I have betrayed him.' I lie down and cover myself up, and hear
something whispering, 'Betrayed! betrayed Mitin! Mitin betrayed!' I
know it is an hallucination, but cannot help listening. I wish to
fall asleep, I cannot. I wish not to think, and cannot cease. That is
terrible!" and as Shoustova spoke she got more and more excited, and
twisted and untwisted the lock of hair round her finger.

"Lydia, dear, be calm," the mother said, touching her shoulder.

But Shoustova could not stop herself.

"It is all the more terrible--" she began again, but did not finish, and
jumping up with a cry rushed out of the room.

Her mother turned to follow her.

"They ought to be hanged, the rascals!" said the schoolboy who was
sitting on the window-sill.

"What's that?" said the mother.

"I only said--Oh, it's nothing," the schoolboy answered, and taking a
cigarette that lay on the table, he began to smoke.



CHAPTER XXVI.

LYDIA'S AUNT.

"Yes, that solitary confinement is terrible for the young," said the
aunt, shaking her head and also lighting a cigarette.

"I should say for every one," Nekhludoff replied.

"No, not for all," answered the aunt. "For the real revolutionists, I
have been told, it is rest and quiet. A man who is wanted by the police
lives in continual anxiety, material want, and fear for himself and
others, and for his cause, and at last, when he is taken up and it is
all over, and all responsibility is off his shoulders, he can sit and
rest. I have been told they actually feel joyful when taken up. But the
young and innocent (they always first arrest the innocent, like Lydia),
for them the first shock is terrible. It is not that they deprive you of
freedom; and the bad food and bad air--all that is nothing. Three times
as many privations would be easily borne if it were not for the moral
shock when one is first taken."

"Have you experienced it?"

"I? I was twice in prison," she answered, with a sad, gentle smile.
"When I was arrested for the first time I had done nothing. I was 22,
had a child, and was expecting another. Though the loss of freedom and
the parting with my child and husband were hard, they were nothing when
compared with what I felt when I found out that I had ceased being a
human creature and had become a thing. I wished to say good-bye to my
little daughter. I was told to go and get into the trap. I asked where I
was being taken to. The answer was that I should know when I got there.
I asked what I was accused of, but got no reply. After I had been
examined, and after they had undressed me and put numbered prison
clothes on me, they led me to a vault, opened a door, pushed me in, and
left me alone; a sentinel, with a loaded gun, paced up and down in front
of my door, and every now and then looked in through a crack--I felt
terribly depressed. What struck me most at the time was that the
gendarme officer who examined me offered me a cigarette. So he knew that
people liked smoking, and must know that they liked freedom and light;
and that mothers love their children, and children their mothers. Then
how could they tear me pitilessly from all that was dear to me, and
lock me up in prison like a wild animal? That sort of thing could not
be borne without evil effects. Any one who believes in God and men, and
believes that men love one another, will cease to believe it after all
that. I have ceased to believe in humanity since then, and have grown
embittered," she finished, with a smile.

Shoustova's mother came in at the door through which her daughter had
gone out, and said that Lydia was very much upset, and would not come in
again.

"And what has this young life been ruined for?" said the aunt. "What is
especially painful to me is that I am the involuntary cause of it."

"She will recover in the country, with God's help," said the mother. "We
shall send her to her father."

"Yes, if it were not for you she would have perished altogether," said
the aunt. "Thank you. But what I wished to see you for is this: I wished
to ask you to take a letter to Vera Doukhova," and she got the letter
out of her pocket.

"The letter is not closed; you may read and tear it up, or hand it to
her, according to how far it coincides with your principles," she said.
"It contains nothing compromising."

Nekhludoff took the letter, and, having promised to give it to Vera
Doukhova, he took his leave and went away. He sealed the letter without
reading it, meaning to take it to its destination.



CHAPTER XXVII.

THE STATE CHURCH AND THE PEOPLE.

The last thing that kept Nekhludoff in Petersburg was the case of the
sectarians, whose petition he intended to get his former fellow-officer,
Aide-de-camp Bogatyreff, to hand to the Tsar. He came to Bogatyreff in
the morning, and found him about to go out, though still at breakfast.
Bogatyreff was not tall, but firmly built and wonderfully strong (he
could bend a horseshoe), a kind, honest, straight, and even liberal man.
In spite of these qualities, he was intimate at Court, and very fond of
the Tsar and his family, and by some strange method he managed, while
living in that highest circle, to see nothing but the good in it and to
take no part in the evil and corruption. He never condemned anybody
nor any measure, and either kept silent or spoke in a bold, loud voice,
almost shouting what he had to say, and often laughing in the same
boisterous manner. And he did not do it for diplomatic reasons, but
because such was his character.

"Ah, that's right that you have come. Would you like some breakfast?
Sit down, the beefsteaks are fine! I always begin with something
substantial--begin and finish, too. Ha! ha! ha! Well, then, have a glass
of wine," he shouted, pointing to a decanter of claret. "I have been
thinking of you. I will hand on the petition. I shall put it into his
own hands. You may count on that, only it occurred to me that it would
be best for you to call on Toporoff."

Nekhludoff made a wry face at the mention of Toporoff.

"It all depends on him. He will be consulted, anyhow. And perhaps he may
himself meet your wishes."

"If you advise it I shall go."

"That's right. Well, and how does Petersburg agree with you?" shouted
Bogatyreff. "Tell me. Eh?"

"I feel myself getting hypnotised," replied Nekhludoff.

"Hypnotised!" Bogatyreff repeated, and burst out laughing. "You won't
have anything? Well, just as you please," and he wiped his moustaches
with his napkin. "Then you'll go? Eh? If he does not do it, give the
petition to me, and I shall hand it on to-morrow." Shouting these words,
he rose, crossed himself just as naturally as he had wiped his mouth,
and began buckling on his sword.

"And now good-bye; I must go. We are both going out," said Nekhludoff,
and shaking Bogatyreff's strong, broad hand, and with the sense of
pleasure which the impression of something healthy and unconsciously
fresh always gave him, Nekhludoff parted from Bogatyreff on the
door-steps.

Though he expected no good result from his visit, still Nekhludoff,
following Bogatyreff's advice, went to see Toporoff, on whom the
sectarians' fate depended.

The position occupied by Toporoff, involving as it did an incongruity of
purpose, could only be held by a dull man devoid of moral sensibility.
Toporoff possessed both these negative qualities. The incongruity of the
position he occupied was this. It was his duty to keep up and to defend,
by external measures, not excluding violence, that Church which, by its
own declaration, was established by God Himself and could not be shaken
by the gates of hell nor by anything human. This divine and immutable
God-established institution had to be sustained and defended by a human
institution--the Holy Synod, managed by Toporoff and his officials.
Toporoff did not see this contradiction, nor did he wish to see it, and
he was therefore much concerned lest some Romish priest, some pastor, or
some sectarian should destroy that Church which the gates of hell could
not conquer.

Toporoff, like all those who are quite destitute of the fundamental
religious feeling that recognises the equality and brotherhood of men,
was fully convinced that the common people were creatures entirely
different from himself, and that the people needed what he could very
well do without, for at the bottom of his heart he believed in nothing,
and found such a state very convenient and pleasant. Yet he feared lest
the people might also come to such a state, and looked upon it as his
sacred duty, as he called it, to save the people therefrom.

A certain cookery book declares that some crabs like to be boiled alive.
In the same way he thought and spoke as if the people liked being kept
in superstition; only he meant this in a literal sense, whereas the
cookery book did not mean its words literally.

His feelings towards the religion he was keeping up were the same as
those of the poultry-keeper towards the carrion he fed his fowls on.
Carrion was very disgusting, but the fowls liked it; therefore it was
right to feed the fowls on carrion. Of course all this worship of the
images of the Iberian, Kasan and Smolensk Mothers of God was a gross
superstition, but the people liked it and believed in it, and therefore
the superstition must be kept up.

Thus thought Toporoff, not considering that the people only liked
superstition because there always have been, and still are, men like
himself who, being enlightened, instead of using their light to help
others to struggle out of their dark ignorance, use it to plunge them
still deeper into it.

When Nekhludoff entered the reception-room Toporoff was in his study
talking with an abbess, a lively and aristocratic lady, who was
spreading the Greek orthodox faith in Western Russia among the Uniates
(who acknowledge the Pope of Rome), and who have the Greek religion
enforced on them. An official who was in the reception-room inquired
what Nekhludoff wanted, and when he heard that Nekhludoff meant to
hand in a petition to the Emperor, he asked him if he would allow the
petition to be read first. Nekhludoff gave it him, and the official took
it into the study. The abbess, with her hood and flowing veil and her
long train trailing behind, left the study and went out, her white hands
(with their well-tended nails) holding a topaz rosary. Nekhludoff was
not immediately asked to come in. Toporoff was reading the petition
and shaking his head. He was unpleasantly surprised by the clear and
emphatic wording of it.

"If it gets into the hands of the Emperor it may cause
misunderstandings, and unpleasant questions may be asked," he thought
as he read. Then he put the petition on the table, rang, and ordered
Nekhludoff to be asked in.

He remembered the case of the sectarians; he had had a petition from
them before. The case was this: These Christians, fallen away from the
Greek Orthodox Church, were first exhorted and then tried by law, but
were acquitted. Then the Archdeacon and the Governor arranged, on the
plea that their marriages were illegal, to exile these sectarians,
separating the husbands, wives, and children. These fathers and
wives were now petitioning that they should not be parted. Toporoff
recollected the first time the case came to his notice: he had at that
time hesitated whether he had not better put a stop to it. But then
he thought no harm could result from his confirming the decision to
separate and exile the different members of the sectarian families,
whereas allowing the peasant sect to remain where it was might have a
bad effect on the rest of the inhabitants of the place and cause them
to fall away from Orthodoxy. And then the affair also proved the zeal
of the Archdeacon, and so he let the case proceed along the lines it had
taken. But now that they had a defender such as Nekhludoff, who had some
influence in Petersburg, the case might be specially pointed out to the
Emperor as something cruel, or it might get into the foreign papers.
Therefore he at once took an unexpected decision.

"How do you do?" he said, with the air of a very busy man, receiving
Nekhludoff standing, and at once starting on the business. "I know
this case. As soon as I saw the names I recollected this unfortunate
business," he said, taking up the petition and showing it to Nekhludoff.
"And I am much indebted to you for reminding me of it. It is the
over-zealousness of the provincial authorities."

Nekhludoff stood silent, looking with no kindly feelings at the
immovable, pale mask of a face before him.

"And I shall give orders that these measures should be revoked and the
people reinstated in their homes."

"So that I need not make use of this petition?"

"I promise you most assuredly," answered Toporoff, laying a stress on
the word I, as if quite convinced that his honesty, his word was the
best guarantee. "It will be best if I write at once. Take a seat,
please."

He went up to the table and began to write. As Nekhludoff sat down he
looked at the narrow, bald skull, at the fat, blue-veined hand that was
swiftly guiding the pen, and wondered why this evidently indifferent man
was doing what he did and why he was doing it with such care.

"Well, here you are," said Toporoff, sealing the envelope; "you may let
your clients know," and he stretched his lips to imitate a smile.

"Then what did these people suffer for?" Nekhludoff asked, as he took
the envelope.

Toporoff raised his head and smiled, as if Nekhludoff's question gave
him pleasure. "That I cannot tell. All I can say is that the interests
of the people guarded by us are so important that too great a zeal
in matters of religion is not so dangerous or so harmful as the
indifference which is now spreading--"

"But how is it that in the name of religion the very first demands of
righteousness are violated--families are separated?"

Toporoff continued to smile patronisingly, evidently thinking what
Nekhludoff said very pretty. Anything that Nekhludoff could say he would
have considered very pretty and very one-sided, from the height of what
he considered his far-reaching office in the State.

"It may seem so from the point of view of a private individual," he
said, "but from an administrative point of view it appears in a rather
different light. However, I must bid you good-bye, now," said Toporoff,
bowing his head and holding out his hand, which Nekhludoff pressed.

"The interests of the people! Your interests is what you mean!" thought
Nekhludoff as he went out. And he ran over in his mind the people in
whom is manifested the activity of the institutions that uphold religion
and educate the people. He began with the woman punished for the
illicit sale of spirits, the boy for theft, the tramp for tramping, the
incendiary for setting a house on fire, the banker for fraud, and that
unfortunate Lydia Shoustova imprisoned only because they hoped to get
such information as they required from her. Then he thought of the
sectarians punished for violating Orthodoxy, and Gourkevitch for wanting
constitutional government, and Nekhludoff clearly saw that all these
people were arrested, locked up, exiled, not really because they
transgressed against justice or behaved unlawfully, but only because
they were an obstacle hindering the officials and the rich from enjoying
the property they had taken away from the people. And the woman who sold
wine without having a license, and the thief knocking about the town,
and Lydia Shoustova hiding proclamations, and the sectarians upsetting
superstitions, and Gourkevitch desiring a constitution, were a real
hindrance. It seemed perfectly clear to Nekhludoff that all these
officials, beginning with his aunt's husband, the Senators, and
Toporoff, down to those clean and correct gentlemen who sat at the
tables in the Ministry Office, were not at all troubled by the fact that
that in such a state of things the innocent had to suffer, but were only
concerned how to get rid of the really dangerous, so that the rule
that ten guilty should escape rather than that one innocent should
be condemned was not observed, but, on the contrary, for the sake of
getting rid of one really dangerous person, ten who seemed dangerous
were punished, as, when cutting a rotten piece out of anything, one has
to cut away some that is good.

This explanation seemed very simple and clear to Nekhludoff; but its
very simplicity and clearness made him hesitate to accept it. Was it
possible that so complicated a phenomenon could have so simple and
terrible an explanation? Was it possible that all these words about
justice, law, religion, and God, and so on, were mere words, hiding the
coarsest cupidity and cruelty?



CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE MEANING OF MARIETTE'S ATTRACTION.

Nekhludoff would have left Petersburg on the evening of the same day,
but he had promised Mariette to meet her at the theatre, and though he
knew that he ought not to keep that promise, he deceived himself into
the belief that it would not be right to break his word.

"Am I capable of withstanding these temptations?" he asked himself not
quite honestly. "I shall try for the last time."

He dressed in his evening clothes, and arrived at the theatre during the
second act of the eternal Dame aux Camelias, in which a foreign actress
once again, and in a novel manner, showed how women die of consumption.

The theatre was quite full. Mariette's box was at once, and with great
deference, shown to Nekhludoff at his request. A liveried servant stood
in the corridor outside; he bowed to Nekhludoff as to one whom he knew,
and opened the door of the box.

All the people who sat and stood in the boxes on the opposite side,
those who sat near and those who were in the parterre, with their grey,
grizzly, bald, or curly heads--all were absorbed in watching the thin,
bony actress who, dressed in silks and laces, was wriggling before them,
and speaking in an unnatural voice.

Some one called "Hush!" when the door opened, and two streams, one of
cool, the other of hot, air touched Nekhludoff's face.

Mariette and a lady whom he did not know, with a red cape and a big,
heavy head-dress, were in the box, and two men also, Mariette's
husband, the General, a tall, handsome man with a severe, inscrutable
countenance, a Roman nose, and a uniform padded round the chest, and a
fair man, with a bit of shaved chin between pompous whiskers.

Mariette, graceful, slight, elegant, her low-necked dress showing her
firm, shapely, slanting shoulders, with a little black mole where they
joined her neck, immediately turned, and pointed with her face to a
chair behind her in an engaging manner, and smiled a smile that seemed
full of meaning to Nekhludoff.

The husband looked at him in the quiet way in which he did everything,
and bowed. In the look he exchanged with his wife, the master, the owner
of a beautiful woman, was to be seen at once.

When the monologue was over the theatre resounded with the clapping of
hands. Mariette rose, and holding up her rustling silk skirt, went into
the back of the box and introduced Nekhludoff to her husband.

The General, without ceasing to smile with his eyes, said he was very
pleased, and then sat inscrutably silent.

"I ought to have left to-day, had I not promised," said Nekhludoff to
Mariette.

"If you do not care to see me," said Mariette, in answer to what his
words implied, "you will see a wonderful actress. Was she not splendid
in the last scene?" she asked, turning to her husband.

The husband bowed his head.

"This sort of thing does not touch me," said Nekhludoff. "I have seen so
much real suffering lately that--"

"Yes, sit down and tell me."

The husband listened, his eyes smiling more and more ironically. "I have
been to see that woman whom they have set free, and who has been kept in
prison for so long; she is quite broken down."

"That is the woman I spoke to you about," Mariette said to her husband.

"Oh, yes, I was very pleased that she could be set free," said the
husband quietly, nodding and smiling under his moustache with evident
irony, so it seemed to Nekhludoff. "I shall go and have a smoke."

Nekhludoff sat waiting to hear what the something was that Mariette had
to tell him. She said nothing, and did not even try to say anything, but
joked and spoke about the performance, which she thought ought to touch
Nekhludoff. Nekhludoff saw that she had nothing to tell, but only wished
to show herself to him in all the splendour of her evening toilet, with
her shoulders and little mole; and this was pleasant and yet repulsive
to him.

The charm that had veiled all this sort of thing from Nekhludoff was
not removed, but it was as if he could see what lay beneath. Looking at
Mariette, he admired her, and yet he knew that she was a liar, living
with a husband who was making his career by means of the tears and lives
of hundreds and hundreds of people, and that she was quite indifferent
about it, and that all she had said the day before was untrue. What she
wanted--neither he nor she knew why--was to make him fall in love with
her. This both attracted and disgusted him. Several times, on the point
of going away, he took up his hat, and then stayed on.

But at last, when the husband returned with a strong smell of tobacco
in his thick moustache, and looked at Nekhludoff with a patronising,
contemptuous air, as if not recognising him, Nekhludoff left the box
before the door was closed again, found his overcoat, and went out of
the theatre. As he was walking home along the Nevski, he could not help
noticing a well-shaped and aggressively finely-dressed woman, who was
quietly walking in front of him along the broad asphalt pavement. The
consciousness of her detestable power was noticeable in her face and
the whole of her figure. All who met or passed that woman looked at her.
Nekhludoff walked faster than she did and, involuntarily, also looked
her in the face. The face, which was probably painted, was handsome,
and the woman looked at him with a smile and her eyes sparkled. And,
curiously enough, Nekhludoff was suddenly reminded of Mariette, because
he again felt both attracted and disgusted just as when in the theatre.

Having hurriedly passed her, Nekhludoff turned off on to the Morskaya,
and passed on to the embankment, where, to the surprise of a policeman,
he began pacing up and down the pavement.

"The other one gave me just such a smile when I entered the theatre," he
thought, "and the meaning of the smile was the same. The only difference
is, that this one said plainly, 'If you want me, take me; if not, go
your way,' and the other one pretended that she was not thinking of
this, but living in some high and refined state, while this was really
at the root. Besides, this one was driven to it by necessity, while
the other amused herself by playing with that enchanting, disgusting,
frightful passion. This woman of the street was like stagnant, smelling
water offered to those whose thirst was greater than their disgust; that
other one in the theatre was like the poison which, unnoticed, poisons
everything it gets into."

Nekhludoff recalled his liaison with the Marechal's wife, and shameful
memories rose before him.

"The animalism of the brute nature in man is disgusting," thought he,
"but as long as it remains in its naked form we observe it from the
height of our spiritual life and despise it; and--whether one has
fallen or resisted--one remains what one was before. But when that
same animalism hides under a cloak of poetry and aesthetic feeling and
demands our worship--then we are swallowed up by it completely, and
worship animalism, no longer distinguishing good from evil. Then it is
awful."

Nekhludoff perceived all this now as clearly as he saw the palace, the
sentinels, the fortress, the river, the boats, and the Stock Exchange.
And just as on this northern summer night there was no restful darkness
on the earth, but only a dismal, dull light coming from an invisible
source, so in Nekhludoff's soul there was no longer the restful
darkness, ignorance. Everything seemed clear. It was clear that
everything considered important and good was insignificant and
repulsive, and that all the glamour and luxury hid the old, well-known
crimes, which not only remained unpunished but were adorned with all the
splendour which men were capable of inventing.

Nekhludoff wished to forget all this, not to see it, but he could no
longer help seeing it. Though he could not see the source of the light
which revealed it to him any more than he could see the source of the
light which lay over Petersburg; and though the light appeared to
him dull, dismal, and unnatural, yet he could not help seeing what it
revealed, and he felt both joyful and anxious.



CHAPTER XXIX.

FOR HER SAKE AND FOR GOD'S.

On his return to Moscow Nekhludoff went at once to the prison hospital
to bring Maslova the sad news that the Senate had confirmed the decision
of the Court, and that she must prepare to go to Siberia. He had little
hope of the success of his petition to the Emperor, which the advocate
had written for him, and which he now brought with him for Maslova to
sign. And, strange to say, he did not at present even wish to succeed;
he had got used to the thought of going to Siberia and living among the
exiled and the convicts, and he could not easily picture to himself how
his life and Maslova's would shape if she were acquitted. He remembered
the thought of the American writer, Thoreau, who at the time when
slavery existed in America said that "under a government that
imprisons any unjustly the true place for a just man is also a prison."
Nekhludoff, especially after his visit to Petersburg and all he
discovered there, thought in the same way.

"Yes, the only place befitting an honest man in Russia at the present
time is a prison," he thought, and even felt that this applied to him
personally, when he drove up to the prison and entered its walls.

The doorkeeper recognised Nekhludoff, and told him at once that Maslova
was no longer there.

"Where is she, then?"

"In the cell again."

"Why has she been removed?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Oh, your excellency, what are such people?" said the doorkeeper,
contemptuously. "She's been carrying on with the medical assistant, so
the head doctor ordered her back."

Nekhludoff had had no idea how near Maslova and the state of her mind
were to him. He was stunned by the news.

He felt as one feels at the news of a great and unforeseen misfortune,
and his pain was very severe. His first feeling was one of shame. He,
with his joyful idea of the change that he imagined was going on in her
soul, now seemed ridiculous in his own eyes. He thought that all her
pretence of not wishing to accept his sacrifice, all the reproaches and
tears, were only the devices of a depraved woman, who wished to use
him to the best advantage. He seemed to remember having seen signs of
obduracy at his last interview with her. All this flashed through his
mind as he instinctively put on his hat and left the hospital.

"What am I to do now? Am I still bound to her? Has this action of hers
not set me free?" And as he put these questions to himself he knew at
once that if he considered himself free, and threw her up, he would be
punishing himself, and not her, which was what he wished to do, and he
was seized with fear.

"No, what has happened cannot alter--it can only strengthen my resolve.
Let her do what flows from the state her mind is in. If it is carrying
on with the medical assistant, let her carry on with the medical
assistant; that is her business. I must do what my conscience demands of
me. And my conscience expects me to sacrifice my freedom. My resolution
to marry her, if only in form, and to follow wherever she may be sent,
remains unalterable." Nekhludoff said all this to himself with vicious
obstinacy as he left the hospital and walked with resolute steps towards
the big gates of the prison. He asked the warder on duty at the gate
to inform the inspector that he wished to see Maslova. The warder knew
Nekhludoff, and told him of an important change that had taken place
in the prison. The old inspector had been discharged, and a new, very
severe official appointed in his place.

"They are so strict nowadays, it's just awful," said the jailer. "He is
in here; they will let him know directly."

The new inspector was in the prison and soon came to Nekhludoff. He was
a tall, angular man, with high cheek bones, morose, and very slow in his
movements.

"Interviews are allowed in the visiting room on the appointed days," he
said, without looking at Nekhludoff.

"But I have a petition to the Emperor, which I want signed."

"You can give it to me."

"I must see the prisoner myself. I was always allowed to before."

"That was so, before," said the inspector, with a furtive glance at
Nekhludoff.

"I have a permission from the governor," insisted Nekhludoff, and took
out his pocket-book.

"Allow me," said the inspector, taking the paper from Nekhludoff with
his long, dry, white fingers, on the first of which was a gold ring,
still without looking him in the eyes. He read the paper slowly. "Step
into the office, please."

This time the office was empty. The inspector sat down by the table
and began sorting some papers that lay on it, evidently intending to be
present at the interview.

When Nekhludoff asked whether he might see the political prisoner,
Doukhova, the inspector answered, shortly, that he could not.
"Interviews with political prisoners are not permitted," he said, and
again fixed his attention on his papers. With a letter to Doukhova in
his pocket, Nekhludoff felt as if he had committed some offence, and his
plans had been discovered and frustrated.

When Maslova entered the room the inspector raised his head, and,
without looking at either her or Nekhludoff, remarked: "You may talk,"
and went on sorting his papers. Maslova had again the white jacket,
petticoat and kerchief on. When she came up to Nekhludoff and saw his
cold, hard look, she blushed scarlet, and crumbling the hem of her
jacket with her hand, she cast down her eyes. Her confusion, so it
seemed to Nekhludoff, confirmed the hospital doorkeeper's words.

Nekhludoff had meant to treat her in the same way as before, but could
not bring himself to shake hands with her, so disgusting was she to him
now.

"I have brought you bad news," he said, in a monotonous voice, without
looking at her or taking her hand. "The Senate has refused."

"I knew it would," she said, in a strange tone, as if she were gasping
for breath.

Formerly Nekhludoff would have asked why she said she knew it would;
now he only looked at her. Her eyes were full of tears. But this did not
soften him; it roused his irritation against her even more.

The inspector rose and began pacing up and down the room.

In spite of the disgust Nekhludoff was feeling at the moment, he
considered it right to express his regret at the Senate's decision.

"You must not despair," he said. "The petition to the Emperor may meet
with success, and I hope---"

"I'm not thinking of that," she said, looking piteously at him with her
wet, squinting eyes.

"What is it, then?"

"You have been to the hospital, and they have most likely told you about
me--"

"What of that? That is your affair," said Nekhludoff coldly, and
frowned. The cruel feeling of wounded pride that had quieted down rose
with renewed force when she mentioned the hospital.

"He, a man of the world, whom any girl of the best families would think
it happiness to marry, offered himself as a husband to this woman,
and she could not even wait, but began intriguing with the medical
assistant," thought he, with a look of hatred.

"Here, sign this petition," he said, taking a large envelope from his
pocket, and laying the paper on the table. She wiped the tears with a
corner of her kerchief, and asked what to write and where.

He showed her, and she sat down and arranged the cuff of her right
sleeve with her left hand; he stood behind her, and silently looked
at her back, which shook with suppressed emotion, and evil and good
feelings were fighting in his breast--feelings of wounded pride and of
pity for her who was suffering--and the last feeling was victorious.

He could not remember which came first; did the pity for her first enter
his heart, or did he first remember his own sins--his own repulsive
actions, the very same for which he was condemning her? Anyhow, he both
felt himself guilty and pitied her.

Having signed the petition and wiped her inky finger on her petticoat,
she got up and looked at him.

"Whatever happens, whatever comes of it, my resolve remains unchanged,"
said Nekhludoff. The thought that he had forgiven her heightened his
feeling of pity and tenderness for her, and he wished to comfort her. "I
will do what I have said; wherever they take you I shall be with you."

"What's the use?" she interrupted hurriedly, though her whole face
lighted up.

"Think what you will want on the way--"

"I don't know of anything in particular, thank you."

The inspector came up, and without waiting for a remark from him
Nekhludoff took leave, and went out with peace, joy, and love towards
everybody in his heart such as he had never felt before. The certainty
that no action of Maslova could change his love for her filled him with
joy and raised him to a level which he had never before attained. Let
her intrigue with the medical assistant; that was her business. He loved
her not for his own but for her sake and for God's.

And this intrigue, for which Maslova was turned out of the hospital,
and of which Nekhludoff believed she was really guilty, consisted of the
following:

Maslova was sent by the head nurse to get some herb tea from the
dispensary at the end of the corridor, and there, all alone, she found
the medical assistant, a tall man, with a blotchy face, who had for a
long time been bothering her. In trying to get away from him Maslova
gave him such a push that he knocked his head against a shelf, from
which two bottles fell and broke. The head doctor, who was passing at
that moment, heard the sound of breaking glass, and saw Maslova run out,
quite red, and shouted to her:

"Ah, my good woman, if you start intriguing here, I'll send you about
your business. What is the meaning of it?" he went on, addressing the
medical assistant, and looking at him over his spectacles.

The assistant smiled, and began to justify himself. The doctor gave no
heed to him, but, lifting his head so that he now looked through his
spectacles, he entered the ward. He told the inspector the same day to
send another more sedate assistant-nurse in Maslova's place. And this
was her "intrigue" with the medical assistant.

Being turned out for a love intrigue was particularly painful to
Maslova, because the relations with men, which had long been repulsive
to her, had become specially disgusting after meeting Nekhludoff. The
thought that, judging her by her past and present position, every man,
the blotchy assistant among them, considered he had a right to offend
her, and was surprised at her refusal, hurt her deeply, and made her
pity herself and brought tears to her eyes.

When she went out to Nekhludoff this time she wished to clear herself of
the false charge which she knew he would certainly have heard about. But
when she began to justify herself she felt he did not believe her, and
that her excuses would only strengthen his suspicions; tears choked her,
and she was silent.

Maslova still thought and continued to persuade herself that she had
never forgiven him, and hated him, as she told him at their second
interview, but in reality she loved him again, and loved him so that she
did all he wished her to do; left off drinking, smoking, coquetting, and
entered the hospital because she knew he wished it. And if every time he
reminded her of it, she refused so decidedly to accept his sacrifice and
marry him, it was because she liked repeating the proud words she had
once uttered, and because she knew that a marriage with her would be a
misfortune for him.

She had resolutely made up her mind that she would not accept his
sacrifice, and yet the thought that he despised her and believed that
she still was what she had been, and did not notice the change that had
taken place in her, was very painful. That he could still think she had
done wrong while in the hospital tormented her more than the news that
her sentence was confirmed.



CHAPTER XXX.

THE ASTONISHING INSTITUTION CALLED CRIMINAL LAW.

Maslova might be sent off with the first gang of prisoners, therefore
Nekhludoff got ready for his departure. But there was so much to be done
that he felt that he could not finish it, however much time he might
have. It was quite different now from what it had been. Formerly he used
to be obliged to look for an occupation, the interest of which always
centred in one person, i.e., Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff, and
yet, though every interest of his life was thus centred, all these
occupations were very wearisome. Now all his occupations related to
other people and not to Dmitri Ivanovitch, and they were all interesting
and attractive, and there was no end to them. Nor was this all. Formerly
Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff's occupations always made him feel vexed
and irritable; now they produced a joyful state of mind. The business at
present occupying Nekhludoff could be divided under three headings.
He himself, with his usual pedantry, divided it in that way, and
accordingly kept the papers referring to it in three different
portfolios. The first referred to Maslova, and was chiefly that of
taking steps to get her petition to the Emperor attended to, and
preparing for her probable journey to Siberia.

The second was about his estates. In Panovo he had given the land to
the peasants on condition of their paying rent to be put to their own
communal use. But he had to confirm this transaction by a legal deed,
and to make his will, in accordance with it. In Kousminski the state of
things was still as he had first arranged it, i.e., he was to receive
the rent; but the terms had to be fixed, and also how much of the money
he would use to live on, and how much he would leave for the peasants'
use. As he did not know what his journey to Siberia would cost him, he
could not decide to lose this revenue altogether, though he reduced the
income from it by half.

The third part of his business was to help the convicts, who applied
more and more often to him. At first when he came in contact with
the prisoners, and they appealed to him for help, he at once began
interceding for them, hoping to lighten their fate, but he soon had so
many applications that he felt the impossibility of attending to all of
them, and that naturally led him to take up another piece of work, which
at last roused his interest even more than the three first. This new
part of his business was finding an answer to the following questions:
What was this astonishing institution called criminal law, of which the
results were that in the prison, with some of the inmates of which
he had lately become acquainted, and in all those other places of
confinement, from the Peter and Paul Fortress in Petersburg to the
island of Sakhalin, hundreds and thousands of victims were pining? What
did this strange criminal law exist for? How had it originated?

From his personal relations with the prisoners, from notes by some of
those in confinement, and by questioning the advocate and the prison
priest, Nekhludoff came to the conclusion that the convicts, the
so-called criminals, could be divided into five classes. The first were
quite innocent people, condemned by judicial blunder. Such were the
Menshoffs, supposed to be incendiaries, Maslova, and others. There
were not many of these; according to the priest's words, only seven per
cent., but their condition excited particular interest.

To the second class belong persons condemned for actions done under
peculiar circumstances, i.e., in a fit of passion, jealousy, or
drunkenness, circumstances under which those who judged them would
surely have committed the same actions.

The third class consisted of people punished for having committed
actions which, according to their understanding, were quite natural,
and even good, but which those other people, the men who made the laws,
considered to be crimes. Such were the persons who sold spirits without
a license, smugglers, those who gathered grass and wood on large estates
and in the forests belonging to the Crown; the thieving miners; and
those unbelieving people who robbed churches.

To the fourth class belonged those who were imprisoned only because they
stood morally higher than the average level of society. Such were the
Sectarians, the Poles, the Circassians rebelling in order to regain
their independence, the political prisoners, the Socialists, the
strikers condemned for withstanding the authorities. There was,
according to Nekhludoff's observations, a very large percentage
belonging to this class; among them some of the best of men.

The fifth class consisted of persons who had been far more sinned
against by society than they had sinned against it. These were
castaways, stupefied by continual oppression and temptation, such as the
boy who had stolen the rugs, and hundreds of others whom Nekhludoff had
seen in the prison and out of it. The conditions under which they lived
seemed to lead on systematically to those actions which are termed
crimes. A great many thieves and murderers with whom he had lately come
in contact, according to Nekhludoff's estimate, belonged to this class.
To this class Nekhludoff also reckoned those depraved, demoralised
creatures whom the new school of criminology classify as the criminal
type, and the existence of which is considered to be the chief proof
of the necessity of criminal law and punishment. This demoralised,
depraved, abnormal type was, according to Nekhludoff, exactly the same
as that against whom society had sinned, only here society had sinned
not directly against them, but against their parents and forefathers.

Among this latter class Nekhludoff was specially struck by one Okhotin,
an inveterate thief, the illegitimate son of a prostitute, brought up
in a doss-house, who, up to the age of 30, had apparently never met with
any one whose morality was above that of a policeman, and who had
got into a band of thieves when quite young. He was gifted with an
extraordinary sense of humour, by means of which he made himself very
attractive. He asked Nekhludoff for protection, at the same time making
fun of himself, the lawyers, the prison, and laws human and divine.

Another was the handsome Fedoroff, who, with a band of robbers, of
whom he was the chief, had robbed and murdered an old man, an official.
Fedoroff was a peasant, whose father had been unlawfully deprived of his
house, and who, later on, when serving as a soldier, had suffered much
because he had fallen in love with an officer's mistress. He had a
fascinating, passionate nature, that longed for enjoyment at any cost.
He had never met anybody who restrained himself for any cause whatever,
and had never heard a word about any aim in life other than enjoyment.

Nekhludoff distinctly saw that both these men were richly endowed by
nature, but had been neglected and crippled like uncared-for plants.

He had also met a tramp and a woman who had repelled him by their
dulness and seeming cruelty, but even in them he could find no trace of
the criminal type written about by the Italian school, but only saw in
them people who were repulsive to him personally, just in the same way
as some he had met outside the prison, in swallow-tail coats wearing
epaulettes, or bedecked with lace. And so the investigation of the
reasons why all these very different persons were put in prison, while
others just like them were going about free and even judging them,
formed a fourth task for Nekhludoff.

He hoped to find an answer to this question in books, and bought all
that referred to it. He got the works of Lombroso, Garofalo, Ferry,
List, Maudsley, Tard, and read them carefully. But as he read he became
more and more disappointed. It happened to him as it always happens
to those who turn to science not in order to play a part in it, nor
to write, nor to dispute, nor to teach, but simply for an answer to an
every-day question of life. Science answered thousands of different very
subtle and ingenious questions touching criminal law, but not the one
he was trying to solve. He asked a very simple question: "Why, and
with what right, do some people lock up, torment, exile, flog, and kill
others, while they are themselves just like those whom they torment,
flog, and kill?" And in answer he got deliberations as to whether human
beings had free will or not. Whether signs of criminality could be
detected by measuring the skulls or not. What part heredity played in
crime. Whether immorality could be inherited. What madness is, what
degeneration is, and what temperament is. How climate, food, ignorance,
imitativeness, hypnotism, or passion act. What society is. What are its
duties, etc., etc.

These disquisitions reminded him of the answer he once got from a little
boy whom he met coming home from school. Nekhludoff asked him if he had
learned his spelling.

"I have," answered the boy.

"Well, then, tell me, how do you spell 'leg'?"

"A dog's leg, or what kind of leg?" the boy answered, with a sly look.

Answers in the form of new questions, like the boy's, was all Nekhludoff
got in reply to his one primary question. He found much that was clever,
learned much that was interesting, but what he did not find was an
answer to the principal question: By what right some people punish
others?

Not only did he not find any answer, but all the arguments were brought
forward in order to explain and vindicate punishment, the necessity of
which was taken as an axiom.

Nekhludoff read much, but only in snatches, and putting down his failure
to this superficial way of reading, hoped to find the answer later on.
He would not allow himself to believe in the truth of the answer which
began, more and more often, to present itself to him.



CHAPTER XXXI.

NEKHLUDOFF'S SISTER AND HER HUSBAND.

The gang of prisoners, with Maslova among them, was to start on the 5th
July. Nekhludoff arranged to start on the same day.

The day before, Nekhludoff's sister and her husband came to town to see
him.

Nekhludoff's sister, Nathalie Ivanovna Rogozhinsky, was 10 years older
than her brother. She had been very fond of him when he was a boy, and
later on, just before her marriage, they grew very close to each other,
as if they were equals, she being a young woman of 25, he a lad of 15.
At that time she was in love with his friend, Nikolenka Irtenieff, since
dead. They both loved Nikolenka, and loved in him and in themselves that
which is good, and which unites all men. Since then they had both been
depraved, he by military service and a vicious life, she by marriage
with a man whom she loved with a sensual love, who did not care for the
things that had once been so dear and holy to her and to her brother,
nor even understand the meaning of those aspirations towards moral
perfection and the service of mankind, which once constituted her life,
and put them down to ambition and the wish to show off; that being the
only explanation comprehensible to him.

Nathalie's husband had been a man without a name and without means, but
cleverly steering towards Liberalism or Conservatism, according to which
best suited his purpose, he managed to make a comparatively brilliant
judicial career. Some peculiarity which made him attractive to women
assisted him when he was no longer in his first youth. While travelling
abroad he made Nekhludoff's acquaintance, and managed to make Nathalie,
who was also no longer a girl, fall in love with him, rather against her
mother's wishes who considered a marriage with him to be a misalliance
for her daughter. Nekhludoff, though he tried to hide it from himself,
though he fought against it, hated his brother-in-law.

Nekhludoff had a strong antipathy towards him because of the vulgarity
of his feelings, his assurance and narrowness, but chiefly because of
Nathalie, who managed to love him in spite of the narrowness of his
nature, and loved him so selfishly, so sensually, and stifled for his
sake all the good that had been in her.

It always hurt Nekhludoff to think of Nathalie as the wife of that
hairy, self-assured man with the shiny, bald patch on his head. He could
not even master a feeling of revulsion towards their children, and when
he heard that she was again going to have a baby, he felt something like
sorrow that she had once more been infected with something bad by this
man who was so foreign to him. The Rogozhinskys had come to Moscow
alone, having left their two children--a boy and a girl--at home, and
stopped in the best rooms of the best hotel. Nathalie at once went to
her mother's old house, but hearing from Agraphena Petrovna that her
brother had left, and was living in a lodging-house, she drove there.
The dirty servant met her in the stuffy passage, dark but for a lamp
which burnt there all day. He told her that the Prince was not in.

Nathalie asked to be shown into his rooms, as she wished to leave a note
for him, and the man took her up.

Nathalie carefully examined her brother's two little rooms. She noticed
in everything the love of cleanliness and order she knew so well in
him, and was struck by the novel simplicity of the surroundings. On his
writing-table she saw the paper-weight with the bronze dog on the top
which she remembered; the tidy way in which his different portfolios and
writing utensils were placed on the table was also familiar, and so was
the large, crooked ivory paper knife which marked the place in a French
book by Tard, which lay with other volumes on punishment and a book
in English by Henry George. She sat down at the table and wrote a note
asking him to be sure to come that same day, and shaking her head in
surprise at what she saw, she returned to her hotel.

Two questions regarding her brother now interested Nathalie: his
marriage with Katusha, which she had heard spoken about in their
town--for everybody was speaking about it--and his giving away the land
to the peasants, which was also known, and struck many as something of
a political nature, and dangerous. The marriage with Katusha pleased
her in a way. She admired that resoluteness which was so like him and
herself as they used to be in those happy times before her marriage. And
yet she was horrified when she thought her brother was going to marry
such a dreadful woman. The latter was the stronger feeling of the two,
and she decided to use all her influence to prevent him from doing it,
though she knew how difficult this would be.

The other matter, the giving up of the land to the peasants, did not
touch her so nearly, but her husband was very indignant about it, and
expected her to influence her brother against it.

Rogozhinsky said that such an action was the height of inconsistency,
flightiness, and pride, the only possible explanation of which was the
desire to appear original, to brag, to make one's self talked about.

"What sense could there be in letting the land to the peasants, on
condition that they pay the rent to themselves?" he said. "If he was
resolved to do such a thing, why not sell the land to them through the
Peasants' Bank? There might have been some sense in that. In fact, this
act verges on insanity."

And Rogozhinsky began seriously thinking about putting Nekhludoff under
guardianship, and demanded of his wife that she should speak seriously
to her brother about his curious intention.



CHAPTER XXXII.

NEKHLUDOFF'S ANARCHISM.

As soon as Nekhludoff returned that evening and saw his sister's note
on the table he started to go and see her. He found Nathalie alone,
her husband having gone to take a rest in the next room. She wore a
tightly-fitting black silk dress, with a red bow in front. Her black
hair was crimped and arranged according to the latest fashion.

The pains she took to appear young, for the sake of her husband, whose
equal she was in years, were very obvious.

When she saw her brother she jumped up and hurried towards him, with her
silk dress rustling. They kissed, and looked smilingly at each other.
There passed between them that mysterious exchange of looks, full of
meaning, in which all was true, and which cannot be expressed in words.
Then came words which were not true. They had not met since their
mother's death.

"You have grown stouter and younger," he said, and her lips puckered up
with pleasure.

"And you have grown thinner."

"Well, and how is your husband?" Nekhludoff asked.

"He is taking a rest; he did not sleep all night." There was much to
say, but it was not said in words; only their looks expressed what their
words failed to say.

"I went to see you."

"Yes, I know. I moved because the house is too big for me. I was lonely
there, and dull. I want nothing of all that is there, so that you had
better take it all--the furniture, I mean, and things."

"Yes, Agraphena Petrovna told me. I went there. Thanks, very much.
But--"

At this moment the hotel waiter brought in a silver tea-set. While he
set the table they were silent. Then Nathalie sat down at the table and
made the tea, still in silence. Nekhludoff also said nothing.

At last Nathalie began resolutely. "Well, Dmitri, I know all about it."
And she looked at him.

"What of that? l am glad you know."

"How can you hope to reform her after the life she has led?" she asked.

He sat quite straight on a small chair, and listened attentively, trying
to understand her and to answer rightly. The state of mind called forth
in him by his last interview with Maslova still filled his soul with
quiet joy and good will to all men.

"It is not her but myself I wish to reform," he replied.

Nathalie sighed.

"There are other means besides marriage to do that."

"But I think it is the best. Besides, it leads me into that world in
which I can be of use."

"I cannot believe you will be happy," said Nathalie.

"It's not my happiness that is the point."

"Of course, but if she has a heart she cannot be happy--cannot even wish
it."

"She does not wish it."

"I understand; but life--"

"Yes--life?"

"Demands something different."

"It demands nothing but that we should do what is right," said
Nekhludoff, looking into her face, still handsome, though slightly
wrinkled round eyes and mouth.

"I do not understand," she said, and sighed.

"Poor darling; how could she change so?" he thought, calling back to his
mind Nathalie as she had been before her marriage, and feeling towards
her a tenderness woven out of innumerable memories of childhood. At that
moment Rogozhinsky entered the room, with head thrown back and expanded
chest, and stepping lightly and softly in his usual manner, his
spectacles, his bald patch, and his black beard all glistening.

"How do you do? How do you do?" he said, laying an unnatural and
intentional stress on his words. (Though, soon after the marriage,
they had tried to be more familiar with each other, they had never
succeeded.)

They shook hands, and Rogozhinsky sank softly into an easy-chair.

"Am I not interrupting your conversation?"

"No, I do not wish to hide what I am saying or doing from any one."

As soon as Nekhludoff saw the hairy hands, and heard the patronising,
self-assured tones, his meekness left him in a moment.

"Yes, we were talking about his intentions," said Nathalie. "Shall I
give you a cup of tea?" she added, taking the teapot.

"Yes, please. What particular intentions do you mean?"

"That of going to Siberia with the gang of prisoners, among whom is the
woman I consider myself to have wronged," uttered Nekhludoff.

"I hear not only to accompany her, but more than that."

"Yes, and to marry her if she wishes it."

"Dear me! But if you do not object I should like to ask you to explain
your motives. I do not understand them."

"My motives are that this woman--that this woman's first step on her way
to degradation--" Nekhludoff got angry with himself, and was unable to
find the right expression. "My motives are that I am the guilty one, and
she gets the punishment."

"If she is being punished she cannot be innocent, either."

"She is quite innocent." And Nekhludoff related the whole incident with
unnecessary warmth.

"Yes, that was a case of carelessness on the part of the president, the
result of which was a thoughtless answer on the part of the jury; but
there is the Senate for cases like that."

"The Senate has rejected the appeal."

"Well, if the Senate has rejected it, there cannot have been sufficient
reasons for an appeal," said Rogozhinsky, evidently sharing the
prevailing opinion that truth is the product of judicial decrees. "The
Senate cannot enter into the question on its merits. If there is a real
mistake, the Emperor should be petitioned."

"That has been done, but there is no probability of success. They will
apply to the Department of the Ministry, the Department will consult the
Senate, the Senate will repeat its decision, and, as usual, the innocent
will get punished."

"In the first place, the Department of the Ministry won't consult the
Senate," said Rogozhinsky, with a condescending smile; "it will give
orders for the original deeds to be sent from the Law Court, and if
it discovers a mistake it will decide accordingly. And, secondly, the
innocent are never punished, or at least in very rare, exceptional
cases. It is the guilty who are punished," Rogozhinsky said
deliberately, and smiled self-complacently.

"And I have become fully convinced that most of those condemned by law
are innocent."

"How's that?"

"Innocent in the literal sense. Just as this woman is innocent of
poisoning any one; as innocent as a peasant I have just come to know, of
the murder he never committed; as a mother and son who were on the point
of being condemned for incendiarism, which was committed by the owner of
the house that was set on fire."

"Well, of course there always have been and always will be judicial
errors. Human institutions cannot be perfect."

"And, besides, there are a great many people convicted who are innocent
of doing anything considered wrong by the society they have grown up
in."

"Excuse me, this is not so; every thief knows that stealing is wrong,
and that we should not steal; that it is immoral," said Rogozhinsky,
with his quiet, self-assured, slightly contemptuous smile, which
specially irritated Nekhludoff.

"No, he does not know it; they say to him 'don't steal,' and he knows
that the master of the factory steals his labour by keeping back his
wages; that the Government, with its officials, robs him continually by
taxation."

"Why, this is anarchism," Rogozhinsky said, quietly defining his
brother-in-law's words.

"I don't know what it is; I am only telling you the truth," Nekhludoff
continued. "He knows that the Government is robbing him, knows that we
landed proprietors have robbed him long since, robbed him of the land
which should be the common property of all, and then, if he picks up dry
wood to light his fire on that land stolen from him, we put him in jail,
and try to persuade him that he is a thief. Of course he knows that not
he but those who robbed him of the land are thieves, and that to get any
restitution of what has been robbed is his duty towards his family."

"I don't understand, or if I do I cannot agree with it. The land must
be somebody's property," began Rogozhinsky quietly, and, convinced that
Nekhludoff was a Socialist, and that Socialism demands that all the land
should be divided equally, that such a division would be very foolish,
and that he could easily prove it to be so, he said. "If you divided
it equally to-day, it would to-morrow be again in the hands of the most
industrious and clever."

"Nobody is thinking of dividing the land equally. The land must not
be anybody's property; must not be a thing to be bought and sold or
rented."

"The rights of property are inborn in man; without them the cultivation
of land would present no interest. Destroy the rights of property and
we lapse into barbarism." Rogozhinsky uttered this authoritatively,
repeating the usual argument in favour of private ownership of land
which is supposed to be irrefutable, based on the assumption that
people's desire to possess land proves that they need it.

"On the contrary, only when the land is nobody's property will it cease
to lie idle, as it does now, while the landlords, like dogs in the
manger, unable themselves to put it to use, will not let those use it
who are able."

"But, Dmitri Ivanovitch, what you are saying is sheer madness. Is it
possible to abolish property in land in our age? I know it is your old
hobby. But allow me to tell you straight," and Rogozhinsky grew pale,
and his voice trembled. It was evident that this question touched him
very nearly. "I should advise you to consider this question well before
attempting to solve it practically."

"Are you speaking of my personal affairs?"

"Yes, I hold that we who are placed in special circumstances should
bear the responsibilities which spring from those circumstances, should
uphold the conditions in which we were born, and which we have
inherited from our predecessors, and which we ought to pass on to our
descendants."

"I consider it my duty--"

"Wait a bit," said Rogozhinsky, not permitting the interruption. "I am
not speaking for myself or my children. The position of my children is
assured, and I earn enough for us to live comfortably, and I expect my
children will live so too, so that my interest in your action--which,
if you will allow me to say so, is not well considered--is not based
on personal motives; it is on principle that I cannot agree with you. I
should advise you to think it well over, to read---?"

"Please allow me to settle my affairs, and to choose what to read and
what not to read, myself," said Nekhludoff, turning pale. Feeling
his hands grow cold, and that he was no longer master of himself, he
stopped, and began drinking his tea.



CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE AIM OF THE LAW.

"Well, and how are the children?" Nekhludoff asked his sister when he
was calmer. The sister told him about the children. She said they were
staying with their grandmother (their father's mother), and, pleased
that his dispute with her husband had come to an end, she began telling
him how her children played that they were travelling, just as he used
to do with his three dolls, one of them a negro and another which he
called the French lady.

"Can you really remember it all?" said Nekhludoff, smiling.

"Yes, and just fancy, they play in the very same way."

The unpleasant conversation had been brought to an end, and Nathalie was
quieter, but she did not care to talk in her husband's presence of what
could be comprehensible only to her brother, so, wishing to start a
general conversation, she began talking about the sorrow of Kamenski's
mother at losing her only son, who had fallen in a duel, for this
Petersburg topic of the day had now reached Moscow. Rogozhinsky
expressed disapproval at the state of things that excluded murder in a
duel from the ordinary criminal offences. This remark evoked a rejoinder
from Nekhludoff, and a new dispute arose on the subject. Nothing was
fully explained, neither of the antagonists expressed all he had in
his mind, each keeping to his conviction, which condemned the other.
Rogozhinsky felt that Nekhludoff condemned him and despised his
activity, and he wished to show him the injustice of his opinions.

Nekhludoff, on the other hand, felt provoked by his brother-in-law's
interference in his affairs concerning the land. And knowing in his
heart of hearts that his sister, her husband, and their children, as his
heirs, had a right to do so, was indignant that this narrow-minded
man persisted with calm assurance to regard as just and lawful what
Nekhludoff no longer doubted was folly and crime.

This man's arrogance annoyed Nekhludoff.

"What could the law do?" he asked.

"It could sentence one of the two duellists to the mines like an
ordinary murderer."

Nekhludoff's hands grew cold.

"Well, and what good would that be?" he asked, hotly.

"It would be just."

"As if justice were the aim of the law," said Nekhludoff.

"What else?"

"The upholding of class interests! I think the law is only an instrument
for upholding the existing order of things beneficial to our class."

"This is a perfectly new view," said Rogozhinsky with a quiet smile;
"the law is generally supposed to have a totally different aim."

"Yes, so it has in theory but not in practice, as I have found out. The
law aims only at preserving the present state of things, and therefore
it persecutes and executes those who stand above the ordinary level and
wish to raise it--the so-called political prisoners, as well as those
who are below the average--the so-called criminal types."

"I do not agree with you. In the first place, I cannot admit that the
criminals classed as political are punished because they are above the
average. In most cases they are the refuse of society, just as much
perverted, though in a different way, as the criminal types whom you
consider below the average."

"But I happen to know men who are morally far above their judges; all
the sectarians are moral, from--"

But Rogozhinsky, a man not accustomed to be interrupted when he spoke,
did not listen to Nekhludoff, but went on talking at the same time,
thereby irritating him still more.

"Nor can I admit that the object of the law is the upholding of the
present state of things. The law aims at reforming--"

"A nice kind of reform, in a prison!" Nekhludoff put in.

"Or removing," Rogozhinsky went on, persistently, "the perverted and
brutalised persons that threaten society."

"That's just what it doesn't do. Society has not the means of doing
either the one thing or the other."

"How is that? I don't understand," said Rogozhinsky with a forced smile.

"I mean that only two reasonable kinds of punishment exist. Those used
in the old days: corporal and capital punishment, which, as human nature
gradually softens, come more and more into disuse," said Nekhludoff.

"There, now, this is quite new and very strange to hear from your lips."

"Yes, it is reasonable to hurt a man so that he should not do in future
what he is hurt for doing, and it is also quite reasonable to cut a
man's head off when he is injurious or dangerous to society. These
punishments have a reasonable meaning. But what sense is there in
locking up in a prison a man perverted by want of occupation and bad
example; to place him in a position where he is provided for, where
laziness is imposed on him, and where he is in company with the most
perverted of men? What reason is there to take a man at public cost (it
comes to more than 500 roubles per head) from the Toula to the Irkoatsk
government, or from Koursk--"

"Yes, but all the same, people are afraid of those journeys at public
cost, and if it were not for such journeys and the prisons, you and I
would not be sitting here as we are."

"The prisons cannot insure our safety, because these people do not
stay there for ever, but are set free again. On the contrary, in those
establishments men are brought to the greatest vice and degradation, so
that the danger is increased."

"You mean to say that the penitentiary system should be improved."

"It cannot be improved. Improved prisons would cost more than all that
is being now spent on the people's education, and would lay a still
heavier burden on the people."

"The shortcomings of the penitentiary system in nowise invalidate
the law itself," Rogozhinsky continued again, without heeding his
brother-in-law.

"There is no remedy for these shortcomings," said Nekhludoff, raising
his voice.

"What of that? Shall we therefore go and kill, or, as a certain
statesman proposed, go putting out people's eyes?" Rogozhinsky remarked.

"Yes; that would be cruel, but it would be effective. What is done
now is cruel, and not only ineffective, but so stupid that one cannot
understand how people in their senses can take part in so absurd and
cruel a business as criminal law."

"But I happen to take part in it," said Rogozhinsky, growing pale.

"That is your business. But to me it is incomprehensible."

"I think there are a good many things incomprehensible to you," said
Rogozhinsky, with a trembling voice.

"I have seen how one public prosecutor did his very best to get an
unfortunate boy condemned, who could have evoked nothing but sympathy in
an unperverted mind. I know how another cross-examined a sectarian and
put down the reading of the Gospels as a criminal offence; in fact, the
whole business of the Law Courts consists in senseless and cruel actions
of that sort."

"I should not serve if I thought so," said Rogozhinsky, rising.

Nekhludoff noticed a peculiar glitter under his brother-in-law's
spectacles. "Can it be tears?" he thought. And they were really tears
of injured pride. Rogozhinsky went up to the window, got out his
handkerchief, coughed and rubbed his spectacles, took them off, and
wiped his eyes.

When he returned to the sofa he lit a cigar, and did not speak any more.

Nekhludoff felt pained and ashamed of having offended his brother-in-law
and his sister to such a degree, especially as he was going away the
next day.

He parted with them in confusion, and drove home.

"All I have said may be true--anyhow he did not reply. But it was not
said in the right way. How little I must have changed if I could be
carried away by ill-feeling to such an extent as to hurt and wound poor
Nathalie in such a way!" he thought.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE PRISONERS START FOR SIBERIA.

The gang of prisoners, among whom was Maslova, was to leave Moscow by
rail at 3 p.m.; therefore, in order to see the gang start, and walk
to the station with the prisoners Nekhludoff meant to reach the prison
before 12 o'clock.

The night before, as he was packing up and sorting his papers, he came
upon his diary, and read some bits here and there. The last bit written
before he left for Petersburg ran thus: "Katusha does not wish to accept
my sacrifice; she wishes to make a sacrifice herself. She has conquered,
and so have I. She makes me happy by the inner change, which seems
to me, though I fear to believe it, to be going on in her. I fear to
believe it, yet she seems to be coming back to life." Then further on
he read. "I have lived through something very hard and very joyful. I
learnt that she has behaved very badly in the hospital, and I suddenly
felt great pain. I never expected that it could be so painful. I spoke
to her with loathing and hatred, then all of a sudden I called to mind
how many times I have been, and even still am, though but in thought,
guilty of the thing that I hated her for, and immediately I became
disgusting to myself, and pitied her and felt happy again. If only we
could manage to see the beam in our own eye in time, how kind we
should be." Then he wrote: "I have been to see Nathalie, and again
self-satisfaction made me unkind and spiteful, and a heavy feeling
remains. Well, what is to be done? Tomorrow a new life will begin. A
final good-bye to the old! Many new impressions have accumulated, but I
cannot yet bring them to unity."

When he awoke the next morning Nekhludoff's first feeling was regret
about the affair between him and his brother-in-law.

"I cannot go away like this," he thought. "I must go and make it up with
them." But when he looked at his watch he saw that he had not time to
go, but must hurry so as not to be too late for the departure of the
gang. He hastily got everything ready, and sent the things to the
station with a servant and Taras, Theodosia's husband, who was going
with them. Then he took the first isvostchik he could find and drove off
to the prison.

The prisoners' train started two hours before the train by which he was
going, so Nekhludoff paid his bill in the lodgings and left for good.

It was July, and the weather was unbearably hot. From the stones, the
walls, the iron of the roofs, which the sultry night had not cooled, the
heat streamed into the motionless air. When at rare intervals a slight
breeze did arise, it brought but a whiff of hot air filled with dust and
smelling of oil paint.

There were few people in the streets, and those who were out tried to
keep on the shady side. Only the sunburnt peasants, with their bronzed
faces and bark shoes on their feet, who were mending the road, sat
hammering the stones into the burning sand in the sun; while the
policemen, in their holland blouses, with revolvers fastened with
orange cords, stood melancholy and depressed in the middle of the road,
changing from foot to foot; and the tramcars, the horses of which wore
holland hoods on their heads, with slits for the ears, kept passing up
and down the sunny road with ringing bells.

When Nekhludoff drove up to the prison the gang had not left the yard.
The work of delivering and receiving the prisoners that had commenced
at 4 A.M. was still going on. The gang was to consist of 623 men and 64
women; they had all to be received according to the registry lists.
The sick and the weak to be sorted out, and all to be delivered to the
convoy. The new inspector, with two assistants, the doctor and medical
assistant, the officer of the convoy, and the clerk, were sitting in the
prison yard at a table covered with writing materials and papers, which
was placed in the shade of a wall. They called the prisoners one by one,
examined and questioned them, and took notes. The rays of the sun had
gradually reached the table, and it was growing very hot and oppressive
for want of air and because of the breathing crowd of prisoners that
stood close by.

"Good gracious, will this never come to an end!" the convoy officer,
a tall, fat, red-faced man with high shoulders, who kept puffing the
smoke, of his cigarette into his thick moustache, asked, as he drew in
a long puff. "You are killing me. From where have you got them all? Are
there many more?" the clerk inquired.

"Twenty-four men and the women."

"What are you standing there for? Come on," shouted the convoy officer
to the prisoners who had not yet passed the revision, and who stood
crowded one behind the other. The prisoners had been standing there more
than three hours, packed in rows in the full sunlight, waiting their
turns.

While this was going on in the prison yard, outside the gate, besides
the sentinel who stood there as usual with a gun, were drawn up about 20
carts, to carry the luggage of the prisoners and such prisoners as were
too weak to walk, and a group of relatives and friends waiting to see
the prisoners as they came out and to exchange a few words if a chance
presented itself and to give them a few things. Nekhludoff took his
place among the group. He had stood there about an hour when the
clanking of chains, the noise of footsteps, authoritative voices, the
sound of coughing, and the low murmur of a large crowd became audible.

This continued for about five minutes, during which several jailers went
in and out of the gateway. At last the word of command was given. The
gate opened with a thundering noise, the clattering of the chains became
louder, and the convoy soldiers, dressed in white blouses and carrying
guns, came out into the street and took their places in a large, exact
circle in front of the gate; this was evidently a usual, often-practised
manoeuvre. Then another command was given, and the prisoners began
coming out in couples, with flat, pancake-shaped caps on their shaved
heads and sacks over their shoulders, dragging their chained legs and
swinging one arm, while the other held up a sack.

First came the men condemned to hard labour, all dressed alike in grey
trousers and cloaks with marks on the back. All of them--young and old,
thin and fat, pale and red, dark and bearded and beardless, Russians,
Tartars, and Jews--came out, clattering with their chains and briskly
swinging their arms as if prepared to go a long distance, but stopped
after having taken ten steps, and obediently took their places behind
each other, four abreast. Then without interval streamed out more shaved
men, dressed in the same manner but with chains only on their legs.
These were condemned to exile. They came out as briskly and stopped as
suddenly, taking their places four in a row. Then came those exiled by
their Communes. Then the women in the same order, first those condemned
to hard labour, with grey cloaks and kerchiefs; then the exiled women,
and those following their husbands of their own free will, dressed in
their own town or village clothing. Some of the women were carrying
babies wrapped in the fronts of their grey cloaks.

With the women came the children, boys and girls, who, like colts in a
herd of horses, pressed in among the prisoners.

The men took their places silently, only coughing now and then, or
making short remarks.

The women talked without intermission. Nekhludoff thought he saw Maslova
as they were coming out, but she was at once lost in the large crowd,
and he could only see grey creatures, seemingly devoid of all that was
human, or at any rate of all that was womanly, with sacks on their backs
and children round them, taking their places behind the men.

Though all the prisoners had been counted inside the prison walls, the
convoy counted them again, comparing the numbers with the list. This
took very long, especially as some of the prisoners moved and changed
places, which confused the convoy.

The convoy soldiers shouted and pushed the prisoners (who complied
obediently, but angrily) and counted them over again. When all had
been counted, the convoy officer gave a command, and the crowd became
agitated. The weak men and women and children rushed, racing each
other, towards the carts, and began placing their bags on the carts
and climbing up themselves. Women with crying babies, merry children
quarrelling for places, and dull, careworn prisoners got into the carts.

Several of the prisoners took off their caps and came up to the convoy
officer with some request. Nekhludoff found out later that they were
asking for places on the carts. Nekhludoff saw how the officer, without
looking at the prisoners, drew in a whiff from his cigarette, and then
suddenly waved his short arm in front of one of the prisoners, who
quickly drew his shaved head back between his shoulders as if afraid of
a blow, and sprang back.

"I will give you a lift such that you'll remember. You'll get there on
foot right enough," shouted the officer. Only one of the men was granted
his request--an old man with chains on his legs; and Nekhludoff saw the
old man take off his pancake-shaped cap, and go up to the cart crossing
himself. He could not manage to get up on the cart because of the chains
that prevented his lifting his old legs, and a woman who was sitting in
the cart at last pulled him in by the arm.

When all the sacks were in the carts, and those who were allowed to get
in were seated, the officer took off his cap, wiped his forehead, his
bald head and fat, red neck, and crossed himself.

"March," commanded the officer. The soldiers' guns gave a click; the
prisoners took off their caps and crossed themselves, those who were
seeing them off shouted something, the prisoners shouted in answer, a
row arose among the women, and the gang, surrounded by the soldiers in
their white blouses, moved forward, raising the dust with their chained
feet. The soldiers went in front; then came the convicts condemned to
hard labour, clattering with their chains; then the exiled and those
exiled by the Communes, chained in couples by their wrists; then the
women. After them, on the carts loaded with sacks, came the weak. High
up on one of the carts sat a woman closely wrapped up, and she kept
shrieking and sobbing.



CHAPTER XXXV.

NOT MEN BUT STRANGE AND TERRIBLE CREATURES?

The procession was such a long one that the carts with the luggage and
the weak started only when those in front were already out of sight.
When the last of the carts moved, Nekhludoff got into the trap that
stood waiting for him and told the isvostchik to catch up the prisoners
in front, so that he could see if he knew any of the men in the gang,
and then try and find out Maslova among the women and ask her if she had
received the things he sent.

It was very hot, and a cloud of dust that was raised by a thousand
tramping feet stood all the time over the gang that was moving down
the middle of the street. The prisoners were walking quickly, and the
slow-going isvostchik's horse was some time in catching them up. Row
upon row they passed, those strange and terrible-looking creatures, none
of whom Nekhludoff knew.

On they went, all dressed alike, moving a thousand feet all shod alike,
swinging their free arms as if to keep up their spirits. There were so
many of them, they all looked so much alike, and they were all placed in
such unusual, peculiar circumstances, that they seemed to Nekhludoff
to be not men but some sort of strange and terrible creatures. This
impression passed when he recognised in the crowd of convicts the
murderer Federoff, and among the exiles Okhotin the wit, and another
tramp who had appealed to him for assistance. Almost all the prisoners
turned and looked at the trap that was passing them and at the gentleman
inside. Federoff tossed his head backwards as a sign that he had
recognised Nekhludoff, Okhotin winked, but neither of them bowed,
considering it not the thing.

As soon as Nekhludoff came up to the women he saw Maslova; she was in
the second row. The first in the row was a short-legged, black-eyed,
hideous woman, who had her cloak tucked up in her girdle. This was
Koroshavka. The next was a pregnant woman, who dragged herself along
with difficulty. The third was Maslova; she was carrying her sack on
her shoulder, and looking straight before her. Her face looked calm
and determined. The fourth in the row was a young, lovely woman who was
walking along briskly, dressed in a short cloak, her kerchief tied in
peasant fashion. This was Theodosia.

Nekhludoff got down and approached the women, meaning to ask Maslova if
she had got the things he had sent her, and how she was feeling, but the
convoy sergeant, who was walking on that side, noticed him at once, and
ran towards him.

"You must not do that, sir. It is against the regulations to approach
the gang," shouted the sergeant as he came up.

But when he recognised Nekhludoff (every one in the prison knew
Nekhludoff) the sergeant raised his fingers to his cap, and, stopping
in front of Nekhludoff, said: "Not now; wait till we get to the railway
station; here it is not allowed. Don't lag behind; march!" he shouted to
the convicts, and putting on a brisk air, he ran back to his place at a
trot, in spite of the heat and the elegant new boots on his feet.

Nekhludoff went on to the pavement and told the isvostchik to follow
him; himself walking, so as to keep the convicts in sight. Wherever the
gang passed it attracted attention mixed with horror and compassion.
Those who drove past leaned out of the vehicles and followed the
prisoners with their eyes. Those on foot stopped and looked with fear
and surprise at the terrible sight. Some came up and gave alms to the
prisoners. The alms were received by the convoy. Some, as if they were
hypnotised, followed the gang, but then stopped, shook their heads, and
followed the prisoners only with their eyes. Everywhere the people
came out of the gates and doors, and called others to come out, too,
or leaned out of the windows looking, silent and immovable, at the
frightful procession. At a cross-road a fine carriage was stopped by the
gang. A fat coachman, with a shiny face and two rows of buttons on his
back, sat on the box; a married couple sat facing the horses, the wife,
a pale, thin woman, with a light-coloured bonnet on her head and a
bright sunshade in her hand, the husband with a top-hat and a well-cut
light-coloured overcoat. On the seat in front sat their children--a
well-dressed little girl, with loose, fair hair, and as fresh as a
flower, who also held a bright parasol, and an eight-year-old boy, with
a long, thin neck and sharp collarbones, a sailor hat with long ribbons
on his head.

The father was angrily scolding the coachman because he had not passed
in front of the gang when he had a chance, and the mother frowned and
half closed her eyes with a look of disgust, shielding herself from the
dust and the sun with her silk sunshade, which she held close to her
face.

The fat coachman frowned angrily at the unjust rebukes of his
master--who had himself given the order to drive along that street--and
with difficulty held in the glossy, black horses, foaming under their
harness and impatient to go on.

The policeman wished with all his soul to please the owner of the fine
equipage by stopping the gang, yet felt that the dismal solemnity of
the procession could not be broken even for so rich a gentleman. He only
raised his fingers to his cap to show his respect for riches, and looked
severely at the prisoners as if promising in any case to protect the
owners of the carriage from them. So the carriage had to wait till the
whole of the procession had passed, and could only move on when the last
of the carts, laden with sacks and prisoners, rattled by. The hysterical
woman who sat on one of the carts, and had grown calm, again began
shrieking and sobbing when she saw the elegant carriage. Then the
coachman tightened the reins with a slight touch, and the black
trotters, their shoes ringing against the paving stones, drew the
carriage, softly swaying on its rubber tires, towards the country
house where the husband, the wife, the girl, and the boy with the sharp
collar-bones were going to amuse themselves. Neither the father nor the
mother gave the girl and boy any explanation of what they had seen, so
that the children had themselves to find out the meaning of this curious
sight. The girl, taking the expression of her father's and mother's
faces into consideration, solved the problem by assuming that these
people were quite another kind of men and women than her father and
mother and their acquaintances, that they were bad people, and that they
had therefore to be treated in the manner they were being treated.

Therefore the girl felt nothing but fear, and was glad when she could no
longer see those people.

But the boy with the long, thin neck, who looked at the procession
of prisoners without taking his eyes off them, solved the question
differently.

He still knew, firmly and without any doubt, for he had it from God,
that these people were just the same kind of people as he was, and like
all other people, and therefore some one had done these people some
wrong, something that ought not to have been done, and he was sorry for
them, and felt no horror either of those who were shaved and chained or
of those who had shaved and chained them. And so the boy's lips pouted
more and more, and he made greater and greater efforts not to cry,
thinking it a shame to cry in such a case.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE TENDER MERCIES OF THE LORD.

Nekhludoff kept up with the quick pace of the convicts. Though lightly
clothed he felt dreadfully hot, and it was hard to breathe in the
stifling, motionless, burning air filled with dust.

When he had walked about a quarter of a mile he again got into the trap,
but it felt still hotter in the middle of the street. He tried to recall
last night's conversation with his brother-in-law, but the recollections
no longer excited him as they had done in the morning. They were dulled
by the impressions made by the starting and procession of the gang, and
chiefly by the intolerable heat.

On the pavement, in the shade of some trees overhanging a fence, he saw
two schoolboys standing over a kneeling man who sold ices. One of the
boys was already sucking a pink spoon and enjoying his ices, the other
was waiting for a glass that was being filled with something yellowish.

"Where could I get a drink?" Nekhludoff asked his isvostchik, feeling an
insurmountable desire for some refreshment.

"There is a good eating-house close by," the isvostchik answered, and
turning a corner, drove up to a door with a large signboard. The plump
clerk in a Russian shirt, who stood behind the counter, and the waiters
in their once white clothing who sat at the tables (there being hardly
any customers) looked with curiosity at the unusual visitor and offered
him their services. Nekhludoff asked for a bottle of seltzer water and
sat down some way from the window at a small table covered with a dirty
cloth. Two men sat at another table with tea-things and a white bottle
in front of them, mopping their foreheads, and calculating something in
a friendly manner. One of them was dark and bald, and had just such a
border of hair at the back as Rogozhinsky. This sight again reminded
Nekhludoff of yesterday's talk with his brother-in-law and his wish to
see him and Nathalie.

"I shall hardly be able to do it before the train starts," he thought;
"I'd better write." He asked for paper, an envelope, and a stamp, and as
he was sipping the cool, effervescent water he considered what he should
say. But his thoughts wandered, and he could not manage to compose a
letter.

"My dear Nathalie,--I cannot go away with the heavy impression that
yesterday's talk with your husband has left," he began. "What next?
Shall I ask him to forgive me what I said yesterday? But I only said
what I felt, and he will think that I am taking it back. Besides, this
interference of his in my private matters. . . . No, I cannot," and
again he felt hatred rising in his heart towards that man so foreign
to him. He folded the unfinished letter and put it in his pocket, paid,
went out, and again got into the trap to catch up the gang. It had grown
still hotter. The stones and the walls seemed to be breathing out hot
air. The pavement seemed to scorch the feet, and Nekhludoff felt a
burning sensation in his hand when he touched the lacquered splashguard
of his trap.

The horse was jogging along at a weary trot, beating the uneven, dusty
road monotonously with its hoofs, the isvostchik kept falling into a
doze, Nekhludoff sat without thinking of anything.

At the bottom of a street, in front of a large house, a group of people
had collected, and a convoy soldier stood by.

"What has happened?" Nekhludoff asked of a porter.

"Something the matter with a convict."

Nekhludoff got down and came up to the group. On the rough stones,
where the pavement slanted down to the gutter, lay a broadly-built,
red-bearded, elderly convict, with his head lower than his feet, and
very red in the face. He had a grey cloak and grey trousers on, and lay
on his back with the palms of his freckled hands downwards, and at
long intervals his broad, high chest heaved, and he groaned, while
his bloodshot eyes were fixed on the sky. By him stood a cross-looking
policeman, a pedlar, a postman, a clerk, an old woman with a parasol,
and a short-haired boy with an empty basket.

"They are weak. Having been locked up in prison they've got weak, and
then they lead them through the most broiling heat," said the clerk,
addressing Nekhludoff, who had just come up.

"He'll die, most likely," said the woman with the parasol, in a doleful
tone.

"His shirt should be untied," said the postman.

The policeman began, with his thick, trembling fingers, clumsily to
untie the tapes that fastened the shirt round the red, sinewy neck. He
was evidently excited and confused, but still thought it necessary to
address the crowd.

"What have you collected here for? It is hot enough without your keeping
the wind off."

"They should have been examined by a doctor, and the weak ones left
behind," said the clerk, showing off his knowledge of the law.

The policeman, having undone the tapes of the shirt, rose and looked
round.

"Move on, I tell you. It is not your business, is it? What's there
to stare at?" he said, and turned to Nekhludoff for sympathy, but not
finding any in his face he turned to the convoy soldier.

But the soldier stood aside, examining the trodden-down heel of his
boot, and was quite indifferent to the policeman's perplexity.

"Those whose business it is don't care. Is it right to do men to death
like this? A convict is a convict, but still he is a man," different
voices were heard saying in the crowd.

"Put his head up higher, and give him some water," said Nekhludoff.

"Water has been sent for," said the policeman, and taking the prisoner
under the arms he with difficulty pulled his body a little higher up.

"What's this gathering here?" said a decided, authoritative voice, and
a police officer, with a wonderfully clean, shiny blouse, and still more
shiny top-boots, came up to the assembled crowd.

"Move on. No standing about here," he shouted to the crowd, before he
knew what had attracted it.

When he came near and saw the dying convict, he made a sign of approval
with his head, just as if he had quite expected it, and, turning to the
policeman, said, "How is this?"

The policeman said that, as a gang of prisoners was passing, one of the
convicts had fallen down, and the convoy officer had ordered him to be
left behind.

"Well, that's all right. He must be taken to the police station. Call an
isvostchik."

"A porter has gone for one," said the policeman, with his fingers raised
to his cap.

The shopman began something about the heat.

"Is it your business, eh? Move on," said the police officer, and looked
so severely at him that the clerk was silenced.

"He ought to have a little water," said Nekhludoff. The police officer
looked severely at Nekhludoff also, but said nothing. When the porter
brought a mug full of water, he told the policeman to offer some to the
convict. The policeman raised the drooping head, and tried to pour a
little water down the mouth; but the prisoner could not swallow it, and
it ran down his beard, wetting his jacket and his coarse, dirty linen
shirt.

"Pour it on his head," ordered the officer; and the policeman took off
the pancake-shaped cap and poured the water over the red curls and bald
part of the prisoner's head. His eyes opened wide as if in fear, but his
position remained unchanged.

Streams of dirt trickled down his dusty face, but the mouth continued to
gasp in the same regular way, and his whole body shook.

"And what's this? Take this one," said the police officer, pointing to
Nekhludoff's isvostchik. "You, there, drive up."

"I am engaged," said the isvostchik, dismally, and without looking up.

"It is my isvostchik; but take him. I will pay you," said Nekhludoff,
turning to the isvostchik.

"Well, what are you waiting for?" shouted the officer. "Catch hold."

The policeman, the porter, and the convoy soldier lifted the dying man
and carried him to the trap, and put him on the seat. But he could not
sit up; his head fell back, and the whole of his body glided off the
seat.

"Make him lie down," ordered the officer.

"It's all right, your honour; I'll manage him like this," said the
policeman, sitting down by the dying man, and clasping his strong,
right arm round the body under the arms. The convoy soldier lifted the
stockingless feet, in prison shoes, and put them into the trap.

The police officer looked around, and noticing the pancake-shaped hat of
the convict lifted it up and put it on the wet, drooping head.

"Go on," he ordered.

The isvostchik looked angrily round, shook his head, and, accompanied
by the convoy soldier, drove back to the police station. The policeman,
sitting beside the convict, kept dragging up the body that was
continually sliding down from the seat, while the head swung from side
to side.

The convoy soldier, who was walking by the side of the trap, kept
putting the legs in their place. Nekhludoff followed the trap.



CHAPTER XXXVII.

SPILLED LIKE WATER ON THE GROUND.

The trap passed the fireman who stood sentinel at the entrance, [the
headquarters of the fire brigade and the police stations are generally
together in Moscow] drove into the yard of the police station, and
stopped at one of the doors. In the yard several firemen with their
sleeves tucked up were washing some kind of cart and talking loudly.
When the trap stopped, several policemen surrounded it, and taking the
lifeless body of the convict under the arms, took him out of the trap,
which creaked under him. The policeman who had brought the body got
down, shook his numbed arm, took off his cap, and crossed himself.
The body was carried through the door and up the stairs. Nekhludoff
followed. In the small, dirty room where the body was taken there stood
four beds. On two of them sat a couple of sick men in dressing-gowns,
one with a crooked mouth, whose neck was bandaged, the other one in
consumption. Two of the beds were empty; the convict was laid on one of
them. A little man, with glistening eyes and continually moving brows,
with only his underclothes and stockings on, came up with quick, soft
steps, looked at the convict and then at Nekhludoff, and burst into loud
laughter. This was a madman who was being kept in the police hospital.

"They wish to frighten me, but no, they won't succeed," he said.

The policemen who carried the corpse were followed by a police officer
and a medical assistant. The medical assistant came up to the body and
touched the freckled hand, already growing cold, which, though still
soft, was deadly pale. He held it for a moment, and then let it go. It
fell lifelessly on the stomach of the dead man.

"He's ready," said the medical assistant, but, evidently to be quite in
order, he undid the wet, brown shirt, and tossing back the curls from
his ear, put it to the yellowish, broad, immovable chest of the convict.
All were silent. The medical assistant raised himself again, shook his
head, and touched with his fingers first one and then the other lid over
the open, fixed blue eyes.

"I'm not frightened, I'm not frightened." The madman kept repeating
these words, and spitting in the direction of the medical assistant.

"Well?" asked the police officer.

"Well! He must be put into the mortuary."

"Are you sure? Mind," said the police officer.

"It's time I should know," said the medical assistant, drawing the shirt
over the body's chest. "However, I will send for Mathew Ivanovitch. Let
him have a look. Petrov, call him," and the medical assistant stepped
away from the body.

"Take him to the mortuary," said the police officer. "And then you must
come into the office and sign," he added to the convoy soldier, who had
not left the convict for a moment.

"Yes, sir," said the soldier.

The policemen lifted the body and carried it down again. Nekhludoff
wished to follow, but the madman kept him back.

"You are not in the plot! Well, then, give me a cigarette," he said.
Nekhludoff got out his cigarette case and gave him one.

The madman, quickly moving his brows all the time, began relating how
they tormented him by thought suggestion.

"Why, they are all against me, and torment and torture me through their
mediums."

"I beg your pardon," said Nekhludoff, and without listening any further
he left the room and went out into the yard, wishing to know where the
body would be put.

The policemen with their burden had already crossed the yard, and were
coming to the door of a cellar. Nekhludoff wished to go up to them, but
the police officer stopped him.

"What do you want?"

"Nothing."

"Nothing? Then go away."

Nekhludoff obeyed, and went back to his isvostchik, who was dozing. He
awoke him, and they drove back towards the railway station.

They had not made a hundred steps when they met a cart accompanied by
a convoy soldier with a gun. On the cart lay another convict, who was
already dead. The convict lay on his back in the cart, his shaved head,
from which the pancake-shaped cap had slid over the black-bearded face
down to the nose, shaking and thumping at every jolt. The driver, in
his heavy boots, walked by the side of the cart, holding the reins;
a policeman followed on foot. Nekhludoff touched his isvostchik's
shoulder.

"Just look what they are doing," said the isvostchik, stopping his
horse.

Nekhludoff got down and, following the cart, again passed the sentinel
and entered the gate of the police station. By this time the firemen had
finished washing the cart, and a tall, bony man, the chief of the fire
brigade, with a coloured band round his cap, stood in their place, and,
with his hands in his pockets, was severely looking at a fat-necked,
well-fed, bay stallion that was being led up and down before him by a
fireman. The stallion was lame on one of his fore feet, and the chief of
the firemen was angrily saying something to a veterinary who stood by.

The police officer was also present. When he saw the cart he went up to
the convoy soldier.

"Where did you bring him from?" he asked, shaking his head
disapprovingly.

"From the Gorbatovskaya," answered the policeman.

"A prisoner?" asked the chief of the fire brigade.

"Yes. It's the second to-day."

"Well, I must say they've got some queer arrangements. Though of course
it's a broiling day," said the chief of the fire brigade; then, turning
to the fireman who was leading the lame stallion, he shouted: "Put him
into the corner stall. And as to you, you hound, I'll teach you how to
cripple horses which are worth more than you are, you scoundrel."

The dead man was taken from the cart by the policemen just in the same
way as the first had been, and carried upstairs into the hospital.
Nekhludoff followed them as if he were hypnotised.

"What do you want?" asked one of the policemen. But Nekhludoff did
not answer, and followed where the body was being carried. The madman,
sitting on a bed, was smoking greedily the cigarette Nekhludoff had
given him.

"Ah, you've come back," he said, and laughed. When he saw the body he
made a face, and said, "Again! I am sick of it. I am not a boy, am I,
eh?" and he turned to Nekhludoff with a questioning smile.

Nekhludoff was looking at the dead man, whose face, which had been
hidden by his cap, was now visible. This convict was as handsome in face
and body as the other was hideous. He was a man in the full bloom of
life. Notwithstanding that he was disfigured by the half of his head
being shaved, the straight, rather low forehead, raised a bit over the
black, lifeless eyes, was very fine, and so was the nose above the
thin, black moustaches. There was a smile on the lips that were already
growing blue, a small beard outlined the lower part of the face, and on
the shaved side of the head a firm, well-shaped ear was visible.

One could see what possibilities of a higher life had been destroyed
in this man. The fine bones of his hands and shackled feet, the strong
muscles of all his well-proportioned limbs, showed what a beautiful,
strong, agile human animal this had been. As an animal merely he had
been a far more perfect one of his kind than the bay stallion, about the
laming of which the fireman was so angry.

Yet he had been done to death, and no one was sorry for him as a man,
nor was any one sorry that so fine a working animal had perished. The
only feeling evinced was that of annoyance because of the bother caused
by the necessity of getting this body, threatening putrefaction, out of
the way. The doctor and his assistant entered the hospital, accompanied
by the inspector of the police station. The doctor was a thick-set man,
dressed in pongee silk coat and trousers of the same material, closely
fitting his muscular thighs. The inspector was a little fat fellow, with
a red face, round as a ball, which he made still broader by a habit he
had of filling his cheeks with air, and slowly letting it out again. The
doctor sat down on the bed by the side of the dead man, and touched
the hands in the same way as his assistant had done, put his ear to the
heart, rose, and pulled his trousers straight. "Could not be more dead,"
he said.

The inspector filled his mouth with air and slowly blew it out again.

"Which prison is he from?" he asked the convoy soldier.

The soldier told him, and reminded him of the chains on the dead man's
feet.

"I'll have them taken off; we have got a smith about, the Lord be
thanked," said the inspector, and blew up his cheeks again; he went
towards the door, slowly letting out the air.

"Why has this happened?" Nekhludoff asked the doctor.

The doctor looked at him through his spectacles.

"Why has what happened? Why they die of sunstroke, you mean? This is
why: They sit all through the winter without exercise and without light,
and suddenly they are taken out into the sunshine, and on a day like
this, and they march in a crowd so that they get no air, and sunstroke
is the result."

"Then why are they sent out?"

"Oh, as to that, go and ask those who send them. But may I ask who are
you?"

"I am a stranger."

"Ah, well, good-afternoon; I have no time." The doctor was vexed; he
gave his trousers a downward pull, and went towards the beds of the
sick.

"Well, how are you getting on?" he asked the pale man with the crooked
mouth and bandaged neck.

Meanwhile the madman sat on a bed, and having finished his cigarette,
kept spitting in the direction of the doctor.

Nekhludoff went down into the yard and out of the gate past the
firemen's horses and the hens and the sentinel in his brass helmet, and
got into the trap, the driver of which had again fallen asleep.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE CONVICT TRAIN.

When Nekhludoff came to the station, the prisoners were all seated in
railway carriages with grated windows. Several persons, come to see
them off, stood on the platform, but were not allowed to come up to the
carriages.

The convoy was much troubled that day. On the way from the prison to the
station, besides the two Nekhludoff had seen, three other prisoners
had fallen and died of sunstroke. One was taken to the nearest police
station like the first two, and the other two died at the railway
station. [In Moscow, in the beginning of the eighth decade of this
century, five convicts died of sunstroke in one day on their way from
the Boutyrki prison to the Nijni railway station.] The convoy men were
not troubled because five men who might have been alive died while in
their charge. This did not trouble them, but they were concerned lest
anything that the law required in such cases should be omitted. To
convey the bodies to the places appointed, to deliver up their papers,
to take them off the lists of those to be conveyed to Nijni--all this
was very troublesome, especially on so hot a day.

It was this that occupied the convoy men, and before it could all be
accomplished Nekhludoff and the others who asked for leave to go up to
the carriages were not allowed to do so. Nekhludoff, however, was soon
allowed to go up, because he tipped the convoy sergeant. The sergeant
let Nekhludoff pass, but asked him to be quick and get his talk over
before any of the authorities noticed. There were 15 carriages in all,
and except one carriage for the officials, they were full of prisoners.
As Nekhludoff passed the carriages he listened to what was going on in
them. In all the carriages was heard the clanging of chains, the sound
of bustle, mixed with loud and senseless language, but not a word was
being said about their dead fellow-prisoners. The talk was all about
sacks, drinking water, and the choice of seats.

Looking into one of the carriages, Nekhludoff saw convoy soldiers taking
the manacles off the hands of the prisoners. The prisoners held out
their arms, and one of the soldiers unlocked the manacles with a key and
took them off; the other collected them.

After he had passed all the other carriages, Nekhludoff came up to the
women's carriages. From the second of these he heard a woman's groans:
"Oh, oh, oh! O God! Oh, oh! O God!"

Nekhludoff passed this carriage and went up to a window of the third
carriage, which a soldier pointed out to him. When he approached his
face to the window, he felt the hot air, filled with the smell of
perspiration, coming out of it, and heard distinctly the shrill sound
of women's voices. All the seats were filled with red, perspiring,
loudly-talking women, dressed in prison cloaks and white jackets.
Nekhludoff's face at the window attracted their attention. Those nearest
ceased talking and drew closer. Maslova, in her white jacket and her
head uncovered, sat by the opposite window. The white-skinned, smiling
Theodosia sat a little nearer. When she recognised Nekhludoff, she
nudged Maslova and pointed to the window. Maslova rose hurriedly, threw
her kerchief over her black hair, and with a smile on her hot, red face
came up to the window and took hold of one of the bars.

"Well, it is hot," she said, with a glad smile.

"Did you get the things?"

"Yes, thank you."

"Is there anything more you want?" asked Nekhludoff, while the air came
out of the hot carriage as out of an oven.

"I want nothing, thank you."

"If we could get a drink?" said Theodosia.

"Yes, if we could get a drink," repeated Maslova.

"Why, have you not got any water?"

"They put some in, but it is all gone."

"Directly, I will ask one of the convoy men. Now we shall not see each
other till we get to Nijni."

"Why? Are you going?" said Maslova, as if she did not know it, and
looked joyfully at Nekhludoff.

"I am going by the next train."

Maslova said nothing, but only sighed deeply.

"Is it true, sir, that 12 convicts have been done to death?" said a
severe-looking old prisoner with a deep voice like a man's.

It was Korableva.

"I did not hear of 12; I have seen two," said Nekhludoff.

"They say there were 12 they killed. And will nothing be done to them?
Only think! The fiends!"

"And have none of the women fallen ill?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Women are stronger," said another of the prisoners--a short little
woman, and laughed; "only there's one that has taken it into her head to
be delivered. There she goes," she said, pointing to the next carriage,
whence proceeded the groans.

"You ask if we want anything," said Maslova, trying to keep the smile
of joy from her lips; "could not this woman be left behind, suffering as
she is? There, now, if you would tell the authorities."

"Yes, I will."

"And one thing more; could she not see her husband, Taras?" she added,
pointing with her eyes to the smiling Theodosia.

"He is going with you, is he not?"

"Sir, you must not talk," said a convoy sergeant, not the one who had
let Nekhludoff come up. Nekhludoff left the carriage and went in search
of an official to whom he might speak for the woman in travail and about
Taras, but could not find him, nor get an answer from any of the convoy
for a long time. They were all in a bustle; some were leading a prisoner
somewhere or other, others running to get themselves provisions, some
were placing their things in the carriages or attending on a lady
who was going to accompany the convoy officer, and they answered
Nekhludoff's questions unwillingly. Nekhludoff found the convoy officer
only after the second bell had been rung. The officer with his short
arm was wiping the moustaches that covered his mouth and shrugging his
shoulders, reproving the corporal for something or other.

"What is it you want?" he asked Nekhludoff.

"You've got a woman there who is being confined, so I thought best--"

"Well, let her be confined; we shall see later on," and briskly swinging
his short arms, he ran up to his carriage. At the moment the guard
passed with a whistle in his hand, and from the people on the platform
and from the women's carriages there arose a sound of weeping and words
of prayer.

Nekhludoff stood on the platform by the side of Taras, and looked how,
one after the other, the carriages glided past him, with the shaved
heads of the men at the grated windows. Then the first of the women's
carriages came up, with women's heads at the windows, some covered with
kerchiefs and some uncovered, then the second, whence proceeded the same
groans, then the carriage where Maslova was. She stood with the others
at the window, and looked at Nekhludoff with a pathetic smile.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

BROTHER AND SISTER.

There were still two hours before the passenger train by which
Nekhludoff was going would start. He had thought of using this interval
to see his sister again; but after the impressions of the morning he
felt much excited and so done up that, sitting down on a sofa in the
first-class refreshment-room, he suddenly grew so drowsy that he turned
over on to his side, and, laying his face on his hand, fell asleep at
once. A waiter in a dress coat with a napkin in his hand woke him.

"Sir, sir, are you not Prince Nekhludoff? There's a lady looking for
you."

Nekhludoff started up and recollected where he was and all that had
happened in the morning.

He saw in his imagination the procession of prisoners, the dead bodies,
the railway carriages with barred windows, and the women locked up in
them, one of whom was groaning in travail with no one to help her, and
another who was pathetically smiling at him through the bars.

The reality before his eyes was very different, i.e., a table with
vases, candlesticks and crockery, and agile waiters moving round the
table, and in the background a cupboard and a counter laden with fruit
and bottles, behind it a barman, and in front the backs of passengers
who had come up for refreshments. When Nekhludoff had risen and sat
gradually collecting his thoughts, he noticed that everybody in the
room was inquisitively looking at something that was passing by the open
doors.

He also looked, and saw a group of people carrying a chair on which sat
a lady whose head was wrapped in a kind of airy fabric.

Nekhludoff thought he knew the footman who was supporting the chair in
front. And also the man behind, and a doorkeeper with gold cord on his
cap, seemed familiar. A lady's maid with a fringe and an apron, who was
carrying a parcel, a parasol, and something round in a leather case,
was walking behind the chair. Then came Prince Korchagin, with his thick
lips, apoplectic neck, and a travelling cap on his head; behind him
Missy, her cousin Misha, and an acquaintance of Nekhludoff's--the
long-necked diplomat Osten, with his protruding Adam's apple and his
unvarying merry mood and expression. He was saying something very
emphatically, though jokingly, to the smiling Missy. The Korchagins were
moving from their estate near the city to the estate of the Princess's
sister on the Nijni railway. The procession--the men carrying the
chair, the maid, and the doctor--vanished into the ladies' waiting-room,
evoking a feeling of curiosity and respect in the onlookers. But the old
Prince remained and sat down at the table, called a waiter, and ordered
food and drink. Missy and Osten also remained in the refreshment-room
and were about to sit down, when they saw an acquaintance in the
doorway, and went up to her. It was Nathalie Rogozhinsky. Nathalie came
into the refreshment-room accompanied by Agraphena Petrovna, and both
looked round the room. Nathalie noticed at one and the same moment both
her brother and Missy. She first went up to Missy, only nodding to her
brother; but, having kissed her, at once turned to him.

"At last I have found you," she said. Nekhludoff rose to greet Missy,
Misha, and Osten, and to say a few words to them. Missy told him about
their house in the country having been burnt down, which necessitated
their moving to her aunt's. Osten began relating a funny story about a
fire. Nekhludoff paid no attention, and turned to his sister.

"How glad I am that you have come."

"I have been here a long time," she said. "Agraphena Petrovna is with
me." And she pointed to Agraphena Petrovna, who, in a waterproof and
with a bonnet on her head, stood some way off, and bowed to him with
kindly dignity and some confusion, not wishing to intrude.

"We looked for you everywhere."

"And I had fallen asleep here. How glad I am that you have come,"
repeated Nekhludoff. "I had begun to write to you."

"Really?" she said, looking frightened. "What about?"

Missy and the gentleman, noticing that an intimate conversation was
about to commence between the brother and sister, went away. Nekhludoff
and his sister sat down by the window on a velvet-covered sofa, on which
lay a plaid, a box, and a few other things.

"Yesterday, after I left you, I felt inclined to return and express my
regret, but I did not know how he would take it," said Nekhludoff. "I
spoke hastily to your husband, and this tormented me."

"I knew," said his sister, "that you did not mean to. Oh, you know!" and
the tears came to her eyes, and she touched his hand. The sentence was
not clear, but he understood it perfectly, and was touched by what it
expressed. Her words meant that, besides the love for her husband which
held her in its sway, she prized and considered important the love she
had for him, her brother, and that every misunderstanding between them
caused her deep suffering.

"Thank you, thank you. Oh! what I have seen to-day!" he said, suddenly
recalling the second of the dead convicts. "Two prisoners have been done
to death."

"Done to death? How?"

"Yes, done to death. They led them in this heat, and two died of
sunstroke."

"Impossible! What, to-day? just now?"

"Yes, just now. I have seen their bodies."

"But why done to death? Who killed them?" asked Nathalie.

"They who forced them to go killed them," said Nekhludoff, with
irritation, feeling that she looked at this, too, with her husband's
eyes.

"Oh, Lord!" said Agraphena Petrovna, who had come up to them.

"Yes, we have not the slightest idea of what is being done to these
unfortunate beings. But it ought to be known," added Nekhludoff, and
looked at old Korchagin, who sat with a napkin tied round him and a
bottle before him, and who looked round at Nekhludoff.

"Nekhludoff," he called out, "won't you join me and take some
refreshment? It is excellent before a journey."

Nekhludoff refused, and turned away.

"But what are you going to do?" Nathalie continued.

"What I can. I don't know, but I feel I must do something. And I shall
do what I am able to."

"Yes, I understand. And how about them?" she continued, with a smile and
a look towards Korchagin. "Is it possible that it is all over?"

"Completely, and I think without any regret on either side."

"It is a pity. I am sorry. I am fond of her. However, it's all right.
But why do you wish to bind yourself?" she added shyly. "Why are you
going?"

"I go because I must," answered Nekhludoff, seriously and dryly, as if
wishing to stop this conversation. But he felt ashamed of his coldness
towards his sister at once. "Why not tell her all I am thinking?" he
thought, "and let Agraphena Petrovna also hear it," he thought, with
a look at the old servant, whose presence made the wish to repeat his
decision to his sister even stronger.

"You mean my intention to marry Katusha? Well, you see, I made up my
mind to do it, but she refuses definitely and firmly," he said, and his
voice shook, as it always did when he spoke of it. "She does not wish
to accept my sacrifice, but is herself sacrificing what in her position
means much, and I cannot accept this sacrifice, if it is only a
momentary impulse. And so I am going with her, and shall be where she
is, and shall try to lighten her fate as much as I can."

Nathalie said nothing. Agraphena Petrovna looked at her with a
questioning look, and shook her head. At this moment the former
procession issued from the ladies' room. The same handsome footman
(Philip). and the doorkeeper were carrying the Princess Korchagin. She
stopped the men who were carrying her, and motioned to Nekhludoff to
approach, and, with a pitiful, languishing air, she extended her white,
ringed hand, expecting the firm pressure of his hand with a sense of
horror.

"Epouvantable!" she said, meaning the heat. "I cannot stand it! Ce
climat me tue!" And, after a short talk about the horrors of the Russian
climate, she gave the men a sign to go on.

"Be sure and come," she added, turning her long face towards Nekhludoff
as she was borne away.

The procession with the Princess turned to the right towards the
first-class carriages. Nekhludoff, with the porter who was carrying his
things, and Taras with his bag, turned to the left.

"This is my companion," said Nekhludoff to his sister, pointing to
Taras, whose story he had told her before.

"Surely not third class?" said Nathalie, when Nekhludoff stopped in
front of a third-class carriage, and Taras and the porter with the
things went in.

"Yes; it is more convenient for me to be with Taras," he said. "One
thing more," he added; "up to now I have not given the Kousminski
land to the peasants; so that, in case of my death, your children will
inherit it."

"Dmitri, don't!" said Nathalie.

"If I do give it away, all I can say is that the rest will be theirs,
as it is not likely I shall marry; and if I do marry I shall have no
children, so that--"

"Dmitri, don't talk like that!" said Nathalie. And yet Nekhludoff
noticed that she was glad to hear him say it.

Higher up, by the side of a first-class carriage, there stood a group of
people still looking at the carriage into which the Princess Korchagin
had been carried. Most of the passengers were already seated. Some of
the late comers hurriedly clattered along the boards of the platform,
the guard was closing the doors and asking the passengers to get in and
those who were seeing them off to come out.

Nekhludoff entered the hot, smelling carriage, but at once stepped out
again on to the small platform at the back of the carriage. Nathalie
stood opposite the carriage, with her fashionable bonnet and cape,
by the side of Agraphena Petrovna, and was evidently trying to find
something to say.

She could not even say ecrivez, because they had long ago laughed
at this word, habitually spoken by those about to part. The short
conversation about money matters had in a moment destroyed the tender
brotherly and sisterly feelings that had taken hold of them. They felt
estranged, so that Nathalie was glad when the train moved; and she
could only say, nodding her head with a sad and tender look, "Goodbye,
good-bye, Dmitri." But as soon as the carriage had passed her she
thought of how she should repeat her conversation with her brother to
her husband, and her face became serious and troubled.

Nekhludoff, too, though he had nothing but the kindest feelings for
his sister, and had hidden nothing from her, now felt depressed and
uncomfortable with her, and was glad to part. He felt that the Nathalie
who was once so near to him no longer existed, and in her place was only
a slave of that hairy, unpleasant husband, who was so foreign to him. He
saw it clearly when her face lit up with peculiar animation as he spoke
of what would peculiarly interest her husband, i.e., the giving up of
the land to the peasants and the inheritance.

And this made him sad.



CHAPTER XL.

THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF HUMAN LIFE.

The heat in the large third-class carriage, which had been standing in
the burning sun all day, was so great that Nekhludoff did not go in,
but stopped on the little platform behind the carriage which formed a
passage to the next one. But there was not a breath of fresh air here
either, and Nekhludoff breathed freely only when the train had passed
the buildings and the draught blew across the platform.

"Yes, killed," he repeated to himself, the words he had used to his
sister. And in his imagination in the midst of all other impressions
there arose with wonderful clearness the beautiful face of the second
dead convict, with the smile of the lips, the severe expression of the
brows, and the small, firm ear below the shaved bluish skull.

And what seemed terrible was that he had been murdered, and no one knew
who had murdered him. Yet he had been murdered. He was led out like all
the rest of the prisoners by Maslennikoff's orders. Maslennikoff had
probably given the order in the usual manner, had signed with his stupid
flourish the paper with the printed heading, and most certainly would
not consider himself guilty. Still less would the careful doctor who
examined the convicts consider himself guilty. He had performed his duty
accurately, and had separated the weak. How could he have foreseen this
terrible heat, or the fact that they would start so late in the day and
in such crowds? The prison inspector? But the inspector had only carried
into execution the order that on a given day a certain number of exiles
and convicts--men and women--had to be sent off. The convoy officer
could not be guilty either, for his business was to receive a certain
number of persons in a certain place, and to deliver up the same number.
He conducted them in the usual manner, and could not foresee that two
such strong men as those Nekhludoff saw would not be able to stand it
and would die. No one is guilty, and yet the men have been murdered by
these people who are not guilty of their murder.

"All this comes," Nekhludoff thought, "from the fact that all these
people, governors, inspectors, police officers, and men, consider that
there are circumstances in which human relations are not necessary
between human beings. All these men, Maslennikoff, and the inspector,
and the convoy officer, if they were not _governor, inspector, officer,_
would have considered twenty times before sending people in such heat
in such a mass--would have stopped twenty times on the way, and, seeing
that a man was growing weak, gasping for breath, would have led him
into the shade, would have given him water and let him rest, and if an
accident had still occurred they would have expressed pity. But they
not only did not do it, but hindered others from doing it, because they
considered not men and their duty towards them but only the office they
themselves filled, and held what that office demanded of them to be
above human relations. That's what it is," Nekhludoff went on in his
thoughts. "If one acknowledges but for a single hour that anything
can be more important than love for one's fellowmen, even in some
one exceptional case, any crime can be committed without a feeling of
guilt."

Nekhludoff was so engrossed by his thoughts that he did not notice how
the weather changed. The sun was covered over by a low-hanging, ragged
cloud. A compact, light grey cloud was rapidly coming from the west, and
was already falling in heavy, driving rain on the fields and woods far
in the distance. Moisture, coming from the cloud, mixed with the air.
Now and then the cloud was rent by flashes of lightning, and peals of
thunder mingled more and more often with the rattling of the train. The
cloud came nearer and nearer, the rain-drops driven by the wind began
to spot the platform and Nekhludoff's coat; and he stepped to the other
side of the little platform, and, inhaling the fresh, moist air--filled
with the smell of corn and wet earth that had long been waiting for
rain--he stood looking at the gardens, the woods, the yellow rye fields,
the green oatfields, the dark-green strips of potatoes in bloom, that
glided past. Everything looked as if covered over with varnish--the
green turned greener, the yellow yellower, the black blacker.

"More! more!" said Nekhludoff, gladdened by the sight of gardens and
fields revived by the beneficent shower. The shower did not last long.
Part of the cloud had come down in rain, part passed over, and the last
fine drops fell straight on to the earth. The sun reappeared,
everything began to glisten, and in the east--not very high above the
horizon--appeared a bright rainbow, with the violet tint very distinct
and broken only at one end.

"Why, what was I thinking about?" Nekhludoff asked himself when all
these changes in nature were over, and the train ran into a cutting
between two high banks.

"Oh! I was thinking that all those people (inspector, convoy men--all
those in the service) are for the greater part kind people--cruel only
because they are serving." He recalled Maslennikoff's indifference when
he told him about what was being done in the prison, the inspector's
severity, the cruelty of the convoy officer when he refused places on
the carts to those who asked for them, and paid no attention to the fact
that there was a woman in travail in the train. All these people were
evidently invulnerable and impregnable to the simplest feelings of
compassion only because they held offices. "As officials they were
impermeable to the feelings of humanity, as this paved ground is
impermeable to the rain." Thus thought Nekhludoff as he looked at the
railway embankment paved with stones of different colours, down which
the water was running in streams instead of soaking into the earth.
"Perhaps it is necessary to pave the banks with stones, but it is sad
to look at the ground, which might be yielding corn, grass, bushes, or
trees in the same way as the ground visible up there is doing--deprived
of vegetation, and so it is with men," thought Nekhludoff. "Perhaps
these governors, inspectors, policemen, are needed, but it is terrible
to see men deprived of the chief human attribute, that of love and
sympathy for one another. The thing is," he continued, "that these
people consider lawful what is not lawful, and do not consider the
eternal, immutable law, written in the hearts of men by God, as law.
That is why I feel so depressed when I am with these people. I am
simply afraid of them, and really they are terrible, more terrible than
robbers. A robber might, after all, feel pity, but they can feel
no pity, they are inured against pity as these stones are against
vegetation. That is what makes them terrible. It is said that the
Pougatcheffs, the Razins [leaders of rebellions in Russia: Stonka Razin
in the 17th and Pougatcheff in the 18th century] are terrible. These are
a thousand times more terrible," he continued, in his thoughts. "If
a psychological problem were set to find means of making men of our
time--Christian, humane, simple, kind people--perform the most horrible
crimes without feeling guilty, only one solution could be devised: to
go on doing what is being done. It is only necessary that these people
should he governors, inspectors, policemen; that they should be fully
convinced that there is a kind of business, called government service,
which allows men to treat other men as things, without human brotherly
relations with them, and also that these people should be so linked
together by this government service that the responsibility for the
results of their actions should not fall on any one of them separately.
Without these conditions, the terrible acts I witnessed to-day would be
impossible in our times. It all lies in the fact that men think there
are circumstances in which one may deal with human beings without love;
and there are no such circumstances. One may deal with things without
love. One may cut down trees, make bricks, hammer iron without love; but
you cannot deal with men without it, just as one cannot deal with bees
without being careful. If you deal carelessly with bees you will injure
them, and will yourself be injured. And so with men. It cannot be
otherwise, because natural love is the fundamental law of human life. It
is true that a man cannot force another to love him, as he can force
him to work for him; but it does not follow that a man may deal with men
without love, especially to demand anything from them. If you feel no
love, sit still," Nekhludoff thought; "occupy yourself with things, with
yourself, with anything you like, only not with men. You can only eat
without injuring yourself when you feel inclined to eat, so you can only
deal with men usefully when you love. Only let yourself deal with a man
without love, as I did yesterday with my brother-in-law, and there are
no limits to the suffering you will bring on yourself, as all my life
proves. Yes, yes, it is so," thought Nekhludoff; "it is good; yes, it is
good," he repeated, enjoying the freshness after the torturing heat, and
conscious of having attained to the fullest clearness on a question that
had long occupied him.



CHAPTER XLI.

TARAS'S STORY.

The carriage in which Nekhludoff had taken his place was half filled
with people. There were in it servants, working men, factory hands,
butchers, Jews, shopmen, workmen's wives, a soldier, two ladies, a
young one and an old one with bracelets on her arm, and a severe-looking
gentleman with a cockade on his black cap. All these people were sitting
quietly; the bustle of taking their places was long over; some sat
cracking and eating sunflower seeds, some smoking, some talking.

Taras sat, looking very happy, opposite the door, keeping a place for
Nekhludoff, and carrying on an animated conversation with a man in
a cloth coat who sat opposite to him, and who was, as Nekhludoff
afterwards found out, a gardener going to a new situation. Before
reaching the place where Taras sat Nekhludoff stopped between the seats
near a reverend-looking old man with a white beard and nankeen coat, who
was talking with a young woman in peasant dress. A little girl of about
seven, dressed in a new peasant costume, sat, her little legs dangling
above the floor, by the side of the woman, and kept cracking seeds.

The old man turned round, and, seeing Nekhludoff, he moved the lappets
of his coat off the varnished seat next to him, and said, in a friendly
manner:

"Please, here's a seat."

Nekhludoff thanked him, and took the seat. As soon as he was seated the
woman continued the interrupted conversation.

She was returning to her village, and related how her husband, whom she
had been visiting, had received her in town.

"I was there during the carnival, and now, by the Lord's help, I've been
again," she said. "Then, God willing, at Christmas I'll go again."

"That's right," said the old man, with a look at Nekhludoff, "it's the
best way to go and see him, else a young man can easily go to the bad,
living in a town."

"Oh, no, sir, mine is not such a man. No nonsense of any kind about him;
his life is as good as a young maiden's. The money he earns he sends
home all to a copeck. And, as to our girl here, he was so glad to see
her, there are no words for it," said the woman, and smiled.

The little girl, who sat cracking her seeds and spitting out the shells,
listened to her mother's words, and, as if to confirm them, looked up
with calm, intelligent eyes into Nekhludoff's and the old man's faces.

"Well, if he's good, that's better still," said the old man. "And none
of that sort of thing?" he added, with a look at a couple, evidently
factory hands, who sat at the other side of the carriage. The husband,
with his head thrown back, was pouring vodka down his throat out of a
bottle, and the wife sat holding a bag, out of which they had taken the
bottle, and watched him intently.

"No, mine neither drinks nor smokes," said the woman who was conversing
with the old man, glad of the opportunity of praising her husband once
more. "No, sir, the earth does not hold many such." And, turning to
Nekhludoff, she added, "That's the sort of man he is."

"What could be better," said the old man, looking at the factory worker,
who had had his drink and had passed the bottle to his wife. The wife
laughed, shook her head, and also raised the bottle to her lips.

Noticing Nekhludoff's and the old man's look directed towards them, the
factory worker addressed the former.

"What is it, sir? That we are drinking? Ah, no one sees how we work,
but every one sees how we drink. I have earned it, and I am drinking and
treating my wife, and no one else."

"Yes, yes," said Nekhludoff, not knowing what to say.

"True, sir. My wife is a steady woman. I am satisfied with my wife,
because she can feel for me. Is it right what I'm saying, Mavra?"

"There you are, take it, I don't want any more," said the wife,
returning the bottle to him. "And what are you jawing for like that?"
she added.

"There now! She's good--that good; and suddenly she'll begin squeaking
like a wheel that's not greased. Mavra, is it right what I'm saying?"

Mavra laughed and moved her hand with a tipsy gesture.

"Oh, my, he's at it again."

"There now, she's that good--that good; but let her get her tail over
the reins, and you can't think what she'll be up to. . . . Is it right
what I'm saying? You must excuse me, sir, I've had a drop! What's to be
done?" said the factory worker, and, preparing to go to sleep, put his
head in his wife's lap.

Nekhludoff sat a while with the old man, who told him all about himself.
The old man was a stove builder, who had been working for 53 years, and
had built so many stoves that he had lost count, and now he wanted to
rest, but had no time. He had been to town and found employment for the
young ones, and was now going to the country to see the people at home.
After hearing the old man's story, Nekhludoff went to the place that
Taras was keeping for him.

"It's all right, sir; sit down; we'll put the bag here," said the
gardener, who sat opposite Taras, in a friendly tone, looking up into
Nekhludoff's face.

"Rather a tight fit, but no matter since we are friends," said Taras,
smiling, and lifting the bag, which weighed more than five stone, as if
it were a feather, he carried it across to the window.

"Plenty of room; besides, we might stand up a bit; and even under
the seat it's as comfortable as you could wish. What's the good of
humbugging?" he said, beaming with friendliness and kindness.

Taras spoke of himself as being unable to utter a word when quite sober;
but drink, he said, helped him to find the right words, and then he
could express everything. And in reality, when he was sober Taras kept
silent; but when he had been drinking, which happened rarely and only on
special occasions, he became very pleasantly talkative. Then he spoke
a great deal, spoke well and very simply and truthfully, and especially
with great kindliness, which shone in his gentle, blue eyes and in the
friendly smile that never left his lips. He was in such a state to-day.
Nekhludoff's approach interrupted the conversation; but when he had put
the bag in its place, Taras sat down again, and with his strong hands
folded in his lap, and looking straight into the gardener's face,
continued his story. He was telling his new acquaintance about his wife
and giving every detail: what she was being sent to Siberia for, and why
he was now following her. Nekhludoff had never heard a detailed account
of this affair, and so he listened with interest. When he came up, the
story had reached the point when the attempt to poison was already an
accomplished fact, and the family had discovered that it was Theodosia's
doing.

"It's about my troubles that I'm talking," said Taras, addressing
Nekhludoff with cordial friendliness. "I have chanced to come across
such a hearty man, and we've got into conversation, and I'm telling him
all."

"I see," said Nekhludoff.

"Well, then in this way, my friend, the business became known. Mother,
she takes that cake. 'I'm going,' says she, 'to the police officer.' My
father is a just old man. 'Wait, wife,' says he, 'the little woman is
a mere child, and did not herself know what she was doing. We must have
pity. She may come to her senses.' But, dear me, mother would not hear
of it. 'While we keep her here,' she says, 'she may destroy us all like
cockroaches.' Well, friend, so she goes off for the police officer. He
bounces in upon us at once. Calls for witnesses."

"Well, and you?" asked the gardener.

"Well, I, you see, friend, roll about with the pain in my stomach, and
vomit. All my inside is turned inside out; I can't even speak. Well, so
father he goes and harnesses the mare, and puts Theodosia into the cart,
and is off to the police-station, and then to the magistrate's. And she,
you know, just as she had done from the first, so also there, confesses
all to the magistrate--where she got the arsenic, and how she kneaded
the cake. 'Why did you do it?' says he. 'Why,' says she, 'because he's
hateful to me. I prefer Siberia to a life with him.' That's me," and
Taras smiled.

"Well, so she confessed all. Then, naturally--the prison, and father
returns alone. And harvest time just coming, and mother the only woman
at home, and she no longer strong. So we think what we are to do. Could
we not bail her out? So father went to see an official. No go. Then
another. I think he went to five of them, and we thought of giving it
up. Then we happened to come across a clerk--such an artful one as you
don't often find. 'You give me five roubles, and I'll get her out,' says
he. He agreed to do it for three. Well, and what do you think, friend? I
went and pawned the linen she herself had woven, and gave him the money.
As soon as he had written that paper," drawled out Taras, just as if he
were speaking of a shot being fired, "we succeeded at once. I went to
fetch her myself. Well, friend, so I got to town, put up the mare, took
the paper, and went to the prison. 'What do you want?' 'This is what I
want,' say I, 'you've got my wife here in prison.' 'And have you got a
paper?' I gave him the paper. He gave it a look. 'Wait,' says he. So I
sat down on a bench. It was already past noon by the sun. An official
comes out. 'You are Vargoushoff?' 'I am.' 'Well, you may take her.' The
gates opened, and they led her out in her own clothes quite all right.
'Well, come along. Have you come on foot?' 'No, I have the horse here.'
So I went and paid the ostler, and harnessed, put in all the hay that
was left, and covered it with sacking for her to sit on. She got in and
wrapped her shawl round her, and off we drove. She says nothing and I
say nothing. Just as we were coming up to the house she says, 'And how's
mother; is she alive?' 'Yes, she's alive.' 'And father; is he alive?
'Yes, he is.' 'Forgive me, Taras,' she says, 'for my folly. I did not
myself know what I was doing.' So I say, 'Words won't mend matters. I
have forgiven you long ago,' and I said no more. We got home, and she
just fell at mother's feet. Mother says, 'The Lord will forgive you.'
And father said, 'How d'you do?' and 'What's past is past. Live as
best you can. Now,' says he, 'is not the time for all that; there's
the harvest to be gathered in down at Skorodino,' he says. 'Down on the
manured acre, by the Lord's help, the ground has borne such rye that
the sickle can't tackle it. It's all interwoven and heavy, and has sunk
beneath its weight; that must be reaped. You and Taras had better go
and see to it to-morrow.' Well, friend, from that moment she took to the
work and worked so that every one wondered. At that time we rented three
desiatins, and by God's help we had a wonderful crop both of oats and
rye. I mow and she binds the sheaves, and sometimes we both of us
reap. I am good at work and not afraid of it, but she's better still at
whatever she takes up. She's a smart woman, young, and full of life; and
as to work, friend, she'd grown that eager that I had to stop her. We
get home, our fingers swollen, our arms aching, and she, instead of
resting, rushes off to the barn to make binders for the sheaves for next
day. Such a change!"

"Well, and to you? Was she kinder, now?" asked the gardener.

"That's beyond question. She clings to me as if we were one soul.
Whatever I think she understands. Even mother, angry as she was, could
not help saying: 'It's as if our Theodosia had been transformed; she's
quite a different woman now!' We were once going to cart the sheaves
with two carts. She and I were in the first, and I say, 'How could you
think of doing that, Theodosia?' and she says, 'How could I think of it?
just so, I did not wish to live with you. I thought I'd rather die
than live with you!' I say, 'And now?' and she says, 'Now you're in
my heart!'" Taras stopped, and smiled joyfully, shook his head as if
surprised. "Hardly had we got the harvest home when I went to soak the
hemp, and when I got home there was a summons, she must go to be tried,
and we had forgotten all about the matter that she was to be tried for."

"It can only be the evil one," said the gardener. "Could any man of
himself think of destroying a living soul? We had a fellow once--" and
the gardener was about to commence his tale when the train began to
stop.

"It seems we are coming to a station," he said. "I'll go and have a
drink."

The conversation stopped, and Nekhludoff followed the gardener out of
the carriage onto the wet platform of the station.



CHAPTER XLII.

LE VRAI GRAND MONDE.

Before Nekhludoff got out he had noticed in the station yard several
elegant equipages, some with three, some with four, well-fed horses,
with tinkling bells on their harness. When he stepped out on the wet,
dark-coloured boards of the platform, he saw a group of people in front
of the first-class carriage, among whom were conspicuous a stout
lady with costly feathers on her hat, and a waterproof, and a tall,
thin-legged young man in a cycling suit. The young man had by his side
an enormous, well-fed dog, with a valuable collar. Behind them stood
footmen, holding wraps and umbrellas, and a coachman, who had also come
to meet the train.

On the whole of the group, from the fat lady down to the coachman who
stood holding up his long coat, there lay the stamp of wealth and quiet
self-assurance. A curious and servile crowd rapidly gathered round this
group--the station-master, in his red cap, a gendarme, a thin young lady
in a Russian costume, with beads round her neck, who made a point of
seeing the trains come in all through the summer, a telegraph clerk, and
passengers, men and women.

In the young man with the dog Nekhludoff recognised young Korchagin,
a gymnasium student. The fat lady was the Princess's sister, to whose
estate the Korchagins were now moving. The guard, with his gold cord and
shiny top-boots, opened the carriage door and stood holding it as a sign
of deference, while Philip and a porter with a white apron carefully
carried out the long-faced Princess in her folding chair. The sisters
greeted each other, and French sentences began flying about. Would the
Princess go in a closed or an open carriage? At last the procession
started towards the exit, the lady's maid, with her curly fringe,
parasol and leather case in the rear.

Nekhludoff not wishing to meet them and to have to take leave over
again, stopped before he got to the door, waiting for the procession to
pass.

The Princess, her son, Missy, the doctor, and the maid went out first,
the old Prince and his sister-in-law remained behind. Nekhludoff was too
far to catch anything but a few disconnected French sentences of their
conversation One of the sentences uttered by the Prince, as it often
happens, for some unaccountable reason remained in his memory with all
its intonations and the sound of the voice.

"_Oh, il est du vrai grand monde, du vrai grand monde_," said the Prince
in his loud, self-assured tone as he went out of the station with his
sister-in-law, accompanied by the respectful guards and porters.

At this moment from behind the corner of the station suddenly appeared
a crowd of workmen in bark shoes, wearing sheepskin coats and carrying
bags on their backs. The workmen went up to the nearest carriage with
soft yet determined steps, and were about to get in, but were at
once driven away by a guard. Without stopping, the workmen passed
on, hurrying and jostling one another, to the next carriage and began
getting in, catching their bags against the corners and door of the
carriage, but another guard caught sight of them from the door of the
station, and shouted at them severely. The workmen, who had already got
in, hurried out again and went on, with the same soft and firm steps,
still further towards Nekhludoff's carriage. A guard was again going to
stop them, but Nekhludoff said there was plenty of room inside, and that
they had better get in. They obeyed and got in, followed by Nekhludoff.

The workmen were about to take their seats, when the gentleman with the
cockade and the two ladies, looking at this attempt to settle in their
carriage as a personal insult to themselves, indignantly protested and
wanted to turn them out. The workmen--there were 20 of them, old men
and quite young ones, all of them wearied, sunburnt, with haggard
faces--began at once to move on through the carriage, catching the
seats, the walls, and the doors with their bags. They evidently felt
they had offended in some way, and seemed ready to go on indefinitely
wherever they were ordered to go.

"Where are you pushing to, you fiends? Sit down here," shouted another
guard they met.

"Voila encore des nouvelles," exclaimed the younger of the two ladies,
quite convinced that she would attract Nekhludoff's notice by her good
French.

The other lady with the bracelets kept sniffing and making faces,
and remarked something about how pleasant it was to sit with smelly
peasants.

The workmen, who felt the joy and calm experienced by people who have
escaped some kind of danger, threw off their heavy bags with a movement
of their shoulders and stowed them away under the seats.

The gardener had left his own seat to talk with Taras, and now went
back, so that there were two unoccupied seats opposite and one next to
Taras. Three of the workmen took these seats, but when Nekhludoff came
up to them, in his gentleman's clothing, they got so confused that they
rose to go away, but Nekhludoff asked them to stay, and himself sat down
on the arm of the seat, by the passage down the middle of the carriage.

One of the workmen, a man of about 50, exchanged a surprised and even
frightened look with a young man. That Nekhludoff, instead of scolding
and driving them away, as was natural to a gentleman, should give up his
seat to them, astonished and perplexed them. They even feared that this
might have some evil result for them.

However, they soon noticed that there was no underlying plot when they
heard Nekhludoff talking quite simply with Taras, and they grew quiet
and told one of the lads to sit down on his bag and give his seat to
Nekhludoff. At first the elderly workman who sat opposite Nekhludoff
shrank and drew back his legs for fear of touching the gentleman, but
after a while he grew quite friendly, and in talking to him and Taras
even slapped Nekhludoff on the knee when he wanted to draw special
attention to what he was saying.

He told them all about his position and his work in the peat bogs,
whence he was now returning home. He had been working there for two and
a half months, and was bringing home his wages, which only came to 10
roubles, since part had been paid beforehand when he was hired. They
worked, as he explained, up to their knees in water from sunrise to
sunset, with two hours' interval for dinner.

"Those who are not used to it find it hard, of course," he said; "but
when one's hardened it doesn't matter, if only the food is right. At
first the food was bad. Later the people complained, and they got good
food, and it was easy to work."

Then he told them how, during 28 years he went out to work, and sent all
his earnings home. First to his father, then to his eldest brother, and
now to his nephew, who was at the head of the household. On himself he
spent only two or three roubles of the 50 or 60 he earned a year, just
for luxuries--tobacco and matches.

"I'm a sinner, when tired I even drink a little vodka sometimes," he
added, with a guilty smile.

Then he told them how the women did the work at home, and how the
contractor had treated them to half a pail of vodka before they started
to-day, how one of them had died, and another was returning home ill.
The sick workman he was talking about was in a corner of the same
carriage. He was a young lad, with a pale, sallow face and bluish lips.
He was evidently tormented by intermittent fever. Nekhludoff went up to
him, but the lad looked up with such a severe and suffering expression
that Nekhludoff did not care to bother him with questions, but advised
the elder man to give him quinine, and wrote down the name of the
medicine. He wished to give him some money, but the old workman said he
would pay for it himself.

"Well, much as I have travelled, I have never met such a gentleman
before. Instead of punching your head, he actually gives up his place
to you," said the old man to Taras. "It seems there are all sorts of
gentlefolk, too."

"Yes, this is quite a new and different world," thought Nekhludoff,
looking at these spare, sinewy, limbs, coarse, home-made garments,
and sunburnt, kindly, though weary-looking faces, and feeling himself
surrounded on all sides with new people and the serious interests, joys,
and sufferings of a life of labour.

"Here is_ le vrai grand monde_," thought Nekhludoff, remembering the
words of Prince Korchagin and all that idle, luxurious world to which
the Korchagins belonged, with their petty, mean interests. And he felt
the joy of a traveller on discovering a new, unknown, and beautiful
world.


END OF BOOK II.




BOOK III.



CHAPTER I.

MASLOVA MAKES NEW FRIENDS.

The gang of prisoners to which Maslova belonged had walked about three
thousand three hundred miles. She and the other prisoners condemned for
criminal offences had travelled by rail and by steamboats as far as the
town of Perm. It was only here that Nekhludoff succeeded in obtaining a
permission for her to continue the journey with the political prisoners,
as Vera Doukhova, who was among the latter, advised him to do. The
journey up to Perm had been very trying to Maslova both morally and
physically. Physically, because of the overcrowding, the dirt, and the
disgusting vermin, which gave her no peace; morally, because of the
equally disgusting men. The men, like the vermin, though they changed
at each halting-place, were everywhere alike importunate; they swarmed
round her, giving her no rest. Among the women prisoners and the men
prisoners, the jailers and the convoy soldiers, the habit of a kind of
cynical debauch was so firmly established that unless a female prisoner
was willing to utilise her position as a woman she had to be constantly
on the watch. To be continually in a state of fear and strife was very
trying. And Maslova was specially exposed to attacks, her appearance
being attractive and her past known to every one. The decided resistance
with which she now met the importunity of all the men seemed offensive
to them, and awakened another feeling, that of ill-will towards her. But
her position was made a little easier by her intimacy with Theodosia,
and Theodosia's husband, who, having heard of the molestations his wife
was subject to, had in Nijni been arrested at his own desire in order
to be able to protect her, and was now travelling with the gang as a
prisoner. Maslova's position became much more bearable when she was
allowed to join the political prisoners, who were provided with better
accomodations, better food, and were treated less rudely, but besides
all this Maslova's condition was much improved because among the
political prisoners she was no longer molested by the men, and could
live without being reminded of that past which she was so anxious to
forget. But the chief advantage of the change lay in the fact that she
made the acquaintance of several persons who exercised a decided and
most beneficial influence on her character. Maslova was allowed to stop
with the political prisoners at all the halting-places, but being a
strong and healthy woman she was obliged to march with the criminal
convicts. In this way she walked all the way from Tomsk. Two political
prisoners also marched with the gang, Mary Pavlovna Schetinina, the girl
with the hazel eyes who had attracted Nekhludoff's attention when he had
been to visit Doukhova in prison, and one Simonson, who was on his
way to the Takoutsk district, the dishevelled dark young fellow with
deep-lying eyes, whom Nekhludoff had also noticed during that visit.
Mary Pavlovna was walking because she had given her place on the cart
to one of the criminals, a woman expecting to be confined, and Simonson
because he did not dare to avail himself of a class privilege.

These three always started early in the morning before the rest of the
political prisoners, who followed later on in the carts.

They were ready to start in this way just outside a large town, where a
new convoy officer had taken charge of the gang.

It was early on a dull September morning. It kept raining and snowing
alternately, and the cold wind blew in sudden gusts. The whole gang of
prisoners, consisting of four hundred men and fifty women, was already
assembled in the court of the halting station. Some of them were
crowding round the chief of the convoy, who was giving to specially
appointed prisoners money for two days' keep to distribute among the
rest, while others were purchasing food from women who had been let into
the courtyard. One could hear the voices of the prisoners counting their
money and making their purchases, and the shrill voices of the women
with the food.

Simonson, in his rubber jacket and rubber overshoes fastened with a
string over his worsted stockings (he was a vegetarian and would not
wear the skin of slaughtered animals), was also in the courtyard waiting
for the gang to start. He stood by the porch and jotted down in his
notebook a thought that had occurred to him. This was what he wrote:
"If a bacteria watched and examined a human nail it would pronounce
it inorganic matter, and thus we, examining our globe and watching its
crust, pronounce it to be inorganic. This is incorrect."

Katusha and Mary Pavlovna, both wearing top-boots and with shawls tied
round their heads, came out of the building into the courtyard where the
women sat sheltered from the wind by the northern wall of the court,
and vied with one another, offering their goods, hot meat pie, fish,
vermicelli, buckwheat porridge, liver, beef, eggs, milk. One had even a
roast pig to offer.

Having bought some eggs, bread, fish, and some rusks, Maslova was
putting them into her bag, while Mary Pavlovna was paying the women,
when a movement arose among the convicts. All were silent and took their
places. The officer came out and began giving the last orders before
starting. Everything was done in the usual manner. The prisoners were
counted, the chains on their legs examined, and those who were to
march in couples linked together with manacles. But suddenly the angry,
authoritative voice of the officer shouting something was heard, also
the sound of a blow and the crying of a child. All was silent for a
moment and then came a hollow murmur from the crowd. Maslova and Mary
Pavlovna advanced towards the spot whence the noise proceeded.



CHAPTER II.

AN INCIDENT OF THE MARCH.

This is what Mary Pavlovna and Katusha saw when they came up to the
scene whence the noise proceeded. The officer, a sturdy fellow, with
fair moustaches, stood uttering words of foul and coarse abuse, and
rubbing with his left the palm of his right hand, which he had hurt in
hitting a prisoner on the face. In front of him a thin, tall convict,
with half his head shaved and dressed in a cloak too short for him and
trousers much too short, stood wiping his bleeding face with one hand,
and holding a little shrieking girl wrapped in a shawl with the other.

"I'll give it you" (foul abuse); "I'll teach you to reason" (more
abuse); "you're to give her to the women!" shouted the officer. "Now,
then, on with them."

The convict, who was exiled by the Commune, had been carrying his little
daughter all the way from Tomsk, where his wife had died of typhus, and
now the officer ordered him to be manacled. The exile's explanation that
he could not carry the child if he was manacled irritated the officer,
who happened to be in a bad temper, and he gave the troublesome prisoner
a beating. [A fact described by Lineff in his "Transportation".] Before
the injured convict stood a convoy soldier, and a black-bearded prisoner
with manacles on one hand and a look of gloom on his face, which he
turned now to the officer, now to the prisoner with the little girl.

The officer repeated his orders for the soldiers to take away the girl.
The murmur among the prisoners grew louder.

"All the way from Tomsk they were not put on," came a hoarse voice from
some one in the rear. "It's a child, and not a puppy."

"What's he to do with the lassie? That's not the law," said some one
else.

"Who's that?" shouted the officer as if he had been stung, and rushed
into the crowd.

"I'll teach you the law. Who spoke. You? You?"

"Everybody says so, because-" said a short, broad-faced prisoner.

Before he had finished speaking the officer hit him in the face.

"Mutiny, is it? I'll show you what mutiny means. I'll have you all
shot like dogs, and the authorities will be only too thankful. Take the
girl."

The crowd was silent. One convoy soldier pulled away the girl, who was
screaming desperately, while another manacled the prisoner, who now
submissively held out his hand.

"Take her to the women," shouted the officer, arranging his sword belt.

The little girl, whose face had grown quite red, was trying to disengage
her arms from under the shawl, and screamed unceasingly. Mary Pavlovna
stepped out from among the crowd and came up to the officer.

"Will you allow me to carry the little girl?" she said.

"Who are you?" asked the officer.

"A political prisoner."

Mary Pavlovna's handsome face, with the beautiful prominent eyes (he
had noticed her before when the prisoners were given into his charge),
evidently produced an effect on the officer. He looked at her in silence
as if considering, then said: "I don't care; carry her if you like. It
is easy for you to show pity; if he ran away who would have to answer?"

"How could he run away with the child in his arms?" said Mary Pavlovna.

"I have no time to talk with you. Take her if you like."

"Shall I give her?" asked the soldier.

"Yes, give her."

"Come to me," said Mary Pavlovna, trying to coax the child to come to
her.

But the child in the soldier's arms stretched herself towards her father
and continued to scream, and would not go to Mary Pavlovna.

"Wait a bit, Mary Pavlovna," said Maslova, getting a rusk out of her
bag; "she will come to me."

The little girl knew Maslova, and when she saw her face and the rusk
she let her take her. All was quiet. The gates were opened, and the gang
stepped out, the convoy counted the prisoners over again, the bags were
packed and tied on to the carts, the weak seated on the top. Maslova
with the child in her arms took her place among the women next to
Theodosia. Simonson, who had all the time been watching what was going
on, stepped with large, determined strides up to the officer, who,
having given his orders, was just getting into a trap, and said, "You
have behaved badly."

"Get to your place; it is no business of yours."

"It is my business to tell you that you have behaved badly and I have
said it," said Simonson, looking intently into the officer's face from
under his bushy eyebrows.

"Ready? March!" the officer called out, paying no heed to Simonson, and,
taking hold of the driver's shoulder, he got into the trap. The gang
started and spread out as it stepped on to the muddy high road with
ditches on each side, which passed through a dense forest.



CHAPTER III.

MARY PAVLOVNA.

In spite of the hard conditions in which they were placed, life among
the political prisoners seemed very good to Katusha after the depraved,
luxurious and effeminate life she had led in town for the last six
years, and after two months' imprisonment with criminal prisoners. The
fifteen to twenty miles they did per day, with one day's rest after two
days' marching, strengthened her physically, and the fellowship with her
new companions opened out to her a life full of interests such as she
had never dreamed of. People so wonderful (as she expressed it) as those
whom she was now going with she had not only never met but could not
even have imagined.

"There now, and I cried when I was sentenced," she said. "Why, I must
thank God for it all the days of my life. I have learned to know what I
never should have found out else."

The motives she understood easily and without effort that guided these
people, and, being of the people, fully sympathised with them. She
understood that these persons were for the people and against the
upper classes, and though themselves belonging to the upper classes
had sacrificed their privileges, their liberty and their lives for the
people. This especially made her value and admire them. She was charmed
with all the new companions, but particularly with Mary Pavlovna,
and she was not only charmed with her, but loved her with a peculiar,
respectful and rapturous love. She was struck by the fact that this
beautiful girl, the daughter of a rich general, who could speak three
languages, gave away all that her rich brother sent her, and lived like
the simplest working girl, and dressed not only simply, but poorly,
paying no heed to her appearance. This trait and a complete absence
of coquetry was particularly surprising and therefore attractive to
Maslova. Maslova could see that Mary Pavlovna knew, and was even pleased
to know, that she was handsome, and yet the effect her appearance had on
men was not at all pleasing to her; she was even afraid of it, and felt
an absolute disgust to all love affairs. Her men companions knew it, and
if they felt attracted by her never permitted themselves to show it to
her, but treated her as they would a man; but with strangers, who often
molested her, the great physical strength on which she prided herself
stood her in good stead.

"It happened once," she said to Katusha, "that a man followed me in the
street and would not leave me on any account. At last I gave him such a
shaking that he was frightened and ran away."

She became a revolutionary, as she said, because she felt a dislike to
the life of the well-to-do from childhood up, and loved the life of the
common people, and she was always being scolded for spending her time
in the servants' hall, in the kitchen or the stables instead of the
drawing-room.

"And I found it amusing to be with cooks and the coachmen, and dull with
our gentlemen and ladies," she said. "Then when I came to understand
things I saw that our life was altogether wrong; I had no mother and I
did not care for my father, and so when I was nineteen I left home, and
went with a girl friend to work as a factory hand."

After she left the factory she lived in the country, then returned to
town and lived in a lodging, where they had a secret printing press.
There she was arrested and sentenced to hard labour. Mary Pavlovna
said nothing about it herself, but Katusha heard from others that Mary
Pavlovna was sentenced because, when the lodging was searched by the
police and one of the revolutionists fired a shot in the dark, she
pleaded guilty.

As soon as she had learned to know Mary Pavlovna, Katusha noticed
that, whatever the conditions she found herself in, Mary Pavlovna never
thought of herself, but was always anxious to serve, to help some one,
in matters small or great. One of her present companions, Novodvoroff,
said of her that she devoted herself to philanthropic amusements. And
this was true. The interest of her whole life lay in the search for
opportunities of serving others. This kind of amusement had become the
habit, the business of her life. And she did it all so naturally that
those who knew her no longer valued but simply expected it of her.

When Maslova first came among them, Mary Pavlovna felt repulsed and
disgusted. Katusha noticed this, but she also noticed that, having made
an effort to overcome these feelings, Mary Pavlovna became particularly
tender and kind to her. The tenderness and kindness of so uncommon
a being touched Maslova so much that she gave her whole heart, and
unconsciously accepting her views, could not help imitating her in
everything.

This devoted love of Katusha touched Mary Pavlovna in her turn, and she
learned to love Katusha.

These women were also united by the repulsion they both felt to sexual
love. The one loathed that kind of love, having experienced all its
horrors, the other, never having experienced it, looked on it as
something incomprehensible and at the same time as something repugnant
and offensive to human dignity.



CHAPTER IV.

SIMONSON.

Mary Pavlovna's influence was one that Maslova submitted to because she
loved Mary Pavlovna. Simonson influenced her because he loved her.

Everybody lives and acts partly according to his own, partly according
to other people's, ideas. This is what constitutes one of the great
differences among men. To some, thinking is a kind of mental game; they
treat their reason as if it were a fly-wheel without a connecting strap,
and are guided in their actions by other people's ideas, by custom or
laws; while others look upon their own ideas as the chief motive power
of all their actions, and always listen to the dictates of their own
reason and submit to it, accepting other people's opinions only on rare
occasions and after weighing them critically. Simonson was a man of the
latter sort; he settled and verified everything according to his own
reason and acted on the decisions he arrived at. When a schoolboy
he made up his mind that his father's income, made as a paymaster in
government office was dishonestly gained, and he told his father that it
ought to be given to the people. When his father, instead of listening
to him, gave him a scolding, he left his father's house and would not
make use of his father's means. Having come to the conclusion that all
the existing misery was a result of the people's ignorance, he joined
the socialists, who carried on propaganda among the people, as soon as
he left the university and got a place as a village schoolmaster.
He taught and explained to his pupils and to the peasants what he
considered to be just, and openly blamed what he thought unjust. He was
arrested and tried. During his trial he determined to tell his judges
that his was a just cause, for which he ought not to be tried or
punished. When the judges paid no heed to his words, but went on with
the trial, he decided not to answer them and kept resolutely silent when
they questioned him. He was exiled to the Government of Archangel. There
he formulated a religious teaching which was founded on the theory that
everything in the world was alive, that nothing is lifeless, and that
all the objects we consider to be without life or inorganic are only
parts of an enormous organic body which we cannot compass. A man's task
is to sustain the life of that huge organism and all its animate parts.
Therefore he was against war, capital punishment and every kind of
killing, not only of human beings, but also of animals. Concerning
marriage, too, he had a peculiar idea of his own; he thought that
increase was a lower function of man, the highest function being to
serve the already existing lives. He found a confirmation of his
theory in the fact that there were phacocytes in the blood. Celibates,
according to his opinion, were the same as phacocytes, their function
being to help the weak and the sickly particles of the organism. From
the moment he came to this conclusion he began to consider himself as
well as Mary Pavlovna as phacocytes, and to live accordingly, though
as a youth he had been addicted to vice. His love for Katusha did not
infringe this conception, because he loved her platonically, and such
love he considered could not hinder his activity as a phacocytes, but
acted, on the contrary, as an inspiration.

Not only moral, but also most practical questions he decided in his own
way. He applied a theory of his own to all practical business, had rules
relating to the number of hours for rest and for work, to the kind of
food to eat, the way to dress, to heat and light up the rooms. With all
this Simonson was very shy and modest; and yet when he had once made
up his mind nothing could make him waver. And this man had a decided
influence on Maslova through his love for her. With a woman's instinct
Maslova very soon found out that he loved her. And the fact that
she could awaken love in a man of that kind raised her in her own
estimation. It was Nekhludoff's magnanimity and what had been in the
past that made him offer to marry her, but Simonson loved her such as
she was now, loved her simply because of the love he bore her. And she
felt that Simonson considered her to be an exceptional woman, having
peculiarly high moral qualities. She did not quite know what the
qualities he attributed to her were, but in order to be on the safe side
and that he should not be disappointed in her, she tried with all her
might to awaken in herself all the highest qualities she could conceive,
and she tried to be as good as possible. This had begun while they
were still in prison, when on a common visiting day she had noticed his
kindly dark blue eyes gazing fixedly at her from under his projecting
brow. Even then she had noticed that this was a peculiar man, and that
he was looking at her in a peculiar manner, and had also noticed the
striking combination of sternness--the unruly hair and the frowning
forehead gave him this appearance--with the child-like kindness and
innocence of his look. She saw him again in Tomsk, where she joined the
political prisoners. Though they had not uttered a word, their looks
told plainly that they had understood one another. Even after that they
had had no serious conversation with each other, but Maslova felt that
when he spoke in her presence his words were addressed to her, and that
he spoke for her sake, trying to express himself as plainly as he could;
but it was when he started walking with the criminal prisoners that they
grew specially near to one another.



CHAPTER V.

THE POLITICAL PRISONERS.

Until they left Perm Nekhludoff only twice managed to see Katusha, once
in Nijni, before the prisoners were embarked on a barge surrounded with
a wire netting, and again in Perm in the prison office. At both these
interviews he found her reserved and unkind. She answered his questions
as to whether she was in want of anything, and whether she was
comfortable, evasively and bashfully, and, as he thought, with the same
feeling of hostile reproach which she had shown several times
before. Her depressed state of mind, which was only the result of the
molestations from the men that she was undergoing at the time, tormented
Nekhludoff. He feared lest, influenced by the hard and degrading
circumstances in which she was placed on the journey, she should again
get into that state of despair and discord with her own self which
formerly made her irritable with him, and which had caused her to drink
and smoke excessively to gain oblivion. But he was unable to help her in
any way during this part of the journey, as it was impossible for him to
be with her. It was only when she joined the political prisoners that he
saw how unfounded his fears were, and at each interview he noticed that
inner change he so strongly desired to see in her becoming more and more
marked. The first time they met in Tomsk she was again just as she had
been when leaving Moscow. She did not frown or become confused when she
saw him, but met him joyfully and simply, thanking him for what he had
done for her, especially for bringing her among the people with whom she
now was.

After two months' marching with the gang, the change that had taken
place within her became noticeable in her appearance. She grew sunburned
and thinner, and seemed older; wrinkles appeared on her temples and
round her mouth. She had no ringlets on her forehead now, and her hair
was covered with the kerchief; in the way it was arranged, as well as in
her dress and her manners, there was no trace of coquetry left. And this
change, which had taken place and was still progressing in her, made
Nekhludoff very happy.

He felt for her something he had never experienced before. This feeling
had nothing in common with his first poetic love for her, and even less
with the sensual love that had followed, nor even with the satisfaction
of a duty fulfilled, not unmixed with self-admiration, with which he
decided to marry her after the trial. The present feeling was simply one
of pity and tenderness. He had felt it when he met her in prison for
the first time, and then again when, after conquering his repugnance,
he forgave her the imagined intrigue with the medical assistant in the
hospital (the injustice done her had since been discovered); it was the
same feeling he now had, only with this difference, that formerly it was
momentary, and that now it had become permanent. Whatever he was doing,
whatever he was thinking now, a feeling of pity and tenderness dwelt
with him, and not only pity and tenderness for her, but for everybody.
This feeling seemed to have opened the floodgates of love, which had
found no outlet in Nekhludoff's soul, and the love now flowed out to
every one he met.

During this journey Nekhludoff's feelings were so stimulated that he
could not help being attentive and considerate to everybody, from the
coachman and the convoy soldiers to the prison inspectors and governors
whom he had to deal with. Now that Maslova was among the political
prisoners, Nekhludoff could not help becoming acquainted with many of
them, first in Ekaterinburg, where they had a good deal of freedom and
were kept altogether in a large cell, and then on the road when Maslova
was marching with three of the men and four of the women. Coming in
contact with political exiles in this way made Nekhludoff completely
change his mind concerning them.

From the very beginning of the revolutionary movement in Russia, but
especially since that first of March, when Alexander II was murdered,
Nekhludoff regarded the revolutionists with dislike and contempt. He
was repulsed by the cruelty and secrecy of the methods they employed
in their struggles against the government, especially the cruel murders
they committed, and their arrogance also disgusted him. But having
learned more intimately to know them and all they had suffered at the
hands of the government, he saw that they could not be other than they
were.

Terrible and endless as were the torments which were inflicted on the
criminals, there was at least some semblance of justice shown them
before and after they were sentenced, but in the case of the political
prisoners there was not even that semblance, as Nekhludoff saw in the
case of Sholostova and that of many and many of his new acquaintances.
These people were dealt with like fish caught with a net; everything
that gets into the nets is pulled ashore, and then the big fish which
are required are sorted out and the little ones are left to perish
unheeded on the shore. Having captured hundreds that were evidently
guiltless, and that could not be dangerous to the government, they left
them imprisoned for years, where they became consumptive, went out of
their minds or committed suicide, and kept them only because they had
no inducement to set them free, while they might be of use to elucidate
some question at a judicial inquiry, safe in prison. The fate of these
persons, often innocent even from the government point of view, depended
on the whim, the humour of, or the amount of leisure at the disposal
of some police officer or spy, or public prosecutor, or magistrate,
or governor, or minister. Some one of these officials feels dull, or
inclined to distinguish himself, and makes a number of arrests, and
imprisons or sets free, according to his own fancy or that of the
higher authorities. And the higher official, actuated by like motives,
according to whether he is inclined to distinguish himself, or to what
his relations to the minister are, exiles men to the other side of the
world or keeps them in solitary confinement, condemns them to Siberia,
to hard labour, to death, or sets them free at the request of some lady.

They were dealt with as in war, and they naturally employed the
means that were used against them. And as the military men live in an
atmosphere of public opinion that not only conceals from them the guilt
of their actions, but sets these actions up as feats of heroism,
so these political offenders were also constantly surrounded by
an atmosphere of public opinion which made the cruel actions they
committed, in the face of danger and at the risk of liberty and life,
and all that is dear to men, seem not wicked but glorious actions.
Nekhludoff found in this the explanation of the surprising phenomenon
that men, with the mildest characters, who seemed incapable of
witnessing the sufferings of any living creature, much less of
inflicting pain, quietly prepared to murder men, nearly all of them
considering murder lawful and just on certain occasions as a means
for self-defence, for the attainment of higher aims or for the general
welfare.

The importance they attribute to their cause, and consequently to
themselves, flowed naturally from the importance the government attached
to their actions, and the cruelty of the punishments it inflicted on
them. When Nekhludoff came to know them better he became convinced that
they were not the right-down villains that some imagined them to be, nor
the complete heroes that others thought them, but ordinary people, just
the same as others, among whom there were some good and some bad, and
some mediocre, as there are everywhere.

There were some among them who had turned revolutionists because they
honestly considered it their duty to fight the existing evils, but there
were also those who chose this work for selfish, ambitious motives; the
majority, however, was attracted to the revolutionary idea by the desire
for danger, for risks, the enjoyment of playing with one's life, which,
as Nekhludoff knew from his military experiences, is quite common to
the most ordinary people while they are young and full of energy. But
wherein they differed from ordinary people was that their moral standard
was a higher one than that of ordinary men. They considered not only
self-control, hard living, truthfulness, but also the readiness to
sacrifice everything, even life, for the common welfare as their duty.
Therefore the best among them stood on a moral level that is not often
reached, while the worst were far below the ordinary level, many of them
being untruthful, hypocritical and at the same time self-satisfied and
proud. So that Nekhludoff learned not only to respect but to love some
of his new acquaintances, while he remained more than indifferent to
others.



CHAPTER VI.

KRYLTZOFF'S STORY.

Nekhludoff grew especially fond of Kryltzoff, a consumptive young man
condemned to hard labour, who was going with the same gang as Katusha.
Nekhludoff had made his acquaintance already in Ekaterinburg, and
talked with him several times on the road after that. Once, in summer,
Nekhludoff spent nearly the whole of a day with him at a halting
station, and Kryltzoff, having once started talking, told him his
story and how he had become a revolutionist. Up to the time of his
imprisonment his story was soon told. He lost his father, a rich landed
proprietor in the south of Russia, when still a child. He was the only
son, and his mother brought him up. He learned easily in the university,
as well as the gymnasium, and was first in the mathematical faculty
in his year. He was offered a choice of remaining in the university
or going abroad. He hesitated. He loved a girl and was thinking of
marriage, and taking part in the rural administration. He did not like
giving up either offer, and could not make up his mind. At this time
his fellow-students at the university asked him for money for a common
cause. He did not know that this common cause was revolutionary, which
he was not interested in at that time, but gave the money from a sense
of comradeship and vanity, so that it should not be said that he was
afraid. Those who received the money were caught, a note was found which
proved that the money had been given by Kryltzoff, he was arrested, and
first kept at the police station, then imprisoned.

"The prison where I was put," Kryltzoff went on to relate (he was
sitting on the high shelf bedstead, his elbows on his knees, with
sunken chest, the beautiful, intelligent eyes with which he looked at
Nekhludoff glistening feverishly)--"they were not specially strict in
that prison. We managed to converse, not only by tapping the wall, but
could walk about the corridors, share our provisions and our tobacco,
and in the evenings we even sang in chorus. I had a fine voice--yes, if
it had not been for mother it would have been all right, even pleasant
and interesting. Here I made the acquaintance of the famous Petroff--he
afterwards killed himself with a piece of glass at the fortress--and
also of others. But I was not yet a revolutionary. I also became
acquainted with my neighbours in the cells next to mine. They were both
caught with Polish proclamations and arrested in the same cause, and
were tried for an attempt to escape from the convoy when they were being
taken to the railway station. One was a Pole, Lozinsky; the other a
Jew, Rozovsky. Yes. Well, this Rozovsky was quite a boy. He said he
was seventeen, but he looked fifteen--thin, small, active, with black,
sparkling eyes, and, like most Jews, very musical. His voice was still
breaking, and yet he sang beautifully. Yes. I saw them both taken to be
tried. They were taken in the morning. They returned in the evening, and
said they were condemned to death. No one had expected it. Their case
was so unimportant; they only tried to get away from the convoy, and had
not even wounded any one. And then it was so unnatural to execute such
a child as Rozovsky. And we in prison all came to the conclusion that it
was only done to frighten them, and would not be confirmed. At first
we were excited, and then we comforted ourselves, and life went on
as before. Yes. Well, one evening, a watchman comes to my door and
mysteriously announces to me that carpenters had arrived, and were
putting up the gallows. At first I did not understand. What's that? What
gallows? But the watchman was so excited that I saw at once it was
for our two. I wished to tap and communicate with my comrades, but was
afraid those two would hear. The comrades were also silent. Evidently
everybody knew. In the corridors and in the cells everything was as
still as death all that evening. They did not tap the wall nor sing.
At ten the watchman came again and announced that a hangman had arrived
from Moscow. He said it and went away. I began calling him back.
Suddenly I hear Rozovsky shouting to me across the corridor: 'What's the
matter? Why do you call him?' I answered something about asking him to
get me some tobacco, but he seemed to guess, and asked me: 'Why did we
not sing to-night, why did we not tap the walls?' I do not remember
what I said, but I went away so as not to speak to him. Yes. It was a
terrible night. I listened to every sound all night. Suddenly, towards
morning, I hear doors opening and somebody walking--many persons. I went
up to my window. There was a lamp burning in the corridor. The first
to pass was the inspector. He was stout, and seemed a resolute,
self-satisfied man, but he looked ghastly pale, downcast, and seemed
frightened; then his assistant, frowning but resolute; behind them the
watchman. They passed my door and stopped at the next, and I hear the
assistant calling out in a strange voice: 'Lozinsky, get up and put on
clean linen.' Yes. Then I hear the creaking of the door; they entered
into his cell. Then I hear Lozinsky's steps going to the opposite side
of the corridor. I could only see the inspector. He stood quite pale,
and buttoned and unbuttoned his coat, shrugging his shoulders. Yes.
Then, as if frightened of something, he moved out of the way. It was
Lozinsky, who passed him and came up to my door. A handsome young fellow
he was, you know, of that nice Polish type: broad shouldered, his head
covered with fine, fair, curly hair as with a cap, and with beautiful
blue eyes. So blooming, so fresh, so healthy. He stopped in front of my
window, so that I could see the whole of his face. A dreadful, gaunt,
livid face. 'Kryltzoff, have you any cigarettes?' I wished to pass him
some, but the assistant hurriedly pulled out his cigarette case and
passed it to him. He took out one, the assistant struck a match, and he
lit the cigarette and began to smoke and seemed to be thinking. Then,
as if he had remembered something, he began to speak. 'It is cruel and
unjust. I have committed no crime. I--' I saw something quiver in his
white young throat, from which I could not take my eyes, and he stopped.
Yes. At that moment I hear Rozovsky shouting in his fine, Jewish
voice. Lozinsky threw away the cigarette and stepped from the door.
And Rozovsky appeared at the window. His childish face, with the limpid
black eyes, was red and moist. He also had clean linen on, the trousers
were too wide, and he kept pulling them up and trembled all over. He
approached his pitiful face to my window. 'Kryltzoff, it's true that the
doctor has prescribed cough mixture for me, is it not? I am not well.
I'll take some more of the mixture.' No one answered, and he looked
inquiringly, now at me, now at the inspector. What he meant to say
I never made out. Yes. Suddenly the assistant again put on a stern
expression, and called out in a kind of squeaking tone: 'Now, then, no
nonsense. Let us go.' Rozovsky seemed incapable of understanding what
awaited him, and hurried, almost ran, in front of him all along the
corridor. But then he drew back, and I could hear his shrill voice
and his cries, then the trampling of feet, and general hubbub. He was
shrieking and sobbing. The sounds came fainter and fainter, and at
last the door rattled and all was quiet. Yes. And so they hanged them.
Throttled them both with a rope. A watchman, another one, saw it done,
and told me that Lozinsky did not resist, but Rozovsky struggled for
a long time, so that they had to pull him up on to the scaffold and to
force his head into the noose. Yes. This watchman was a stupid fellow.
He said: 'They told me, sir, that it would be frightful, but it was
not at all frightful. After they were hanged they only shrugged their
shoulders twice, like this.' He showed how the shoulders convulsively
rose and fell. 'Then the hangman pulled a bit so as to tighten the
noose, and it was all up, and they never budged."' And Kryltzoff
repeated the watchman's words, "Not at all frightful," and tried to
smile, but burst into sobs instead.

For a long time after that he kept silent, breathing heavily, and
repressing the sobs that were choking him.

"From that time I became a revolutionist. Yes," he said, when he was
quieter and finished his story in a few words. He belonged to the
Narodovoltzy party, and was even at the head of the disorganising group,
whose object was to terrorise the government so that it should give
up its power of its own accord. With this object he travelled
to Petersburg, to Kiev, to Odessa and abroad, and was everywhere
successful. A man in whom he had full confidence betrayed him. He was
arrested, tried, kept in prison for two years, and condemned to death,
but the sentence was mitigated to one of hard labour for life.

He went into consumption while in prison, and in the conditions he was
now placed he had scarcely more than a few months longer to live. This
he knew, but did not repent of his action, but said that if he had
another life he would use it in the same way to destroy the conditions
in which such things as he had seen were possible.

This man's story and his intimacy with him explained to Nekhludoff much
that he had not previously understood.



CHAPTER VII.

NEKHLUDOFF SEEKS AN INTERVIEW WITH MASLOVA.

On the day when the convoy officer had the encounter with the prisoners
at the halting station about the child, Nekhludoff, who had spent
the night at the village inn, woke up late, and was some time writing
letters to post at the next Government town, so that he left the inn
later than usual, and did not catch up with the gang on the road as
he had done previously, but came to the village where the next halting
station was as it was growing dusk.

Having dried himself at the inn, which was kept by an elderly woman who
had an extraordinarily fat, white neck, he had his tea in a clean room
decorated with a great number of icons and pictures and then hurried
away to the halting station to ask the officer for an interview
with Katusha. At the last six halting stations he could not get the
permission for an interview from any of the officers. Though they had
been changed several times, not one of them would allow Nekhludoff
inside the halting stations, so that he had not seen Katusha for
more than a week. This strictness was occasioned by the fact that
an important prison official was expected to pass that way. Now this
official had passed without looking in at the gang, after all, and
Nekhludoff hoped that the officer who had taken charge of the gang in
the morning would allow him an interview with the prisoners, as former
officers had done.

The landlady offered Nekhludoff a trap to drive him to the halting
station, situated at the farther end of the village, but Nekhludoff
preferred to walk. A young labourer, a broad-shouldered young fellow
of herculean dimensions, with enormous top-boots freshly blackened with
strongly smelling tar, offered himself as a guide.

A dense mist obscured the sky, and it was so dark that when the young
fellow was three steps in advance of him Nekhludoff could not see him
unless the light of some window happened to fall on the spot, but he
could hear the heavy boots wading through the deep, sticky slush. After
passing the open place in front of the church and the long street,
with its rows of windows shining brightly in the darkness, Nekhludoff
followed his guide to the outskirts of the village, where it was pitch
dark. But soon here, too, rays of light, streaming through the mist
from the lamps in the front of the halting station, became discernible
through the darkness. The reddish spots of light grew bigger and bigger;
at last the stakes of the palisade, the moving figure of the sentinel, a
post painted with white and black stripes and the sentinel's box became
visible.

The sentinel called his usual "Who goes there?" as they approached, and
seeing they were strangers treated them with such severity that he would
not allow them to wait by the palisade; but Nekhludoff's guide was not
abashed by this severity.

"Hallo, lad! why so fierce? You go and rouse your boss while we wait
here?"

The sentinel gave no answer, but shouted something in at the gate and
stood looking at the broad-shouldered young labourer scraping the mud
off Nekhludoff's boots with a chip of wood by the light of the lamp.
From behind the palisade came the hum of male and female voices. In
about three minutes more something rattled, the gate opened, and a
sergeant, with his cloak thrown over his shoulders, stepped out of the
darkness into the lamplight.

The sergeant was not as strict as the sentinel, but he was extremely
inquisitive. He insisted on knowing what Nekhludoff wanted the officer
for, and who he was, evidently scenting his booty and anxious not to let
it escape. Nekhludoff said he had come on special business, and would
show his gratitude, and would the sergeant take a note for him to the
officer. The sergeant took the note, nodded, and went away. Some time
after the gate rattled again, and women carrying baskets, boxes, jugs
and sacks came out, loudly chattering in their peculiar Siberian dialect
as they stepped over the threshold of the gate. None of them wore
peasant costumes, but were dressed town fashion, wearing jackets and
fur-lined cloaks. Their skirts were tucked up high, and their heads
wrapped up in shawls. They examined Nekhludoff and his guide curiously
by the light of the lamp. One of them showed evident pleasure at the
sight of the broad-shouldered fellow, and affectionately administered to
him a dose of Siberian abuse.

"You demon, what are you doing here? The devil take you," she said,
addressing him.

"I've been showing this traveller here the way," answered the young
fellow. "And what have you been bringing here?"

"Dairy produce, and I am to bring more in the morning."

The guide said something in answer that made not only the women but even
the sentinel laugh, and, turning to Nekhludoff, he said:

"You'll find your way alone? Won't get lost, will you?"

"I shall find it all right."

"When you have passed the church it's the second from the two-storied
house. Oh, and here, take my staff," he said, handing the stick he
was carrying, and which was longer than himself, to Nekhludoff; and
splashing through the mud with his enormous boots, he disappeared in the
darkness, together with the women.

His voice mingling with the voices of the women was still audible
through the fog, when the gate again rattled, and the sergeant appeared
and asked Nekhludoff to follow him to the officer.



CHAPTER VIII.

NEKHLUDOFF AND THE OFFICER.

This halting station, like all such stations along the Siberian
road, was surrounded by a courtyard, fenced in with a palisade of
sharp-pointed stakes, and consisted of three one-storied houses. One of
them, the largest, with grated windows, was for the prisoners, another
for the convoy soldiers, and the third, in which the office was, for the
officers.

There were lights in the windows of all the three houses, and, like
all such lights, they promised, here in a specially deceptive manner,
something cosy inside the walls. Lamps were burning before the porches
of the houses and about five lamps more along the walls lit up the yard.

The sergeant led Nekhludoff along a plank which lay across the yard up
to the porch of the smallest of the houses.

When he had gone up the three steps of the porch he let Nekhludoff pass
before him into the ante-room, in which a small lamp was burning, and
which was filled with smoky fumes. By the stove a soldier in a coarse
shirt with a necktie and black trousers, and with one top-boot on, stood
blowing the charcoal in a somovar, using the other boot as bellows. [The
long boots worn in Russia have concertina-like sides, and when held to
the chimney of the somovar can be used instead of bellows to make the
charcoal inside burn up.] When he saw Nekhludoff, the soldier left the
somovar and helped him off with his waterproof; then went into the inner
room.

"He has come, your honour."

"Well, ask him in," came an angry voice.

"Go in at the door," said the soldier, and went back to the somovar.

In the next room an officer with fair moustaches and a very red face,
dressed in an Austrian jacket that closely fitted his broad chest and
shoulders, sat at a covered table, on which were the remains of his
dinner and two bottles; there was a strong smell of tobacco and some
very strong, cheap scent in the warm room. On seeing Nekhludoff the
officer rose and gazed ironically and suspiciously, as it seemed, at the
newcomer.

"What is it you want?" he asked, and, not waiting for a reply, he
shouted through the open door:

"Bernoff, the somovar! What are you about?"

"Coming at once."

"You'll get it 'at once' so that you'll remember it," shouted the
officer, and his eyes flashed.

"I'm coming," shouted the soldier, and brought in the somovar.
Nekhludoff waited while the soldier placed the somovar on the table.
When the officer had followed the soldier out of the room with his cruel
little eyes looking as if they were aiming where best to hit him, he
made the tea, got the four-cornered decanter out of his travelling case
and some Albert biscuits, and having placed all this on the cloth he
again turned to Nekhludoff. "Well, how can I be of service to you?"

"I should like to be allowed to visit a prisoner," said Nekhludoff,
without sitting down.

"A political one? That's forbidden by the law," said the officer.

"The woman I mean is not a political prisoner," said Nekhludoff.

"Yes. But pray take a scat," said the officer. Nekhludoff sat down.

"She is not a political one, but at my request she has been allowed by
the higher authorities to join the political prisoners--"

"Oh, yes, I know," interrupted the other; "a little dark one? Well,
yes, that can be managed. Won't you smoke?" He moved a box of cigarettes
towards Nekhludoff, and, having carefully poured out two tumblers of
tea, he passed one to Nekhludoff. "If you please," he said.

"Thank you; I should like to see--"

"The night is long. You'll have plenty of time. I shall order her to be
sent out to you."

"But could I not see her where she is? Why need she be sent for?"
Nekhludoff said.

"In to the political prisoners? It is against the law."

"I have been allowed to go in several times. If there is any danger of
my passing anything in to them I could do it through her just as well."

"Oh, no; she would be searched," said the officer, and laughed in an
unpleasant manner.

"Well, why not search me?"

"All right; we'll manage without that," said the officer, opening the
decanter, and holding it out towards Nekhludoff's tumbler of tea. "May
I? No? Well, just as you like. When you are living here in Siberia you
are too glad to meet an educated person. Our work, as you know, is the
saddest, and when one is used to better things it is very hard. The idea
they have of us is that convoy officers are coarse, uneducated men, and
no one seems to remember that we may have been born for a very different
position."

This officer's red face, his scents, his rings, and especially his
unpleasant laughter disgusted Nekhludoff very much, but to-day, as
during the whole of his journey, he was in that serious, attentive state
which did not allow him to behave slightingly or disdainfully towards
any man, but made him feel the necessity of speaking to every one
"entirely," as he expressed to himself, this relation to men. When he
had heard the officer and understood his state of mind, he said in a
serious manner:

"I think that in your position, too, some comfort could be found in
helping the suffering people," he said.

"What are their sufferings? You don't know what these people are."

"They are not special people," said Nekhludoff; "they are just such
people as others, and some of them are quite innocent."

"Of course, there are all sorts among them, and naturally one pities
them. Others won't let anything off, but I try to lighten their
condition where I can. It's better that I should suffer, but not they.
Others keep to the law in every detail, even as far as to shoot, but
I show pity. May I?--Take another," he said, and poured out another
tumbler of tea for Nekhludoff.

"And who is she, this woman that you want to see?" he asked.

"It is an unfortunate woman who got into a brothel, and was there
falsely accused of poisoning, and she is a very good woman," Nekhludoff
answered.

The officer shook his head. "Yes, it does happen. I can tell you about
a certain Emma who lived in Kasan. She was a Hungarian by birth, but she
had quite Persian eyes," he continued, unable to restrain a smile at the
recollection; "there was so much chic about her that a countess--"

Nekhludoff interrupted the officer and returned to the former topic of
conversation.

"I think that you could lighten the condition of the people while they
are in your charge. And in acting that way I am sure you would find
great joy!" said Nekhludoff, trying to pronounce as distinctly as
possible, as he might if talking to a foreigner or a child.

The officer looked at Nekhludoff impatiently, waiting for him to stop
so as to continue the tale about the Hungarian with Persian eyes, who
evidently presented herself very vividly to his imagination and quite
absorbed his attention.

"Yes, of course, this is all quite true," he said, "and I do pity them;
but I should like to tell you about Emma. What do you think she did--?"

"It does not interest me," said Nekhludoff, "and I will tell you
straight, that though I was myself very different at one time, I now
hate that kind of relation to women."

The officer gave Nekhludoff a frightened look.

"Won't you take some more tea?" he said.

"No, thank you."

"Bernoff!" the officer called, "take the gentleman to Vakouloff. Tell
him to let him into the separate political room. He may remain there
till the inspection."



CHAPTER IX.

THE POLITICAL PRISONERS.

Accompanied by the orderly, Nekhludoff went out into the courtyard,
which was dimly lit up by the red light of the lamps.

"Where to?" asked the convoy sergeant, addressing the orderly.

"Into the separate cell, No. 5."

"You can't pass here; the boss has gone to the village and taken the
keys."

"Well, then, pass this way."

The soldier led Nekhludoff along a board to another entrance. While
still in the yard Nekhludoff could hear the din of voices and general
commotion going on inside as in a beehive when the bees are preparing to
swarm; but when he came nearer and the door opened the din grew louder,
and changed into distinct sounds of shouting, abuse and laughter. He
heard the clatter of chairs and smelt the well-known foul air. This din
of voices and the clatter of the chairs, together with the close smell,
always flowed into one tormenting sensation, and produced in Nekhludoff
a feeling of moral nausea which grew into physical sickness, the two
feelings mingling with and heightening each other.

The first thing Nekhludoff saw, on entering, was a large, stinking tub.
A corridor into which several doors opened led from the entrance. The
first was the family room, then the bachelors' room, and at the very end
two small rooms were set apart for the political prisoners.

The buildings, which were arranged to hold one hundred and fifty
prisoners, now that there were four hundred and fifty inside, were so
crowded that the prisoners could not all get into the rooms, but filled
the passage, too. Some were sitting or lying on the floor, some were
going out with empty teapots, or bringing them back filled with boiling
water. Among the latter was Taras. He overtook Nekhludoff and greeted
him affectionately. The kind face of Taras was disfigured by dark
bruises on his nose and under his eye.

"What has happened to you?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Yes, something did happen," Taras said, with a smile.

"All because of the woman," added a prisoner, who followed Taras; "he's
had a row with Blind Fedka."

"And how's Theodosia?"

"She's all right. Here I am bringing her the water for her tea," Taras
answered, and went into the family room.

Nekhludoff looked in at the door. The room was crowded with women and
men, some of whom were on and some under the bedsteads; it was full of
steam from the wet clothes that were drying, and the chatter of women's
voices was unceasing. The next door led into the bachelors' room. This
room was still more crowded; even the doorway and the passage in front
of it were blocked by a noisy crowd of men, in wet garments, busy doing
or deciding something or other.

The convoy sergeant explained that it was the prisoner appointed to buy
provisions, paying off out of the food money what was owing to a sharper
who had won from or lent money to the prisoners, and receiving back
little tickets made of playing cards. When they saw the convoy soldier
and a gentleman, those who were nearest became silent, and followed
them with looks of ill-will. Among them Nekhludoff noticed the criminal
Fedoroff, whom he knew, and who always kept a miserable lad with
a swelled appearance and raised eyebrows beside him, and also a
disgusting, noseless, pock-marked tramp, who was notorious among the
prisoners because he killed his comrade in the marshes while trying to
escape, and had, as it was rumoured, fed on his flesh. The tramp stood
in the passage with his wet cloak thrown over one shoulder, looking
mockingly and boldly at Nekhludoff, and did not move out of the way.
Nekhludoff passed him by.

Though this kind of scene had now become quite familiar to him, though
he had during the last three months seen these four hundred criminal
prisoners over and over again in many different circumstances; in the
heat, enveloped in clouds of dust which they raised as they dragged
their chained feet along the road, and at the resting places by the way,
where the most horrible scenes of barefaced debauchery had occurred, yet
every time he came among them, and felt their attention fixed upon him
as it was now, shame and consciousness of his sin against them tormented
him. To this sense of shame and guilt was added an unconquerable feeling
of loathing and horror. He knew that, placed in a position such as
theirs, they could not be other than they were, and yet he was unable to
stifle his disgust.

"It's well for them do-nothings," Nekhludoff heard some one say in a
hoarse voice as he approached the room of the political prisoners. Then
followed a word of obscene abuse, and spiteful, mocking laughter.



CHAPTER X.

MAKAR DEVKIN.

When they had passed the bachelors' room the sergeant who accompanied
Nekhludoff left him, promising to come for him before the inspection
would take place. As soon as the sergeant was gone a prisoner, quickly
stepping with his bare feet and holding up the chains, came close up to
Nekhludoff, enveloping him in the strong, acid smell of perspiration,
and said in a mysterious whisper:

"Help the lad, sir; he's got into an awful mess. Been drinking. To-day
he's given his name as Karmanoff at the inspection. Take his part, sir.
We dare not, or they'll kill us," and looking uneasily round he turned
away.

This is what had happened. The criminal Kalmanoff had persuaded a young
fellow who resembled him in appearance and was sentenced to exile to
change names with him and go to the mines instead of him, while he only
went to exile. Nekhludoff knew all this. Some convict had told him about
this exchange the week before. He nodded as a sign that he understood
and would do what was in his power, and continued his way without
looking round.

Nekhludoff knew this convict, and was surprised by his action. When in
Ekaterinburg the convict had asked Nekhludoff to get a permission for
his wife to follow him. The convict was a man of medium size and of the
most ordinary peasant type, about thirty years old. He was condemned to
hard labour for an attempt to murder and rob. His name was Makar Devkin.
His crime was a very curious one. In the account he gave of it to
Nekhludoff, he said it was not his but his devil's doing. He said that
a traveller had come to his father's house and hired his sledge to drive
him to a village thirty miles off for two roubles. Makar's father told
him to drive the stranger. Makar harnessed the horse, dressed, and
sat down to drink tea with the stranger. The stranger related at the
tea-table that he was going to be married and had five hundred roubles,
which he had earned in Moscow, with him. When he had heard this, Makar
went out into the yard and put an axe into the sledge under the straw.
"And I did not myself know why I was taking the axe," he said. "'Take
the axe,' says _he_, and I took it. We got in and started. We drove
along all right; I even forgot about the axe. Well, we were getting
near the village; only about four miles more to go. The way from the
cross-road to the high road was up hill, and I got out. I walked behind
the sledge and _he_ whispers to me, 'What are you thinking about? When
you get to the top of the hill you will meet people along the highway,
and then there will be the village. He will carry the money away. If
you mean to do it, now's the time.' I stooped over the sledge as if to
arrange the straw, and the axe seemed to jump into my hand of itself.
The man turned round. 'What are you doing?' I lifted the axe and tried
to knock him down, but he was quick, jumped out, and took hold of my
hands. 'What are you doing, you villain?' He threw me down into the
snow, and I did not even struggle, but gave in at once. He bound my arms
with his girdle, and threw me into the sledge, and took me straight to
the police station. I was imprisoned and tried. The commune gave me a
good character, said that I was a good man, and that nothing wrong had
been noticed about me. The masters for whom I worked also spoke well of
me, but we had no money to engage a lawyer, and so I was condemned to
four years' hard labour."

It was this man who, wishing to save a fellow-villager, knowing that he
was risking his life thereby, told Nekhludoff the prisoner's secret, for
doing which (if found out) he should certainly be throttled.



CHAPTER XI.

MASLOVA AND HER COMPANIONS.

The political prisoners were kept in two small rooms, the doors of which
opened into a part of the passage partitioned off from the rest. The
first person Nekhludoff saw on entering into this part of the passage
was Simonson in his rubber jacket and with a log of pine wood in his
hands, crouching in front of a stove, the door of which trembled, drawn
in by the heat inside.

When he saw Nekhludoff he looked up at him from under his protruding
brow, and gave him his hand without rising.

"I am glad you have come; I want to speak to you," he said, looking
Nekhludoff straight in the eyes with an expression of importance.

"Yes; what is it?" Nekhludoff asked.

"It will do later on; I am busy just now," and Simonson turned again
towards the stove, which he was heating according to a theory of his
own, so as to lose as little heat energy as possible.

Nekhludoff was going to enter in at the first door, when Maslova,
stooping and pushing a large heap of rubbish and dust towards the stove
with a handleless birch broom, came out of the other. She had a white
jacket on, her skirt was tucked up, and a kerchief, drawn down to her
eyebrows, protected her hair from the dust. When she saw Nekhludoff, she
drew herself up, flushing and animated, put down the broom, wiped her
hands on her skirt, and stopped right in front of him. "You are tidying
up the apartments, I see," said Nekhludoff, shaking hands.

"Yes; my old occupation," and she smiled. "But the dirt! You can't
imagine what it is. We have been cleaning and cleaning. Well, is the
plaid dry?" she asked, turning to Simonson.

"Almost," Simonson answered, giving her a strange look, which struck
Nekhludoff.

"All right, I'll come for it, and will bring the cloaks to dry. Our
people are all in here," she said to Nekhludoff, pointing to the first
door as she went out of the second.

Nekhludoff opened the door and entered a small room dimly lit by a
little metal lamp, which was standing low down on the shelf bedstead. It
was cold in the room, and there was a smell of the dust, which had not
had time to settle, damp and tobacco smoke.

Only those who were close to the lamp were clearly visible, the
bedsteads were in the shade and wavering shadows glided over the walls.
Two men, appointed as caterers, who had gone to fetch boiling water and
provisions, were away; most of the political prisoners were gathered
together in the small room. There was Nekhludoff's old acquaintance,
Vera Doukhova, with her large, frightened eyes, and the swollen vein on
her forehead, in a grey jacket with short hair, and thinner and yellower
than ever.. She had a newspaper spread out in front of her, and sat
rolling cigarettes with a jerky movement of her hands.

Emily Rintzeva, whom Nekhludoff considered to be the pleasantest of the
political prisoners, was also here. She looked after the housekeeping,
and managed to spread a feeling of home comfort even in the midst of
the most trying surroundings. She sat beside the lamp, with her sleeves
rolled up, wiping cups and mugs, and placing them, with her deft, red
and sunburnt hands, on a cloth that was spread on the bedstead. Rintzeva
was a plain-looking young woman, with a clever and mild expression of
face, which, when she smiled, had a way of suddenly becoming merry,
animated and captivating. It was with such a smile that she now welcomed
Nekhludoff.

"Why, we thought you had gone back to Russia," she said.

Here in a dark corner was also Mary Pavlovna, busy with a little,
fair-haired girl, who kept prattling in her sweet, childish accents.

"How nice that you have come," she said to Nekhludoff.

"Have you seen Katusha? And we have a visitor here," and she pointed to
the little girl.

Here was also Anatole Kryltzoff with felt boots on, sitting in a far
corner with his feet under him, doubled up and shivering, his arms
folded in the sleeves of his cloak, and looking at Nekhludoff with
feverish eyes. Nekhludoff was going up to him, but to the right of
the door a man with spectacles and reddish curls, dressed in a rubber
jacket, sat talking to the pretty, smiling Grabetz. This was the
celebrated revolutionist Novodvoroff. Nekhludoff hastened to greet him.
He was in a particular hurry about it, because this man was the only one
among all the political prisoners whom he disliked. Novodvoroff's eyes
glistened through his spectacles as he looked at Nekhludoff and held his
narrow hand out to him.

"Well, are you having a pleasant journey?" he asked, with apparent
irony.

"Yes, there is much that is interesting," Nekhludoff answered, as if
he did not notice the irony, but took the question for politeness, and
passed on to Kryltzoff.

Though Nekhludoff appeared indifferent, he was really far from
indifferent, and these words of Novodvoroff, showing his evident desire
to say or do something unpleasant, interfered with the state of kindness
in which Nekhludoff found himself, and he felt depressed and sad.

"Well, how are you?" he asked, pressing Kryltzoff's cold and trembling
hand.

"Pretty well, only I cannot get warm; I got wet through," Kryltzoff
answered, quickly replacing his hands into the sleeves of his cloak.
"And here it is also beastly cold. There, look, the window-panes are
broken," and he pointed to the broken panes behind the iron bars. "And
how are you? Why did you not come?"

"I was not allowed to, the authorities were so strict, but to-day the
officer is lenient."

"Lenient indeed!" Kryltzoff remarked. "Ask Mary what she did this
morning."

Mary Pavlovna from her place in the corner related what had happened
about the little girl that morning when they left the halting station.

"I think it is absolutely necessary to make a collective protest," said
Vera Doukhova, in a determined tone, and yet looking now at one, now
at another, with a frightened, undecided look. "Valdemar Simonson did
protest, but that is not sufficient."

"What protest!" muttered Kryltzoff, cross and frowning. Her want
of simplicity, artificial tone and nervousness had evidently been
irritating him for a long time.

"Are you looking for Katusha?" he asked, addressing Nekhludoff. "She is
working all the time. She has cleaned this, the men's room, and now she
has gone to clean the women's! Only it is not possible to clean away
the fleas. And what is Mary doing there?" he asked, nodding towards the
corner where Mary Pavlovna sat.

"She is combing out her adopted daughter's hair," replied Rintzeva.

"But won't she let the insects loose on us?" asked Kryltzoff.

"No, no; I am very careful. She is a clean little girl now. You take
her," said Mary, turning to Rintzeva, "while I go and help Katusha, and
I will also bring him his plaid."

Rintzeva took the little girl on her lap, pressing her plump, bare,
little arms to her bosom with a mother's tenderness, and gave her a bit
of sugar. As Mary Pavlovna left the room, two men came in with boiling
water and provisions.



CHAPTER XII.

NABATOFF AND MARKEL.

One of the men who came in was a short, thin, young man, who had a
cloth-covered sheepskin coat on, and high top-boots. He stepped lightly
and quickly, carrying two steaming teapots, and holding a loaf wrapped
in a cloth under his arm.

"Well, so our prince has put in an appearance again," he said, as he
placed the teapot beside the cups, and handed the bread to Rintzeva.
"We have bought wonderful things," he continued, as he took off his
sheepskin, and flung it over the heads of the others into the corner
of the bedstead. "Markel has bought milk and eggs. Why, we'll have
a regular ball to-day. And Rintzeva is spreading out her aesthetic
cleanliness," he said, and looked with a smile at Rintzeva, "and now she
will make the tea."

The whole presence of this man--his motion, his voice, his look--seemed
to breathe vigour and merriment. The other newcomer was just the reverse
of the first. He looked despondent and sad. He was short, bony, had very
prominent cheek bones, a sallow complexion, thin lips and beautiful,
greenish eyes, rather far apart. He wore an old wadded coat, top-boots
and goloshes, and was carrying two pots of milk and two round boxes
made of birch bark, which he placed in front of Rintzeva. He bowed to
Nekhludoff, bending only his neck, and with his eyes fixed on him. Then,
having reluctantly given him his damp hand to shake, he began to take
out the provisions.

Both these political prisoners were of the people; the first was
Nabatoff, a peasant; the second, Markel Kondratieff, a factory hand.
Markel did not come among the revolutionists till he was quite a man,
Nabatoff only eighteen. After leaving the village school, owing to
his exceptional talents Nabatoff entered the gymnasium, and maintained
himself by giving lessons all the time he studied there, and obtained
the gold medal. He did not go to the university because, while still in
the seventh class of the gymnasium, he made up his mind to go among the
people and enlighten his neglected brethren. This he did, first getting
the place of a Government clerk in a large village. He was soon arrested
because he read to the peasants and arranged a co-operative industrial
association among them. They kept him imprisoned for eight months and
then set him free, but he remained under police supervision. As soon
as he was liberated he went to another village, got a place as
schoolmaster, and did the same as he had done in the first village.
He was again taken up and kept fourteen months in prison, where his
convictions became yet stronger. After that he was exiled to the Perm
Government, from where he escaped. Then he was put to prison for seven
months and after that exiled to Archangel. There he refused to take the
oath of allegiance that was required of them and was condemned to
be exiled to the Takoutsk Government, so that half his life since he
reached manhood was passed in prison and exile. All these adventures did
not embitter him nor weaken his energy, but rather stimulated it. He was
a lively young fellow, with a splendid digestion, always active, gay
and vigorous. He never repented of anything, never looked far ahead, and
used all his powers, his cleverness, his practical knowledge to act in
the present. When free he worked towards the aim he had set himself, the
enlightening and the uniting of the working men, especially the country
labourers. When in prison he was just as energetic and practical in
finding means to come in contact with the outer world, and in arranging
his own life and the life of his group as comfortably as the conditions
would allow. Above all things he was a communist. He wanted, as it
seemed to him, nothing for himself and contented himself with very
little, but demanded very much for the group of his comrades, and could
work for it either physically or mentally day and night, without sleep
or food. As a peasant he had been industrious, observant, clever at
his work, and naturally self-controlled, polite without any effort, and
attentive not only to the wishes but also the opinions of others. His
widowed mother, an illiterate, superstitious, old peasant woman, was
still living, and Nabatoff helped her and went to see her while he was
free. During the time he spent at home he entered into all the interests
of his mother's life, helped her in her work, and continued his
intercourse with former playfellows; smoked cheap tobacco with them in
so-called "dog's feet," [a kind of cigarette that the peasants smoke,
made of a bit of paper and bent at one end into a hook] took part
in their fist fights, and explained to them how they were all being
deceived by the State, and how they ought to disentangle themselves out
of the deception they were kept in. When he thought or spoke of what a
revolution would do for the people he always imagined this people from
whom he had sprung himself left in very nearly the same conditions
as they were in, only with sufficient land and without the gentry and
without officials. The revolution, according to him, and in this
he differed from Novodvoroff and Novodvoroff's follower, Markel
Kondratieff, should not alter the elementary forms of the life of the
people, should not break down the whole edifice, but should only alter
the inner walls of the beautiful, strong, enormous old structure he
loved so dearly. He was also a typical peasant in his views on religion,
never thinking about metaphysical questions, about the origin of
all origin, or the future life. God was to him, as also to Arago, an
hypothesis, which he had had no need of up to now. He had no business
with the origin of the world, whether Moses or Darwin was right.
Darwinism, which seemed so important to his fellows, was only the same
kind of plaything of the mind as the creation in six days. The question
how the world had originated did not interest him, just because the
question how it would be best to live in this world was ever before him.
He never thought about future life, always bearing in the depth of his
soul the firm and quiet conviction inherited from his forefathers, and
common to all labourers on the land, that just as in the world of plants
and animals nothing ceases to exist, but continually changes its form,
the manure into grain, the grain into a food, the tadpole into a frog,
the caterpillar into a butterfly, the acorn into an oak, so man also
does not perish, but only undergoes a change. He believed in this, and
therefore always looked death straight in the face, and bravely bore the
sufferings that lead towards it, but did not care and did not know how
to speak about it. He loved work, was always employed in some practical
business, and put his comrades in the way of the same kind of practical
work.

The other political prisoner from among the people, Markel Kondratieff,
was a very different kind of man. He began to work at the age of
fifteen, and took to smoking and drinking in order to stifle a dense
sense of being wronged. He first realised he was wronged one Christmas
when they, the factory children, were invited to a Christmas tree, got
up by the employer's wife, where he received a farthing whistle, an
apple, a gilt walnut and a fig, while the employer's children had
presents given them which seemed gifts from fairyland, and had cost more
than fifty roubles, as he afterwards heard.

When he was twenty a celebrated revolutionist came to their factory to
work as a working girl, and noticing his superior qualities began giving
books and pamphlets to Kondratieff and to talk and explain his position
to him, and how to remedy it. When the possibility of freeing himself
and others from their oppressed state rose clearly in his mind, the
injustice of this state appeared more cruel and more terrible than
before, and he longed passionately not only for freedom, but also for
the punishment of those who had arranged and who kept up this cruel
injustice. Kondratieff devoted himself with passion to the acquirement
of knowledge. It was not clear to him how knowledge should bring about
the realisation of the social ideal, but he believed that the knowledge
that had shown him the injustice of the state in which he lived would
also abolish that injustice itself. Besides knowledge would, in his
opinion, raise him above others. Therefore he left off drinking and
smoking, and devoted all his leisure time to study. The revolutionist
gave him lessons, and his thirst for every kind of knowledge, and the
facility with which he took it in, surprised her. In two years he had
mastered algebra, geometry, history--which he was specially fond of--and
made acquaintance with artistic and critical, and especially socialistic
literature. The revolutionist was arrested, and Kondratieff with her,
forbidden books having been found in their possession, and they were
imprisoned and then exiled to the Vologda Government. There Kondratieff
became acquainted with Novodvoroff, and read a great deal more
revolutionary literature, remembered it all, and became still firmer
in his socialistic views. While in exile he became leader in a large
strike, which ended in the destruction of a factory and the murder of
the director. He was again arrested and condemned to Siberia.

His religious views were of the same negative nature as his views of the
existing economic conditions. Having seen the absurdity of the religion
in which he was brought up, and having gained with great effort, and
at first with fear, but later with rapture, freedom from it, he did
not tire of viciously and with venom ridiculing priests and religious
dogmas, as if wishing to revenge himself for the deception that had been
practised on him.

He was ascetic through habit, contented himself with very little, and,
like all those used to work from childhood and whose muscles have been
developed, he could work much and easily, and was quick at any manual
labour; but what he valued most was the leisure in prisons and halting
stations, which enabled him to continue his studies. He was now studying
the first volume of Karl Marks's, and carefully hid the book in his sack
as if it were a great treasure. He behaved with reserve and indifference
to all his comrades, except Novodvoroff, to whom he was greatly
attached, and whose arguments on all subjects he accepted as
unanswerable truths.

He had an indefinite contempt for women, whom he looked upon as a
hindrance in all necessary business. But he pitied Maslova and was
gentle with her, for he considered her an example of the way the lower
are exploited by the upper classes. The same reason made him dislike
Nekhludoff, so that he talked little with him, and never pressed
Nekhludoff's hand, but only held out his own to be pressed when greeting
him.



CHAPTER XIII.

LOVE AFFAIRS OF THE EXILES.

The stove had burned up and got warm, the tea was made and poured out
into mugs and cups, and milk was added to it; rusks, fresh rye and wheat
bread, hard-boiled eggs, butter, and calf's head and feet were placed on
the cloth. Everybody moved towards the part of the shelf beds which took
the place of the table and sat eating and talking. Rintzeva sat on a box
pouring out the tea. The rest crowded round her, only Kryltzoff, who had
taken off his wet cloak and wrapped himself in his dry plaid and lay in
his own place talking to Nekhludoff.

After the cold and damp march and the dirt and disorder they had found
here, and after the pains they had taken to get it tidy, after having
drunk hot tea and eaten, they were all in the best and brightest of
spirits.

The fact that the tramp of feet, the screams and abuse of the criminals,
reached them through the wall, reminding them of their surroundings,
seemed only to increase the sense of coziness. As on an island in the
midst of the sea, these people felt themselves for a brief interval not
swamped by the degradation and sufferings which surrounded them; this
made their spirits rise, and excited them. They talked about everything
except their present position and that which awaited them. Then, as it
generally happens among young men, and women especially, if they are
forced to remain together, as these people were, all sorts of agreements
and disagreements and attractions, curiously blended, had sprung up
among them. Almost all of them were in love. Novodvoroff was in love
with the pretty, smiling Grabetz. This Grabetz was a young, thoughtless
girl who had gone in for a course of study, perfectly indifferent to
revolutionary questions, but succumbing to the influence of the day, she
compromised herself in some way and was exiled. The chief interest of
her life during the time of her trial in prison and in exile was her
success with men, just as it had been when she was free. Now on the way
she comforted herself with the fact that Novodvoroff had taken a fancy
to her, and she fell in love with him. Vera Doukhova, who was very prone
to fall in love herself, but did not awaken love in others, though she
was always hoping for mutual love, was sometimes drawn to Nabatoff, then
to Novodvoroff. Kryltzoff felt something like love for Mary Pavlovna. He
loved her with a man's love, but knowing how she regarded this sort of
love, hid his feelings under the guise of friendship and gratitude
for the tenderness with which she attended to his wants. Nabatoff and
Rintzeva were attached to each other by very complicated ties. Just as
Mary Pavlovna was a perfectly chaste maiden, in the same way Rintzeva
was perfectly chaste as her own husband's wife. When only a schoolgirl
of sixteen she fell in love with Rintzeff, a student of the Petersburg
University, and married him before he left the university, when she was
only nineteen years old. During his fourth year at the university her
husband had become involved in the students' rows, was exiled from
Petersburg, and turned revolutionist. She left the medical courses she
was attending, followed him, and also turned revolutionist. If she had
not considered her husband the cleverest and best of men she would not
have fallen in love with him; and if she had not fallen in love would
not have married; but having fallen in love and married him whom she
thought the best and cleverest of men, she naturally looked upon life
and its aims in the way the best and cleverest of men looked at them. At
first he thought the aim of life was to learn, and she looked upon study
as the aim of life. He became a revolutionist, and so did she. She could
demonstrate very clearly that the existing state of things could not go
on, and that it was everybody's duty to fight this state of things and
to try to bring about conditions in which the individual could develop
freely, etc. And she imagined that she really thought and felt all
this, but in reality she only regarded everything her husband thought
as absolute truth, and only sought for perfect agreement, perfect
identification of her own soul with his which alone could give her full
moral satisfaction. The parting with her husband and their child, whom
her mother had taken, was very hard to bear; but she bore it firmly and
quietly, since it was for her husband's sake and for that cause which
she had not the slightest doubt was true, since he served it. She was
always with her husband in thoughts, and did not love and could not love
any other any more than she had done before. But Nabatoff's devoted and
pure love touched and excited her. This moral, firm man, her husband's
friend, tried to treat her as a sister, but something more appeared in
his behaviour to her, and this something frightened them both, and yet
gave colour to their life of hardship.

So that in all this circle only Mary Pavlovna and Kondratieff were quite
free from love affairs.



CHAPTER XIV.

CONVERSATIONS IN PRISON.

Expecting to have a private talk with Katusha, as usual, after tea,
Nekhludoff sat by the side of Kryltzoff, conversing with him. Among
other things he told him the story of Makar's crime and about his
request to him. Kryltzoff listened attentively, gazing at Nekhludoff
with glistening eyes.

"Yes," said Kryltzoff suddenly, "I often think that here we are going
side by side with them, and who are they? The same for whose sake we
are going, and yet we not only do not know them, but do not even wish to
know them. And they, even worse than that, they hate us and look upon us
as enemies. This is terrible."

"There is nothing terrible about it," broke in Novodvoroff. "The masses
always worship power only. The government is in power, and they worship
it and hate us. To-morrow we shall have the power, and they will worship
us," he said with his grating voice. At that moment a volley of abuse
and the rattle of chains sounded from behind the wall, something was
heard thumping against it and screaming and shrieking, some one was
being beaten, and some one was calling out, "Murder! help!"

"Hear them, the beasts! What intercourse can there be between us and
such as them?" quietly remarked Novodvoroff.

"You call them beasts, and Nekhludoff was just telling me about such an
action!" irritably retorted Kryltzoff, and went on to say how Makar was
risking his life to save a fellow-villager. "That is not the action of a
beast, it is heroism."

"Sentimentality!" Novodvoroff ejaculated ironically; "it is difficult
for us to understand the emotions of these people and the motives on
which they act. You see generosity in the act, and it may be simply
jealousy of that other criminal."

"How is it that you never wish to see anything good in another?" Mary
Pavlovna said suddenly, flaring up.

"How can one see what does not exist!"

"How does it not exist, when a man risks dying a terrible death?"

"I think," said Novodvoroff, "that if we mean to do our work, the first
condition is that" (here Kondratieff put down the book he was reading by
the lamplight and began to listen attentively to his master's words) "we
should not give way to fancy, but look at things as they are. We should
do all in our power for the masses, and expect nothing in return.
The masses can only be the object of our activity, but cannot be our
fellow-workers as long as they remain in that state of inertia they are
in at present," he went on, as if delivering a lecture. "Therefore, to
expect help from them before the process of development--that process
which we are preparing them for--has taken place is an illusion."

"What process of development?" Kryltzoff began, flushing all over. "We
say that we are against arbitrary rule and despotism, and is this not
the most awful despotism?"

"No despotism whatever," quietly rejoined Novodvoroff. "I am only saying
that I know the path that the people must travel, and can show them that
path."

"But how can you be sure that the path you show is the true path?
Is this not the same kind of despotism that lay at the bottom of the
Inquisition, all persecutions, and the great revolution? They, too, knew
the one true way, by means of their science."

"Their having erred is no proof of my going to err; besides, there is a
great difference between the ravings of idealogues and the facts based
on sound, economic science." Novodvoroff's voice filled the room; he
alone was speaking, all the rest were silent.

"They are always disputing," Mary Pavlovna said, when there was a
moment's silence.

"And you yourself, what do you think about it?" Nekhludoff asked her.

"I think Kryltzoff is right when he says we should not force our views
on the people."

"And you, Katusha?" asked Nekhludoff with a smile, waiting anxiously for
her answer, fearing she would say something awkward.

"I think the common people are wronged," she said, and blushed scarlet.
"I think they are dreadfully wronged."

"That's right, Maslova, quite right," cried Nabatoff. "They are terribly
wronged, the people, and they must not be wronged, and therein lies the
whole of our task."

"A curious idea of the object of revolution," Novodvoroff remarked
crossly, and began to smoke.

"I cannot talk to him," said Kryltzoff in a whisper, and was silent.

"And it is much better not to talk," Nekhludoff said.



CHAPTER XV.

NOVODVOROFF.

Although Novodvoroff was highly esteemed of all the revolutionists,
though he was very learned, and considered very wise, Nekhludoff
reckoned him among those of the revolutionists who, being below the
average moral level, were very far below it. His inner life was of a
nature directly opposite to that of Simonson's. Simonson was one of
those people (of an essentially masculine type) whose actions follow
the dictates of their reason, and are determined by it. Novodvoroff
belonged, on the contrary, to the class of people of a feminine type,
whose reason is directed partly towards the attainment of aims set by
their feelings, partly to the justification of acts suggested by their
feelings. The whole of Novodvoroff's revolutionary activity, though
he could explain it very eloquently and very convincingly, appeared
to Nekhludoff to be founded on nothing but ambition and the desire
for supremacy. At first his capacity for assimilating the thoughts of
others, and of expressing them correctly, had given him a position of
supremacy among pupils and teachers in the gymnasium and the university,
where qualities such as his are highly prized, and he was satisfied.
When he had finished his studies and received his diploma he suddenly
altered his views, and from a modern liberal he turned into a rabid
Narodovoletz, in order (so Kryltzoff, who did not like him, said) to
gain supremacy in another sphere.

As he was devoid of those moral and aesthetic qualities which call
forth doubts and hesitation, he very soon acquired a position in the
revolutionary world which satisfied him--that of the leader of a party.
Having once chosen a direction, he never doubted or hesitated, and was
therefore certain that he never made a mistake. Everything seemed quite
simple, clear and certain. And the narrowness and one-sidedness of his
views did make everything seem simple and clear. One only had to be
logical, as he said. His self-assurance was so great that it either
repelled people or made them submit to him. As he carried on his work
among very young people, his boundless self-assurance led them to
believe him very profound and wise; the majority did submit to him,
and he had a great success in revolutionary circles. His activity was
directed to the preparation of a rising in which he was to usurp the
power and call together a council. A programme, composed by him, should
be proposed before the council, and he felt sure that this programme of
his solved every problem, and that it would be impossible not to carry
it out.

His comrades respected but did not love him. He did not love any one,
looked upon all men of note as upon rivals, and would have willingly
treated them as old male monkeys treat young ones if he could have done
it. He would have torn all mental power, every capacity, from other men,
so that they should not interfere with the display of his talents. He
behaved well only to those who bowed before him. Now, on the journey he
behaved well to Kondratieff, who was influenced by his propaganda; to
Vera Doukhova and pretty little Grabetz, who were both in love with him.
Although in principle he was in favour of the woman's movement, yet in
the depth of his soul he considered all women stupid and insignificant
except those whom he was sentimentally in love with (as he was now in
love with Grabetz), and such women he considered to be exceptions, whose
merits he alone was capable of discerning.

The question of the relations of the sexes he also looked upon as
thoroughly solved by accepting free union. He had one nominal and
one real wife, from both of whom he was separated, having come to the
conclusion that there was no real love between them, and now he thought
of entering on a free union with Grabetz. He despised Nekhludoff
for "playing the fool," as Novodvoroff termed it, with Maslova, but
especially for the freedom Nekhludoff took of considering the defects
of the existing system and the methods of correcting those defects in a
manner which was not only not exactly the same as Novodvoroff's, but was
Nekhludoff's own--a prince's, that is, a fool's manner. Nekhludoff felt
this relation of Novodvoroff's towards him, and knew to his sorrow that
in spite of the state of good will in which he found himself on this
journey he could not help paying this man in his own coin, and could not
stifle the strong antipathy he felt for him.



CHAPTER XVI.

SIMONSON SPEAKS TO NEKHLUDOFF.

The voices of officials sounded from the next room. All the prisoners
were silent, and a sergeant, followed by two convoy soldiers, entered.
The time of the inspection had come. The sergeant counted every one, and
when Nekhludoff's turn came he addressed him with kindly familiarity.

"You must not stay any longer, Prince, after the inspection; you must go
now."

Nekhludoff knew what this meant, went up to the sergeant and shoved a
three-rouble note into his hand.

"Ah, well, what is one to do with you; stay a bit longer, if you like."
The sergeant was about to go when another sergeant, followed by a
convict, a spare man with a thin beard and a bruise under his eye, came
in.

"It's about the girl I have come," said the convict.

"Here's daddy come," came the ringing accents of a child's voice, and a
flaxen head appeared from behind Rintzeva, who, with Katusha's and Mary
Pavlovna's help, was making a new garment for the child out of one of
Rintzeva's own petticoats.

"Yes, daughter, it's me," Bousovkin, the prisoner, said softly.

"She is quite comfortable here," said Mary Pavlovna, looking with pity
at Bousovkin's bruised face. "Leave her with us."

"The ladies are making me new clothes," said the girl, pointing to
Rintzeva's sewing--"nice red ones," she went on, prattling.

"Do you wish to sleep with us?" asked Rintzeva, caressing the child.

"Yes, I wish. And daddy, too."

"No, daddy can't. Well, leave her then," she said, turning to the
father.

"Yes, you may leave her," said the first sergeant, and went out with the
other.

As soon as they were out of the room Nabatoff went up to Bousovkin,
slapped him on the shoulder, and said: "I say, old fellow, is it true
that Karmanoff wishes to exchange?"

Bousovkin's kindly, gentle face turned suddenly sad and a veil seemed to
dim his eyes.

"We have heard nothing--hardly," he said, and with the same dimness
still over his eyes he turned to the child.

"Well, Aksutka, it seems you're to make yourself comfortable with the
ladies," and he hurried away.

"It's true about the exchange, and he knows it very well," said
Nabatoff.

"What are you going to do?"

"I shall tell the authorities in the next town. I know both prisoners by
sight," said Nekhludoff.

All were silent, fearing a recommencement of the dispute.

Simonson, who had been lying with his arms thrown back behind his head,
and not speaking, rose, and determinately walked up to Nekhludoff,
carefully passing round those who were sitting.

"Could you listen to me now?"

"Of course," and Nekhludoff rose and followed him.

Katusha looked up with an expression of suspense, and meeting
Nekhludoff's eyes, she blushed and shook her head.

"What I want to speak to you about is this," Simonson began, when they
had come out into the passage. In the passage the din of the criminal's
voices and shouts sounded louder. Nekhludoff made a face, but Simonson
did not seem to take any notice.

"Knowing of your relations to Katerina Maslova," he began seriously and
frankly, with his kind eyes looking straight into Nekhludoff's face,
"I consider it my duty"--He was obliged to stop because two voices were
heard disputing and shouting, both at once, close to the door.

"I tell you, blockhead, they are not mine," one voice shouted.

"May you choke, you devil," snorted the other.

At this moment Mary Pavlovna came out into the passage.

"How can one talk here?" she said; "go in, Vera is alone there," and she
went in at the second door, and entered a tiny room, evidently meant for
a solitary cell, which was now placed at the disposal of the political
women prisoners, Vera Doukhova lay covered up, head and all, on the bed.

"She has got a headache, and is asleep, so she cannot hear you, and I
will go away," said Mary Pavlovna.

"On the contrary, stay here," said Simonson; "I have no secrets from any
one, certainly none from you."

"All right," said Mary Pavlovna, and moving her whole body from side to
side, like a child, so as to get farther back on to the bed, she settled
down to listen, her beautiful hazel eyes seeming to look somewhere far
away.

"Well, then, this is my business," Simonson repeated. "Knowing of your
relations to Katerina Maslova, I consider myself bound to explain to you
my relations to her."

Nekhludoff could not help admiring the simplicity and truthfulness with
which Simonson spoke to him.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that I should like to marry Katerina Maslova--"

"How strange!" said Mary Pavlovna, fixing her eyes on Simonson.

"--And so I made up my mind to ask her to be my wife," Simonson
continued.

"What can I do? It depends on her," said Nekhludoff.

"Yes; but she will not come to any decision without you."

"Why?"

"Because as long as your relations with her are unsettled she cannot
make up her mind."

"As far as I am concerned, it is finally settled. I should like to do
what I consider to be my duty and also to lighten her fate, but on no
account would I wish to put any restraint on her."

"Yes, but she does not wish to accept your sacrifice."

"It is no sacrifice."

"And I know that this decision of hers is final."

"Well, then, there is no need to speak to me," said Nekhludoff.

"She wants you to acknowledge that you think as she does."

"How can I acknowledge that I must not do what I consider to be my duty?
All I can say is that I am not free, but she is."

Simonson was silent; then, after thinking a little, he said: "Very
well, then, I'll tell her. You must not think I am in love with her,"
he continued; "I love her as a splendid, unique, human being who has
suffered much. I want nothing from her. I have only an awful longing to
help her, to lighten her posi--"

Nekhludoff was surprised to hear the trembling in Simonson's voice.

"--To lighten her position," Simonson continued. "If she does not wish
to accept your help, let her accept mine. If she consents, I shall ask
to be sent to the place where she will be imprisoned. Four years are
not an eternity. I would live near her, and perhaps might lighten her
fate--" and he again stopped, too agitated to continue.

"What am I to say?" said Nekhludoff. "I am very glad she has found such
a protector as you--"

"That's what I wanted to know," Simonson interrupted.

"I wanted to know if, loving her and wishing her happiness, you would
consider it good for her to marry me?"

"Oh, yes," said Nekhludoff decidedly.

"It all depends on her; I only wish that this suffering soul should find
rest," said Simonson, with such childlike tenderness as no one could
have expected from so morose-looking a man.

Simonson rose, and stretching his lips out to Nekhludoff, smiled shyly
and kissed him.

"So I shall tell her," and he went away.



CHAPTER XVII.

"I HAVE NOTHING MORE TO SAY."

"What do you think of that?" said Mary Pavlovna. "In love--quite in
love. Now, that's a thing I never should have expected, that Valdemar
Simonson should be in love, and in the silliest, most boyish manner. It
is strange, and, to say the truth, it is sad," and she sighed.

"But she? Katusha? How does she look at it, do you think?" Nekhludoff
asked.

"She?" Mary Pavlovna waited, evidently wishing to give as exact an
answer as possible. "She? Well, you see, in spite of her past she
has one of the most moral natures--and such fine feelings. She loves
you--loves you well, and is happy to be able to do you even the negative
good of not letting you get entangled with her. Marriage with you would
be a terrible fall for her, worse than all that's past, and therefore
she will never consent to it. And yet your presence troubles her."

"Well, what am I to do? Ought I to vanish?"

Mary Pavlovna smiled her sweet, childlike smile, and said, "Yes,
partly."

"How is one to vanish partly?"

"I am talking nonsense. But as for her, I should like to tell you that
she probably sees the silliness of this rapturous kind of love (he has
not spoken to her), and is both flattered and afraid of it. I am not
competent to judge in such affairs, you know, still I believe that on
his part it is the most ordinary man's feeling, though it is masked. He
says that this love arouses his energy and is Platonic, but I know that
even if it is exceptional, still at the bottom it is degrading."

Mary Pavlovna had wandered from the subject, having started on her
favourite theme.

"Well, but what am I to do?" Nekhludoff asked.

"I think you should tell her everything; it is always best that
everything should be clear. Have a talk with her; I shall call her.
Shall I?" said Mary Pavlovna.

"If you please," said Nekhludoff, and Mary Pavlovna went.

A strange feeling overcame Nekhludoff when he was alone in the little
room with the sleeping Vera Doukhova, listening to her soft breathing,
broken now and then by moans, and to the incessant dirt that came
through the two doors that separated him from the criminals. What
Simonson had told him freed him from the self-imposed duty, which had
seemed hard and strange to him in his weak moments, and yet now he felt
something that was not merely unpleasant but painful.

He had a feeling that this offer of Simonson's destroyed the exceptional
character of his sacrifice, and thereby lessened its value in his own
and others' eyes; if so good a man who was not bound to her by any kind
of tie wanted to join his fate to hers, then this sacrifice was not so
great. There may have also been an admixture of ordinary jealousy. He
had got so used to her love that he did not like to admit that she loved
another.

Then it also upset the plans he had formed of living near her while
she was doing her term. If she married Simonson his presence would be
unnecessary, and he would have to form new plans.

Before he had time to analyse his feelings the loud din of the
prisoners' voices came in with a rush (something special was going on
among them to-day) as the door opened to let Katusha in.

She stepped briskly close up to him and said, "Mary Pavlovna has sent
me."

"Yes, I must have a talk with you. Sit down. Valdemar Simonson has been
speaking to me."

She sat down and folded her hands in her lap and seemed quite calm, but
hardly had Nekhludoff uttered Simonson's name when she flushed crimson.

"What did he say?" she asked.

"He told me he wanted to marry you."

Her face suddenly puckered up with pain, but she said nothing and only
cast down her eyes.

"He is asking for my consent or my advice. I told him that it all
depends entirely on you--that you must decide."

"Ah, what does it all mean? Why?" she muttered, and looked in his eyes
with that peculiar squint that always strangely affected Nekhludoff.

They sat silent for a few minutes looking into each other's eyes, and
this look told much to both of them.

"You must decide," Nekhludoff repeated.

"What am I to decide? Everything has long been decided."

"No; you must decide whether you will accept Mr. Simonson's offer," said
Nekhludoff.

"What sort of a wife can I be--I, a convict? Why should I ruin Mr.
Simonson, too?" she said, with a frown.

"Well, but if the sentence should be mitigated."

"Oh, leave me alone. I have nothing more to say," she said, and rose to
leave the room.



CHAPTER XVIII.

NEVEROFF'S FATE.

When, following Katusha, Nekhludoff returned to the men's room, he found
every one there in agitation. Nabatoff, who went about all over the
place, and who got to know everybody, and noticed everything, had
just brought news which staggered them all. The news was that he had
discovered a note on a wall, written by the revolutionist Petlin, who
had been sentenced to hard labour, and who, every one thought, had long
since reached the Kara; and now it turned out that he had passed this
way quite recently, the only political prisoner among criminal convicts.

"On the 17th of August," so ran the note, "I was sent off alone with
the criminals. Neveroff was with me, but hanged himself in the lunatic
asylum in Kasan. I am well and in good spirits and hope for the best."

All were discussing Petlin's position and the possible reasons of
Neveroff's suicide. Only Kryltzoff sat silent and preoccupied, his
glistening eyes gazing fixedly in front of him.

"My husband told me that Neveroff had a vision while still in the
Petropavlovski prison," said Rintzeva.

"Yes, he was a poet, a dreamer; this sort of people cannot stand
solitary confinement," said Novodvoroff. "Now, I never gave my
imagination vent when in solitary confinement, but arranged my days most
systematically, and in this way always bore it very well."

"What is there unbearable about it? Why, I used to be glad when they
locked me up," said Nabatoff cheerfully, wishing to dispel the general
depression.

"A fellow's afraid of everything; of being arrested himself and
entangling others, and of spoiling the whole business, and then he gets
locked up, and all responsibility is at an end, and he can rest; he can
just sit and smoke."

"You knew him well?" asked Mary Pavlovna, glancing anxiously at the
altered, haggard expression of Kryltzoff's face.

"Neveroff a dreamer?" Kryltzoff suddenly began, panting for breath as
if he had been shouting or singing for a long time. "Neveroff was a man
'such as the earth bears few of,' as our doorkeeper used to express it.
Yes, he had a nature like crystal, you could see him right through; he
could not lie, he could not dissemble; not simply thin skinned, but
with all his nerves laid bare, as if he were flayed. Yes, his was a
complicated, rich nature, not such a-- But where is the use of talking?"
he added, with a vicious frown. "Shall we first educate the people
and then change the forms of life, or first change the forms and then
struggle, using peaceful propaganda or terrorism? So we go on disputing
while _they_ kill; _they_ do not dispute--they know their business; they
don't care whether dozens, hundreds of men perish--and what men! No;
that the best should perish is just what they want. Yes, Herzen said
that when the Decembrists were withdrawn from circulation the average
level of our society sank. I should think so, indeed. Then Herzen
himself and his fellows were withdrawn; now is the turn of the
Neveroffs."

"They can't all be got rid off," said Nabatoff, in his cheerful tones.
"There will always be left enough to continue the breed. No, there
won't, if we show any pity to _them_ there," Nabatoff said, raising his
voice; and not letting himself be interrupted, "Give me a cigarette."

"Oh, Anatole, it is not good for you," said Mary Pavlovna. "Please do
not smoke."

"Oh, leave me alone," he said angrily, and lit a cigarette, but at once
began to cough and to retch, as if he were going to be sick. Having
cleared his throat though, he went on:

"What we have been doing is not the thing at all. Not to argue, but for
all to unite--to destroy them--that's it."

"But _they_ are also human beings," said Nekhludoff.

"No, _they_ are not human, they who can do what they are
doing--No--There, now, I heard that some kind of bombs and balloons have
been invented. Well, one ought to go up in such a balloon and sprinkle
bombs down on _them_ as if _they_ were bugs, until _they_ are all
exterminated--Yes. Because--" he was going to continue, but, flushing
all over, he began coughing worse than before, and a stream of blood
rushed from his mouth.

Nabatoff ran to get ice. Mary Pavlovna brought valerian drops and
offered them to him, but he, breathing quickly and heavily, pushed her
away with his thin, white hand, and kept his eyes closed. When the ice
and cold water had eased Kryltzoff a little, and he had been put to
bed, Nekhludoff, having said good-night to everybody, went out with the
sergeant, who had been waiting for him some time.

The criminals were now quiet, and most of them were asleep. Though the
people were lying on and under the bed shelves and in the space between,
they could not all be placed inside the rooms, and some of them lay in
the passage with their sacks under their heads and covered with their
cloaks. The moans and sleepy voices came through the open doors and
sounded through the passage. Everywhere lay compact heaps of human
beings covered with prison cloaks. Only a few men who were sitting in
the bachelors' room by the light of a candle end, which they put out
when they noticed the sergeant, were awake, and an old man who sat naked
under the lamp in the passage picking the vermin off his shirt. The
foul air in the political prisoners' rooms seemed pure compared to the
stinking closeness here. The smoking lamp shone dimly as through a mist,
and it was difficult to breathe. Stepping along the passage, one had to
look carefully for an empty space, and having put down one foot had to
find place for the other. Three persons, who had evidently found no
room even in the passage, lay in the anteroom, close to the stinking and
leaking tub. One of these was an old idiot, whom Nekhludoff had often
seen marching with the gang; another was a boy about twelve; he lay
between the two other convicts, with his head on the leg of one of them.

When he had passed out of the gate Nekhludoff took a deep breath and
long continued to breathe in deep draughts of frosty air.



CHAPTER XIX.

WHY IS IT DONE?

It had cleared up and was starlight. Except in a few places the mud was
frozen hard when Nekhludoff returned to his inn and knocked at one of
its dark windows. The broad-shouldered labourer came barefooted to open
the door for him and let him in. Through a door on the right, leading
to the back premises, came the loud snoring of the carters, who slept
there, and the sound of many horses chewing oats came from the yard. The
front room, where a red lamp was burning in front of the icons, smelt
of wormwood and perspiration, and some one with mighty lungs was snoring
behind a partition. Nekhludoff undressed, put his leather travelling
pillow on the oilcloth sofa, spread out his rug and lay down, thinking
over all he had seen and heard that day; the boy sleeping on the liquid
that oozed from the stinking tub, with his head on the convict's leg,
seemed more dreadful than all else.

Unexpected and important as his conversation with Simonson and Katusha
that evening had been, he did not dwell on it; his situation in relation
to that subject was so complicated and indefinite that he drove the
thought from his mind. But the picture of those unfortunate beings,
inhaling the noisome air, and lying in the liquid oozing out of the
stinking tub, especially that of the boy, with his innocent face asleep
on the leg of a criminal, came all the more vividly to his mind, and he
could not get it out of his head.

To know that somewhere far away there are men who torture other men
by inflicting all sorts of humiliations and inhuman degradation and
sufferings on them, or for three months incessantly to look on while men
were inflicting these humiliations and sufferings on other men is a very
different thing. And Nekhludoff felt it. More than once during these
three months he asked himself, "Am I mad because I see what others do
not, or are they mad that do these things that I see?"

Yet they (and there were many of them) did what seemed so astonishing
and terrible to him with such quiet assurance that what they were doing
was necessary and was important and useful work that it was hard to
believe they were mad; nor could he, conscious of the clearness of his
thoughts, believe he was mad; and all this kept him continually in a
state of perplexity.

This is how the things he saw during these three months impressed
Nekhludoff: From among the people who were free, those were chosen, by
means of trials and the administration, who were the most nervous,
the most hot tempered, the most excitable, the most gifted, and the
strongest, but the least careful and cunning. These people, not a wit
more dangerous than many of those who remained free, were first locked
in prisons, transported to Siberia, where they were provided for and
kept months and years in perfect idleness, and away from nature, their
families, and useful work--that is, away from the conditions necessary
for a natural and moral life. This firstly. Secondly, these people
were subjected to all sorts of unnecessary indignity in these different
Places--chains, shaved heads, shameful clothing--that is, they were
deprived of the chief motives that induce the weak to live good lives,
the regard for public opinion, the sense of shame and the consciousness
of human dignity. Thirdly, they were continually exposed to dangers,
such as the epidemics so frequent in places of confinement, exhaustion,
flogging, not to mention accidents, such as sunstrokes, drowning or
conflagrations, when the instinct of self-preservation makes even the
kindest, most moral men commit cruel actions, and excuse such actions
when committed by others.

Fourthly, these people were forced to associate with others who
were particularly depraved by life, and especially by these very
institutions--rakes, murderers and villains--who act on those who are
not yet corrupted by the measures inflicted on them as leaven acts on
dough.

And, fifthly, the fact that all sorts of violence, cruelty, inhumanity,
are not only tolerated, but even permitted by the government, when it
suits its purposes, was impressed on them most forcibly by the inhuman
treatment they were subjected to; by the sufferings inflicted on
children, women and old men; by floggings with rods and whips; by
rewards offered for bringing a fugitive back, dead or alive; by the
separation of husbands and wives, and the uniting them with the wives
and husbands of others for sexual intercourse; by shooting or hanging
them. To those who were deprived of their freedom, who were in want
and misery, acts of violence were evidently still more permissible.
All these institutions seemed purposely invented for the production of
depravity and vice, condensed to such a degree that no other conditions
could produce it, and for the spreading of this condensed depravity and
vice broadcast among the whole population.

"Just as if a problem had been set to find the best, the surest means
of depraving the greatest number of persons," thought Nekhludoff, while
investigating the deeds that were being done in the prisons and halting
stations. Every year hundreds of thousands were brought to the highest
pitch of depravity, and when completely depraved they were set free to
carry the depravity they had caught in prison among the people. In
the prisons of Tamen, Ekaterinburg, Tomsk and at the halting stations
Nekhludoff saw how successfully the object society seemed to have set
itself was attained.

Ordinary, simple men with a conception of the demands of the social and
Christian Russian peasant morality lost this conception, and found a
new one, founded chiefly on the idea that any outrage or violence was
justifiable if it seemed profitable. After living in a prison those
people became conscious with the whole of their being that, judging by
what was happening to themselves, all the moral laws, the respect and
the sympathy for others which church and the moral teachers preach,
was really set aside, and that, therefore, they, too, need not keep the
laws. Nekhludoff noticed the effects of prison life on all the convicts
he knew--on Fedoroff, on Makar, and even on Taras, who, after two months
among the convicts, struck Nekhludoff by the want of morality in his
arguments. Nekhludoff found out during his journey how tramps, escaping
into the marshes, persuade a comrade to escape with them, and then kill
him and feed on his flesh. (He saw a living man who was accused of this
and acknowledged the fact.) And the most terrible part was that this was
not a solitary, but a recurring case.

Only by a special cultivation of vice, such as was perpetrated in these
establishments, could a Russian be brought to the state of this tramp,
who excelled Nietzsche's newest teaching, and held that everything was
possible and nothing forbidden, and who spread this teaching first among
the convicts and then among the people in general.

The only explanation of all that was being done was the wish to put
a stop to crime by fear, by correction, by lawful vengeance as it was
written in the books. But in reality nothing in the least resembling any
of these results came to pass. Instead of vice being put a stop to, it
only spread further; instead of being frightened, the criminals were
encouraged (many a tramp returned to prison of his own free will).
Instead of being corrected, every kind of vice was systematically
instilled, while the desire for vengeance did not weaken by the measures
of the government, but was bred in the people who had none of it.

"Then why is it done?" Nekhludoff asked himself, but could find no
answer. And what seemed most surprising was that all this was not being
done accidentally, not by mistake, not once, but that it had continued
for centuries, with this difference only, that at first the people's
nostrils used to be torn and their ears cut off; then they were branded,
and now they were manacled and transported by steam instead of on the
old carts. The arguments brought forward by those in government service,
who said that the things which aroused his indignation were simply due
to the imperfect arrangements of the places of confinement, and that
they could all be put to rights if prisons of a modern type were built,
did not satisfy Nekhludoff, because he knew that what revolted him was
not the consequence of a better or worse arrangement of the prisons.
He had read of model prisons with electric bells, of executions by
electricity, recommended by Tard; but this refined kind of violence
revolted him even more.

But what revolted Nekhludoff most was that there were men in the law
courts and in the ministry who received large salaries, taken from the
people, for referring to books written by men like themselves and with
like motives, and sorting actions that violated laws made by themselves
according to different statutes; and, in obedience to these statutes,
sending those guilty of such actions to places where they were
completely at the mercy of cruel, hardened inspectors, jailers, convoy
soldiers, where millions of them perished body and soul.

Now that he had a closer knowledge of prisons, Nekhludoff found out
that all those vices which developed among the prisoners--drunkenness,
gambling, cruelty, and all these terrible crimes, even cannibalism--were
not casual, or due to degeneration or to the existence of monstrosities
of the criminal type, as science, going hand in hand with the
government, explained it, but an unavoidable consequence of the
incomprehensible delusion that men may punish one another. Nekhludoff
saw that cannibalism did not commence in the marshes, but in the
ministry. He saw that his brother-in-law, for example, and, in fact, all
the lawyers and officials, from the usher to the minister, do not care
in the least for justice or the good of the people about whom they
spoke, but only for the roubles they were paid for doing the things that
were the source whence all this degradation and suffering flowed. This
was quite evident.

"Can it be, then, that all this is done simply through misapprehension?
Could it not be managed that all these officials should have their
salaries secured to them, and a premium paid them, besides, so that
they should leave off, doing all that they were doing now?" Nekhludoff
thought, and in spite of the fleas, that seemed to spring up round him
like water from a fountain whenever he moved, he fell fast asleep.



CHAPTER XX.

THE JOURNEY RESUMED.

The carters had left the inn long before Nekhludoff awoke. The landlady
had had her tea, and came in wiping her fat, perspiring neck with
her handkerchief, and said that a soldier had brought a note from
the halting station. The note was from Mary Pavlovna. She wrote that
Kryltzoff's attack was more serious than they had imagined. "We wished
him to be left behind and to remain with him, but this has not been
allowed, so that we shall take him on; but we fear the worst. Please
arrange so that if he should be left in the next town, one of us might
remain with him. If in order to get the permission to stay I should be
obliged to get married to him, I am of course ready to do so."

Nekhludoff sent the young labourer to the post station to order horses
and began packing up hurriedly. Before he had drunk his second tumbler
of tea the three-horsed postcart drove up to the porch with ringing
bells, the wheels rattling on the frozen mud as on stones. Nekhludoff
paid the fat-necked landlady, hurried out and got into the cart,
and gave orders to the driver to go on as fast as possible, so as to
overtake the gang. Just past the gates of the commune pasture ground
they did overtake the carts, loaded with sacks and the sick prisoners,
as they rattled over the frozen mud, that was just beginning to be
rolled smooth by the wheels (the officer was not there, he had gone in
advance). The soldiers, who had evidently been drinking, followed by the
side of the road, chatting merrily. There were a great many carts. In
each of the first carts sat six invalid criminal convicts, close packed.
On each of the last two were three political prisoners. Novodvoroff,
Grabetz and Kondratieff sat on one, Rintzeva, Nabatoff and the woman to
whom Mary Pavlovna had given up her own place on the other, and on one
of the carts lay Kryltzoff on a heap of hay, with a pillow under his
head, and Mary Pavlovna sat by him on the edge of the cart. Nekhludoff
ordered his driver to stop, got out and went up to Kryltzoff. One of
the tipsy soldiers waved his hand towards Nekhludoff, but he paid no
attention and started walking by Kryltzoff's side, holding on to the
side of the cart with his hand. Dressed in a sheepskin coat, with a fur
cap on his head and his mouth bound up with a handkerchief, he seemed
paler and thinner than ever. His beautiful eyes looked very large and
brilliant. Shaken from side to side by the jottings of the cart, he lay
with his eyes fixed on Nekhludoff; but when asked about his health, he
only closed his eyes and angrily shook his head. All his energy seemed
to be needed in order to bear the jolting of the cart. Mary Pavlovna was
on the other side. She exchanged a significant glance with Nekhludoff,
which expressed all her anxiety about Kryltzoff's state, and then began
to talk at once in a cheerful manner.

"It seems the officer is ashamed of himself," she shouted, so as to be
heard above the rattle of the wheels. "Bousovkin's manacles have
been removed, and he is carrying his little girl himself. Katusha and
Simonson are with him, and Vera, too. She has taken my place."

Kryltzoff said something that could not be heard because of the noise,
and frowning in the effort to repress his cough shook his head. Then
Nekhludoff stooped towards him, so as to hear, and Kryltzoff, freeing
his mouth of the handkerchief, whispered:

"Much better now. Only not to catch cold."

Nekhludoff nodded in acquiescence, and again exchanged a glance with
Mary Pavlovna.

"How about the problem of the three bodies?" whispered Kryltzoff,
smiling with great difficulty. "The solution is difficult."

Nekhludoff did not understand, but Mary Pavlovna explained that he meant
the well-known mathematical problem which defined the position of the
sun, moon and earth, which Kryltzoff compared to the relations between
Nekhludoff, Katusha and Simonson. Kryltzoff nodded, to show that Mary
Pavlovna had explained his joke correctly.

"The decision does not lie with me," Nekhludoff said.

"Did you get my note? Will you do it?" Mary Pavlovna asked.

"Certainly," answered Nekhludoff; and noticing a look of displeasure on
Kryltzoff's face, he returned to his conveyance, and holding with both
hands to the sides of the cart, got in, which jolted with him over the
ruts of the rough road. He passed the gang, which, with its grey cloaks
and sheepskin coats, chains and manacles, stretched over three-quarters
of a mile of the road. On the opposite side of the road Nekhludoff
noticed Katusha's blue shawl, Vera Doukhova's black coat, and Simonson's
crochet cap, white worsted stockings, with bands, like those of sandals,
tied round him. Simonson was walking with the woman and carrying on a
heated discussion.

When they saw Nekhludoff they bowed to him, and Simonson raised his hat
in a solemn manner. Nekhludoff, having nothing to say, did not stop, and
was soon ahead of the carts. Having got again on to a smoother part of
the road, they drove still more quickly, but they had continually to
turn aside to let pass long rows of carts that were moving along the
road in both directions.

The road, which was cut up by deep ruts, lay through a thick pine
forest, mingled with birch trees and larches, bright with yellow leaves
they had not yet shed. By the time Nekhludoff had passed about half the
gang he reached the end of the forest. Fields now lay stretched along
both sides of the road, and the crosses and cupolas of a monastery
appeared in the distance. The clouds had dispersed, and it had cleared
up completely; the leaves, the frozen puddles and the gilt crosses and
cupolas of the monastery glittered brightly in the sun that had risen
above the forest. A little to the right mountains began to gleam white
in the blue-grey distance, and the trap entered a large village.
The village street was full of people, both Russians and other
nationalities, wearing peculiar caps and cloaks. Tipsy men and women
crowded and chattered round booths, traktirs, public houses and carts.
The vicinity of a town was noticeable. Giving a pull and a lash of the
whip to the horse on his right, the driver sat down sideways on the
right edge of the seat, so that the reins hung over that side, and with
evident desire of showing off, he drove quickly down to the river, which
had to be crossed by a ferry. The raft was coming towards them, and
had reached the middle of the river. About twenty carts were waiting to
cross. Nekhludoff had not long to wait. The raft, which had been pulled
far up the stream, quickly approached the landing, carried by the swift
waters. The tall, silent, broad-shouldered, muscular ferryman, dressed
in sheepskins, threw the ropes and moored the raft with practised hand,
landed the carts that were on it, and put those that were waiting on
the bank on board. The whole raft was filled with vehicles and horses
shuffling at the sight of the water. The broad, swift river splashed
against the sides of the ferryboats, tightening their moorings.

When the raft was full, and Nekhludoff's cart, with the horses taken out
of it, stood closely surrounded by other carts on the side of the raft,
the ferryman barred the entrance, and, paying no heed to the prayers of
those who had not found room in the raft, unfastened the ropes and set
off.

All was quiet on the raft; one could hear nothing but the tramp of the
ferryman's boots and the horses changing from foot to foot.



CHAPTER XXI.

"JUST A WORTHLESS TRAMP."

Nekhludoff stood on the edge of the raft looking at the broad river. Two
pictures kept rising up in his mind. One, that of Kryltzoff, unprepared
for death and dying, made a heavy, sorrowful impression on him. The
other, that of Katusha, full of energy, having gained the love of such a
man as Simonson, and found a true and solid path towards righteousness,
should have been pleasant, yet it also created a heavy impression on
Nekhludoff's mind, and he could not conquer this impression.

The vibrating sounds of a big brass bell reached them from the town.
Nekhludoff's driver, who stood by his side, and the other men on the
raft raised their caps and crossed themselves, all except a short,
dishevelled old man, who stood close to the railway and whom Nekhludoff
had not noticed before. He did not cross himself, but raised his head
and looked at Nekhludoff. This old man wore a patched coat, cloth
trousers and worn and patched shoes. He had a small wallet on his back,
and a high fur cap with the fur much rubbed on his head.

"Why don't you pray, old chap?" asked Nekhludoff's driver as he replaced
and straightened his cap. "Are you unbaptized?"

"Who's one to pray to?" asked the old man quickly, in a determinately
aggressive tone.

"To whom? To God, of course," said the driver sarcastically.

"And you just show me where he is, that god." There was something so
serious and firm in the expression of the old man, that the driver felt
that he had to do with a strong-minded man, and was a bit abashed. And
trying not to show this, not to be silenced, and not to be put to shame
before the crowd that was observing them, he answered quickly.

"Where? In heaven, of course."

"And have you been up there?"

"Whether I've been or not, every one knows that you must pray to God."

"No one has ever seen God at any time. The only begotten Son who is in
the bosom of the Father he hath declared him," said the old man in the
same rapid manner, and with a severe frown on his brow.

"It's clear you are not a Christian, but a hole worshipper. You pray
to a hole," said the driver, shoving the handle of his whip into his
girdle, pulling straight the harness on one of the horses.

Some one laughed.

"What is your faith, Dad?" asked a middle-aged man, who stood by his
cart on the same side of the raft.

"I have no kind of faith, because I believe no one--no one but myself,"
said the old man as quickly and decidedly as before.

"How can you believe yourself?" Nekhludoff asked, entering into a
conversation with him. "You might make a mistake."

"Never in your life," the old man said decidedly, with a toss of his
head.

"Then why are there different faiths?" Nekhludoff asked.

"It's just because men believe others and do not believe themselves that
there are different faiths. I also believed others, and lost myself as
in a swamp,--lost myself so that I had no hope of finding my way out.
Old believers and new believers and Judaisers and Khlysty and Popovitzy,
and Bespopovitzy and Avstriaks and Molokans and Skoptzy--every faith
praises itself only, and so they all creep about like blind puppies.
There are many faiths, but the spirit is one--in me and in you and in
him. So that if every one believes himself all will be united. Every one
be himself, and all will be as one."

The old man spoke loudly and often looked round, evidently wishing that
as many as possible should hear him.

"And have you long held this faith?"

"I? A long time. This is the twenty-third year that they persecute me."

"Persecute you? How?"

"As they persecuted Christ, so they persecute me. They seize me, and
take me before the courts and before the priests, the Scribes and the
Pharisees. Once they put me into a madhouse; but they can do nothing
because I am free. They say, 'What is your name?' thinking I shall name
myself. But I do not give myself a name. I have given up everything:
I have no name, no place, no country, nor anything. I am just myself.
'What is your name?' 'Man.' 'How old are you?' I say, 'I do not count my
years and cannot count them, because I always was, I always shall be.'
'Who are your parents?' 'I have no parents except God and Mother Earth.
God is my father.' 'And the Tsar? Do you recognise the Tsar?' they say.
I say, 'Why not? He is his own Tsar, and I am my own Tsar.' 'Where's the
good of talking to him,' they say, and I say, 'I do not ask you to talk
to me.' And so they begin tormenting me."

"And where are you going now?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Where God will lead me. I work when I can find work, and when I can't
I beg." The old man noticed that the raft was approaching the bank and
stopped, looking round at the bystanders with a look of triumph.

Nekhludoff got out his purse and offered some money to the old man, but
he refused, saying:

"I do not accept this sort of thing--bread I do accept."

"Well, then, excuse me."

"There is nothing to excuse, you have not offended me. And it is not
possible to offend me." And the old man put the wallet he had taken
off again on his back. Meanwhile, the post-cart had been landed and the
horses harnessed.

"I wonder you should care to talk to him, sir," said the driver, when
Nekhludoff, having tipped the bowing ferryman, got into the cart again.
"He is just a worthless tramp."



CHAPTER XXII.

NEKHLUDOFF SEES THE GENERAL.

When they got to the top of the hill bank the driver turned to
Nekhludoff.

"Which hotel am I to drive to?"

"Which is the best?"

"Nothing could be better than the Siberian, but Dukeoff's is also good."

"Drive to whichever you like."

The driver again seated himself sideways and drove faster. The town
was like all such towns. The same kind of houses with attic windows
and green roofs, the same kind of cathedral, the same kind of shops and
stores in the principal street, and even the same kind of policemen.
Only the houses were almost all of them wooden, and the streets were not
paved. In one of the chief streets the driver stopped at the door of an
hotel, but there was no room to be had, so he drove to another. And here
Nekhludoff, after two months, found himself once again in surroundings
such as he had been accustomed to as far as comfort and cleanliness
went. Though the room he was shown to was simple enough, yet Nekhludoff
felt greatly relieved to be there after two months of post-carts,
country inns and halting stations. His first business was to clean
himself of the lice which he had never been able to get thoroughly rid
of after visiting a halting station. When he had unpacked he went to the
Russian bath, after which he made himself fit to be seen in a town,
put on a starched shirt, trousers that had got rather creased along the
seams, a frock-coat and an overcoat, and drove to the Governor of the
district. The hotel-keeper called an isvostchik, whose well-fed Kirghiz
horse and vibrating trap soon brought Nekhludoff to the large porch of
a big building, in front of which stood sentinels and a policeman. The
house had a garden in front, and at the back, among the naked branches
of aspen and birch trees, there grew thick and dark green pines and
firs. The General was not well, and did not receive; but Nekhludoff
asked the footman to hand in his card all the same, and the footman came
back with a favourable reply.

"You are asked to come in."

The hall, the footman, the orderly, the staircase, the dancing-room,
with its well-polished floor, were very much the same as in Petersburg,
only more imposing and rather dirtier. Nekhludoff was shown into the
cabinet.

The General, a bloated, potato-nosed man, with a sanguine disposition,
large bumps on his forehead, bald head, and puffs under his eyes, sat
wrapped in a Tartar silk dressing-gown smoking a cigarette and sipping
his tea out of a tumbler in a silver holder.

"How do you do, sir? Excuse my dressing-gown; it is better so than if I
had not received you at all," he said, pulling up his dressing-gown over
his fat neck with its deep folds at the nape. "I am not quite well, and
do not go out. What has brought you to our remote region?"

"I am accompanying a gang of prisoners, among whom there is a person
closely connected with me, said Nekhludoff, and now I have come to
see your Excellency partly in behalf of this person, and partly about
another business." The General took a whiff and a sip of tea, put
his cigarette into a malachite ashpan, with his narrow eyes fixed on
Nekhludoff, listening seriously. He only interrupted him once to offer
him a cigarette.

The General belonged to the learned type of military men who believed
that liberal and humane views can be reconciled with their profession.
But being by nature a kind and intelligent man, he soon felt the
impossibility of such a reconciliation; so as not to feel the inner
discord in which he was living, he gave himself up more and more to the
habit of drinking, which is so widely spread among military men, and
was now suffering from what doctors term alcoholism. He was imbued
with alcohol, and if he drank any kind of liquor it made him tipsy. Yet
strong drink was an absolute necessity to him, he could not live without
it, so he was quite drunk every evening; but had grown so used to this
state that he did not reel nor talk any special nonsense. And if he
did talk nonsense, it was accepted as words of wisdom because of the
important and high position which he occupied. Only in the morning, just
at the time Nekhludoff came to see him, he was like a reasonable being,
could understand what was said to him, and fulfil more or less aptly a
proverb he was fond of repeating: "He's tipsy, but he's wise, so he's
pleasant in two ways."

The higher authorities knew he was a drunkard, but he was more educated
than the rest, though his education had stopped at the spot where
drunkenness had got hold of him. He was bold, adroit, of imposing
appearance, and showed tact even when tipsy; therefore, he was
appointed, and was allowed to retain so public and responsible an
office.

Nekhludoff told him that the person he was interested in was a woman,
that she was sentenced, though innocent, and that a petition had been
sent to the Emperor in her behalf.

"Yes, well?" said the General.

"I was promised in Petersburg that the news concerning her fate should
be sent to me not later than this month and to this place-"

The General stretched his hand with its stumpy fingers towards the
table, and rang a bell, still looking at Nekhludoff and puffing at his
cigarette.

"So I would like to ask you that this woman should be allowed to remain
here until the answer to her petition comes."

The footman, an orderly in uniform, came in.

"Ask if Anna Vasilievna is up," said the General to the orderly, "and
bring some more tea." Then, turning to Nekhludoff, "Yes, and what else?"

"My other request concerns a political prisoner who is with the same
gang."

"Dear me," said the General, with a significant shake of the head.

"He is seriously ill--dying, and he will probably be left here in the
hospital, so one of the women prisoners would like to stay behind with
him."

"She is no relation of his?"

"No, but she is willing to marry him if that will enable her to remain
with him."

The General looked fixedly with twinkling eyes at his interlocutor, and,
evidently with a wish to discomfit him, listened, smoking in silence.

When Nekhludoff had finished, the General took a book off the table,
and, wetting his finger, quickly turned over the pages and found the
statute relating to marriage.

"What is she sentenced to?" he asked, looking up from the book.

"She? To hard labour."

"Well, then, the position of one sentenced to that cannot be bettered by
marriage."

"Yes, but--"

"Excuse me. Even if a free man should marry her, she would have to
serve her term. The question in such cases is, whose is the heavier
punishment, hers or his?"

"They are both sentenced to hard labour."

"Very well; so they are quits," said the General, with a laugh. "She's
got what he has, only as he is sick he may be left behind, and of course
what can be done to lighten his fate shall be done. But as for her, even
if she did marry him, she could not remain behind."

"The Generaless is having her coffee," the footman announced.

The General nodded and continued:

"However, I shall think about it. What are their names? Put them down
here."

Nekhludoff wrote down the names.

Nekhludoff's request to be allowed to see the dying man the General
answered by saying, "Neither can I do that. Of course I do not suspect
you, but you take an interest in him and in the others, and you have
money, and here with us anything can be done with money. I have been
told to put down bribery. But how can I put down bribery when everybody
takes bribes? And the lower their rank the more ready they are to be
bribed. How can one find it out across more than three thousand miles?
There any official is a little Tsar, just as I am here," and he laughed.
"You have in all likelihood been to see the political prisoners; you
gave money and got permission to see them," he said, with a smile. "Is
it not so?"

"Yes, it is."

"I quite understand that you had to do it. You pity a political prisoner
and wish to see him. And the inspector or the convoy soldier accepts,
because he has a salary of twice twenty copecks and a family, and he
can't help accepting it. In his place and yours I should have acted
in the same way as you and he did. But in my position I do not permit
myself to swerve an inch from the letter of the law, just because I am
a man, and might be influenced by pity. But I am a member of the
executive, and I have been placed in a position of trust on certain
conditions, and these conditions I must carry out. Well, so this
business is finished. And now let us hear what is going on in the
metropolis." And the General began questioning with the evident desire
to hear the news and to show how very human he was.



CHAPTER XXIII.

THE SENTENCE COMMUTED.

"By-the-way, where are you staying?" asked the General as he was taking
leave of Nekhludoff. "At Duke's? Well, it's horrid enough there. Come
and dine with us at five o'clock. You speak English?"

"Yes, I do."

"That's good. You see, an English traveller has just arrived here. He
is studying the question of transportation and examining the prisons of
Siberia. Well, he is dining with us to-night, and you come and meet him.
We dine at five, and my wife expects punctuality. Then I shall also
give you an answer what to do about that woman, and perhaps it may be
possible to leave some one behind with the sick prisoner."

Having made his bow to the General, Nekhludoff drove to the post-office,
feeling himself in an extremely animated and energetic frame of mind.

The post-office was a low-vaulted room. Several officials sat behind
a counter serving the people, of whom there was quite a crowd. One
official sat with his head bent to one side and kept stamping the
envelopes, which he slipped dexterously under the stamp. Nekhludoff had
not long to wait. As soon as he had given his name, everything that had
come for him by post was at once handed to him. There was a good deal:
letters, and money, and books, and the last number of Fatherland Notes.
Nekhludoff took all these things to a wooden bench, on which a soldier
with a book in his hand sat waiting for something, took the seat by
his side, and began sorting the letters. Among them was one registered
letter in a fine envelope, with a distinctly stamped bright red seal. He
broke the seal, and seeing a letter from Selenin and some official paper
inside the envelope, he felt the blood rush to his face, and his heart
stood still. It was the answer to Katusha's petition. What would that
answer be? Nekhludoff glanced hurriedly through the letter, written
in an illegibly small, hard, and cramped hand, and breathed a sigh of
relief. The answer was a favourable one.

"Dear friend," wrote Selenin, "our last talk has made a profound
impression on me. You were right concerning Maslova. I looked carefully
through the case, and see that shocking injustice has been done her. It
could be remedied only by the Committee of Petitions before which you
laid it. I managed to assist at the examination of the case, and I
enclose herewith the copy of the mitigation of the sentence. Your aunt,
the Countess Katerina Ivanovna, gave me the address which I am sending
this to. The original document has been sent to the place where she was
imprisoned before her trial, and will from there he probably sent
at once to the principal Government office in Siberia. I hasten to
communicate this glad news to you and warmly press your hand.

                    "Yours,

                        "SELENIN."

The document ran thus: "His Majesty's office for the reception
of petitions, addressed to his Imperial name"--here followed the
date----"by order of the chief of his Majesty's office for the reception
of petitions addressed to his Imperial name. The meschanka Katerina
Maslova is hereby informed that his Imperial Majesty, with reference to
her most loyal petition, condescending to her request, deigns to order
that her sentence to hard labour should be commuted to one of exile to
the less distant districts of Siberia."

This was joyful and important news; all that Nekhludoff could have hoped
for Katusha, and for himself also, had happened. It was true that the
new position she was in brought new complications with it. While she was
a convict, marriage with her could only be fictitious, and would have
had no meaning except that he would have been in a position to alleviate
her condition. And now there was nothing to prevent their living
together, and Nekhludoff had not prepared himself for that. And,
besides, what of her relations to Simonson? What was the meaning of her
words yesterday? If she consented to a union with Simonson, would it
be well? He could not unravel all these questions, and gave up thinking
about it. "It will all clear itself up later on," he thought; "I must
not think about it now, but convey the glad news to her as soon as
possible, and set her free." He thought that the copy of the document he
had received would suffice, so when he left the post-office he told the
isvostchik to drive him to the prison.

Though he had received no order from the governor to visit the prison
that morning, he knew by experience that it was easy to get from the
subordinates what the higher officials would not grant, so now he meant
to try and get into the prison to bring Katusha the joyful news, and
perhaps to get her set free, and at the same time to inquire about
Kryltzoff's state of health, and tell him and Mary Pavlovna what the
general had said. The prison inspector was a tall, imposing-looking man,
with moustaches and whiskers that twisted towards the corners of his
mouth. He received Nekhludoff very gravely, and told him plainly that
he could not grant an outsider the permission to interview the prisoners
without a special order from his chief. To Nekhludoff's remark that he
had been allowed to visit the prisoners even in the cities he answered:

"That may be so, but I do not allow it," and his tone implied, "You
city gentlemen may think to surprise and perplex us, but we in Eastern
Siberia also know what the law is, and may even teach it you." The copy
of a document straight from the Emperor's own office did not have any
effect on the prison inspector either. He decidedly refused to let
Nekhludoff come inside the prison walls. He only smiled contemptuously
at Nekhludoff's naive conclusion, that the copy he had received would
suffice to set Maslova free, and declared that a direct order from his
own superiors would be needed before any one could be set at liberty.
The only things he agreed to do were to communicate to Maslova that a
mitigation had arrived for her, and to promise that he would not detain
her an hour after the order from his chief to liberate her would arrive.
He would also give no news of Kryltzoff, saying he could not even tell
if there was such a prisoner; and so Nekhludoff, having accomplished
next to nothing, got into his trap and drove back to his hotel.

The strictness of the inspector was chiefly due to the fact that an
epidemic of typhus had broken out in the prison, owing to twice the
number of persons that it was intended for being crowded in it. The
isvostchik who drove Nekhludoff said, "Quite a lot of people are dying
in the prison every day, some kind of disease having sprung up among
them, so that as many as twenty were buried in one day."



CHAPTER XXIV.

THE GENERAL'S HOUSEHOLD.

In spite of his ineffectual attempt at the prison, Nekhludoff, still
in the same vigorous, energetic frame of mind, went to the Governor's
office to see if the original of the document had arrived for Maslova.
It had not arrived, so Nekhludoff went back to the hotel and wrote
without delay to Selenin and the advocate about it. When he had
finished writing he looked at his watch and saw it was time to go to the
General's dinner party.

On the way he again began wondering how Katusha would receive the news
of the mitigation of her sentence. Where she would be settled? How he
should live with her? What about Simonson? What would his relations to
her be? He remembered the change that had taken place in her, and
this reminded him of her past. "I must forget it for the present," he
thought, and again hastened to drive her out of his mind. "When the time
comes I shall see," he said to himself, and began to think of what he
ought to say to the General.

The dinner at the General's, with the luxury habitual to the lives
of the wealthy and those of high rank, to which Nekhludoff had been
accustomed, was extremely enjoyable after he had been so long deprived
not only of luxury but even of the most ordinary comforts. The mistress
of the house was a Petersburg grande dame of the old school, a maid of
honour at the court of Nicholas I., who spoke French quite naturally and
Russian very unnaturally. She held herself very erect and, moving her
hands, she kept her elbows close to her waist. She was quietly and,
somewhat sadly considerate for her husband, and extremely kind to
all her visitors, though with a tinge of difference in her behaviour
according to their position. She received Nekhludoff as if he were one
of them, and her fine, almost imperceptible flattery made him once again
aware of his virtues and gave him a feeling of satisfaction. She made
him feel that she knew of that honest though rather singular step of his
which had brought him to Siberia, and held him to be an exceptional man.
This refined flattery and the elegance and luxury of the General's house
had the effect of making Nekhludoff succumb to the enjoyment of the
handsome surroundings, the delicate dishes and the ease and pleasure
of intercourse with educated people of his own class, so that the
surroundings in the midst of which he had lived for the last months
seemed a dream from which he had awakened to reality. Besides those
of the household, the General's daughter and her husband and an
aide-de-camp, there were an Englishman, a merchant interested in gold
mines, and the governor of a distant Siberian town. All these people
seemed pleasant to Nekhludoff. The Englishman, a healthy man with a
rosy complexion, who spoke very bad French, but whose command of his own
language was very good and oratorically impressive, who had seen a great
deal, was very interesting to listen to when he spoke about America,
India, Japan and Siberia.

The young merchant interested in the gold mines, the son of a peasant,
whose evening dress was made in London, who had diamond studs to his
shirt, possessed a fine library, contributed freely to philanthropic
work, and held liberal European views, seemed pleasant to Nekhludoff
as a sample of a quite new and good type of civilised European culture,
grafted on a healthy, uncultivated peasant stem.

The governor of the distant Siberian town was that same man who had been
so much talked about in Petersburg at the time Nekhludoff was there. He
was plump, with thin, curly hair, soft blue eyes, carefully-tended white
hands, with rings on the fingers, a pleasant smile, and very big in the
lower part of his body. The master of the house valued this governor
because of all the officials he was the only one who would not be
bribed. The mistress of the house, who was very fond of music and a
very good pianist herself, valued him because he was a good musician and
played duets with her.

Nekhludoff was in such good humour that even this man was not unpleasant
to him, in spite of what he knew of his vices. The bright, energetic
aide-de-camp, with his bluey grey chin, who was continually offering his
services, pleased Nekhludoff by his good nature. But it was the charming
young couple, the General's daughter and her husband, who pleased
Nekhludoff best. The daughter was a plain-looking, simple-minded young
woman, wholly absorbed in her two children. Her husband, whom she had
fallen in love with and married after a long struggle with her parents,
was a Liberal, who had taken honours at the Moscow University, a modest
and intellectual young man in Government service, who made up statistics
and studied chiefly the foreign tribes, which he liked and tried to save
from dying out.

All of them were not only kind and attentive to Nekhludoff, but
evidently pleased to see him, as a new and interesting acquaintance. The
General, who came in to dinner in uniform and with a white cross round
his neck, greeted Nekhludoff as a friend, and asked the visitors to
the side table to take a glass of vodka and something to whet their
appetites. The General asked Nekhludoff what he had been doing since
he left that morning, and Nekhludoff told him he had been to the
post-office and received the news of the mitigation of that person's
sentence that he had spoken of in the morning, and again asked for a
permission to visit the prison.

The General, apparently displeased that business should be mentioned at
dinner, frowned and said nothing.

"Have a glass of vodka," he said, addressing the Englishman, who had
just come up to the table. The Englishman drank a glass, and said he had
been to see the cathedral and the factory, but would like to visit the
great transportation prison.

"Oh, that will just fit in," said the General to Nekhludoff. "You will
be able to go together. Give them a pass," he added, turning to his
aide-de-camp.

"When would you like to go?" Nekhludoff asked.

"I prefer visiting the prisons in the evening," the Englishman answered.
"All are indoors and there is no preparation; you find them all as they
are."

"Ah, he would like to see it in all its glory! Let him do so. I have
written about it and no attention has been paid to it. Let him find out
from foreign publications," the General said, and went up to the dinner
table, where the mistress of the house was showing the visitors their
places. Nekhludoff sat between his hostess and the Englishman. In front
of him sat the General's daughter and the ex-director of the Government
department in Petersburg. The conversation at dinner was carried on by
fits and starts, now it was India that the Englishman talked about, now
the Tonkin expedition that the General strongly disapproved of, now the
universal bribery and corruption in Siberia. All these topics did not
interest Nekhludoff much.

But after dinner, over their coffee, Nekhludoff and the Englishman began
a very interesting conversation about Gladstone, and Nekhludoff thought
he had said many clever things which were noticed by his interlocutor.
And Nekhludoff felt it more and more pleasant to be sipping his coffee
seated in an easy-chair among amiable, well-bred people. And when at
the Englishman's request the hostess went up to the piano with the
ex-director of the Government department, and they began to play in
well-practised style Beethoven's fifth symphony, Nekhludoff fell into
a mental state of perfect self-satisfaction to which he had long been
a stranger, as though he had only just found out what a good fellow he
was.

The grand piano was a splendid instrument, the symphony was well
performed. At least, so it seemed to Nekhludoff, who knew and liked that
symphony. Listening to the beautiful andante, he felt a tickling in his
nose, he was so touched by his many virtues.

Nekhludoff thanked his hostess for the enjoyment that he had been
deprived of for so long, and was about to say goodbye and go when the
daughter of the house came up to him with a determined look and said,
with a blush, "You asked about my children. Would you like to see them?"

"She thinks that everybody wants to see her children," said her mother,
smiling at her daughter's winning tactlessness. "The Prince is not at
all interested."

"On the contrary, I am very much interested," said Nekhludoff, touched
by this overflowing, happy mother-love. "Please let me see them."

"She's taking the Prince to see her babies," the General shouted,
laughing from the card-table, where he sat with his son-in-law, the mine
owner and the aide-de-camp. "Go, go, pay your tribute."

The young woman, visibly excited by the thought that judgment was about
to be passed on her children, went quickly towards the inner apartments,
followed by Nekhludoff. In the third, a lofty room, papered with white
and lit up by a shaded lamp, stood two small cots, and a nurse with a
white cape on her shoulders sat between the cots. She had a kindly, true
Siberian face, with its high cheek-bones.

The nurse rose and bowed. The mother stooped over the first cot, in
which a two-year-old little girl lay peacefully sleeping with her little
mouth open and her long, curly hair tumbled over the pillow.

"This is Katie," said the mother, straightening the white and blue
crochet coverlet, from under which a little white foot pushed itself
languidly out.

"Is she not pretty? She's only two years old, you know."

"Lovely."

"And this is Vasiuk, as 'grandpapa' calls him. Quite a different type. A
Siberian, is he not?"

"A splendid boy," said Nekhludoff, as he looked at the little fatty
lying asleep on his stomach.

"Yes," said the mother, with a smile full of meaning.

Nekhludoff recalled to his mind chains, shaved heads, fighting
debauchery, the dying Kryltzoff, Katusha and the whole of her past, and
he began to feel envious and to wish for what he saw here, which now
seemed to him pure and refined happiness.

After having repeatedly expressed his admiration of the children,
thereby at least partially satisfying their mother, who eagerly drank
in this praise, he followed her back to the drawing-room, where the
Englishman was waiting for him to go and visit the prison, as they had
arranged. Having taken leave of their hosts, the old and the young ones,
the Englishman and Nekhludoff went out into the porch of the General's
house.

The weather had changed. It was snowing, and the snow fell densely in
large flakes, and already covered the road, the roof and the trees in
the garden, the steps of the porch, the roof of the trap and the back of
the horse.

The Englishman had a trap of his own, and Nekhludoff, having told the
coachman to drive to the prison, called his isvostchik and got in with
the heavy sense of having to fulfil an unpleasant duty, and followed
the Englishman over the soft snow, through which the wheels turned with
difficulty.



CHAPTER XXV.

MASLOVA'S DECISION.

The dismal prison house, with its sentinel and lamp burning under the
gateway, produced an even more dismal impression, with its long row of
lighted windows, than it had done in the morning, in spite of the white
covering that now lay over everything--the porch, the roof and the
walls.

The imposing inspector came up to the gate and read the pass that had
been given to Nekhludoff and the Englishman by the light of the lamp,
shrugged his fine shoulders in surprise, but, in obedience to the order,
asked the visitors to follow him in. He led them through the courtyard
and then in at a door to the right and up a staircase into the office.
He offered them a seat and asked what he could do for them, and when
he heard that Nekhludoff would like to see Maslova at once, he sent a
jailer to fetch her. Then he prepared himself to answer the questions
which the Englishman began to put to him, Nekhludoff acting as
interpreter.

"How many persons is the prison built to hold?" the Englishman asked.
"How many are confined in it? How many men? How many women? Children?
How many sentenced to the mines? How many exiles? How many sick
persons?"

Nekhludoff translated the Englishman's and the inspector's words without
paying any attention to their meaning, and felt an awkwardness he had
not in the least expected at the thought of the impending interview.
When, in the midst of a sentence he was translating for the Englishman,
he heard the sound of approaching footsteps, and the office door opened,
and, as had happened many times before, a jailer came in, followed by
Katusha, and he saw her with a kerchief tied round her head, and in a
prison jacket a heavy sensation came over him. "I wish to live, I want
a family, children, I want a human life." These thoughts flashed through
his mind as she entered the room with rapid steps and blinking her eyes.

He rose and made a few steps to meet her, and her face appeared hard
and unpleasant to him. It was again as it had been at the time when
she reproached him. She flushed and turned pale, her fingers nervously
twisting a corner of her jacket. She looked up at him, then cast down
her eyes.

"You know that a mitigation has come?"

"Yes, the jailer told me."

"So that as soon as the original document arrives you may come away and
settle where you like. We shall consider--"

She interrupted him hurriedly. "What have I to consider? Where Valdemar
Simonson goes, there I shall follow." In spite of the excitement she
was in she raised her eyes to Nekhludoff's and pronounced these words
quickly and distinctly, as if she had prepared what she had to say.

"Indeed!"

"Well, Dmitri Ivanovitch, you see he wishes me to live with him--" and
she stopped, quite frightened, and corrected herself. "He wishes me to
be near him. What more can I desire? I must look upon it as happiness.
What else is there for me--"

"One of two things," thought he. "Either she loves Simonson and does not
in the least require the sacrifice I imagined I was bringing her, or she
still loves me and refuses me for my own sake, and is burning her ships
by uniting her fate with Simonson." And Nekhludoff felt ashamed and knew
that he was blushing.

"And you yourself, do you love him?" he asked.

"Loving or not loving, what does it matter? I have given up all that.
And then Valdemar Simonson is quite an exceptional man."

"Yes, of course," Nekhludoff began. "He is a splendid man, and I
think--"

But she again interrupted him, as if afraid that he might say too much
or that she should not say all. "No, Dmitri Ivanovitch, you must forgive
me if I am not doing what you wish," and she looked at him with those
unfathomable, squinting eyes of hers. "Yes, it evidently must be so. You
must live, too."

She said just what he had been telling himself a few moments before, but
he no longer thought so now and felt very differently. He was not only
ashamed, but felt sorry to lose all he was losing with her. "I did not
expect this," he said.

"Why should you live here and suffer? You have suffered enough."

"I have not suffered. It was good for me, and I should like to go on
serving you if I could."

"We do not want anything," she said, and looked at him.

"You have done so much for me as it is. If it had not been for you--"
She wished to say more, but her voice trembled.

"You certainly have no reason to thank me," Nekhludoff said.

"Where is the use of our reckoning? God will make up our accounts," she
said, and her black eyes began to glisten with the tears that filled
them.

"What a good woman you are," he said.

"I good?" she said through her tears, and a pathetic smile lit up her
face.

"Are you ready?" the Englishman asked.

"Directly," replied Nekhludoff and asked her about Kryltzoff.

She got over her emotion and quietly told him all she knew. Kryltzoff
was very weak and had been sent into the infirmary. Mary Pavlovna was
very anxious, and had asked to be allowed to go to the infirmary as a
nurse, but could not get the permission.

"Am I to go?" she asked, noticing that the Englishman was waiting.

"I will not say good-bye; I shall see you again," said Nekhludoff,
holding out his hand.

"Forgive me," she said so low that he could hardly hear her. Their eyes
met, and Nekhludoff knew by the strange look of her squinting eyes and
the pathetic smile with which she said not "Good-bye" but "Forgive
me," that of the two reasons that might have led to her resolution,
the second was the real one. She loved him, and thought that by uniting
herself to him she would be spoiling his life. By going with Simonson
she thought she would be setting Nekhludoff free, and felt glad that she
had done what she meant to do, and yet she suffered at parting from him.

She pressed his hand, turned quickly and left the room.

Nekhludoff was ready to go, but saw that the Englishman was noting
something down, and did not disturb him, but sat down on a wooden seat
by the wall, and suddenly a feeling of terrible weariness came over him.
It was not a sleepless night that had tired him, not the journey, not
the excitement, but he felt terribly tired of living. He leaned against
the back of the bench, shut his eyes and in a moment fell into a deep,
heavy sleep.

"Well, would you like to look round the cells now?" the inspector asked.

Nekhludoff looked up and was surprised to find himself where he was. The
Englishman had finished his notes and expressed a wish to see the cells.

Nekhludoff, tired and indifferent, followed him.



CHAPTER XXVI.

THE ENGLISH VISITOR.

When they had passed the anteroom and the sickening, stinking corridor,
the Englishman and Nekhludoff, accompanied by the inspector, entered the
first cell, where those sentenced to hard labour were confined. The beds
took up the middle of the cell and the prisoners were all in bed. There
were about 70 of them. When the visitors entered all the prisoners
jumped up and stood beside the beds, excepting two, a young man who was
in a state of high fever, and an old man who did nothing but groan.

The Englishman asked if the young man had long been ill. The inspector
said that he was taken ill in the morning, but that the old man had long
been suffering with pains in the stomach, but could not be removed, as
the infirmary had been overfilled for a long time. The Englishman shook
his head disapprovingly, said he would like to say a few words to these
people, asking Nekhludoff to interpret. It turned out that besides
studying the places of exile and the prisons of Siberia, the Englishman
had another object in view, that of preaching salvation through faith
and by the redemption.

"Tell them," he said, "that Christ died for them. If they believe in
this they shall be saved." While he spoke, all the prisoners stood
silent with their arms at their sides. "This book, tell them," he
continued, "says all about it. Can any of them read?"

There were more than 20 who could.

The Englishman took several bound Testaments out of a hang-bag, and many
strong hands with their hard, black nails stretched out from beneath the
coarse shirt-sleeves towards him. He gave away two Testaments in this
cell.

The same thing happened in the second cell. There was the same foul air,
the same icon hanging between the windows, the same tub to the left of
the door, and they were all lying side by side close to one another, and
jumped up in the same manner and stood stretched full length with their
arms by their sides, all but three, two of whom sat up and one remained
lying, and did not even look at the newcomers; these three were also
ill. The Englishman made the same speech and again gave away two books.

In the third room four were ill. When the Englishman asked why the sick
were not put all together into one cell, the inspector said that they
did not wish it themselves, that their diseases were not infectious, and
that the medical assistant watched them and attended to them.

"He has not set foot here for a fortnight," muttered a voice.

The inspector did not say anything and led the way to the next cell.
Again the door was unlocked, and all got up and stood silent. Again the
Englishman gave away Testaments. It was the same in the fifth and sixth
cells, in those to the right and those to the left.

From those sentenced to hard labour they went on to the exiles.

From the exiles to those evicted by the Commune and those who followed
of their own free will.

Everywhere men, cold, hungry, idle, infected, degraded, imprisoned, were
shown off like wild beasts.

The Englishman, having given away the appointed number of Testaments,
stopped giving any more, and made no speeches. The oppressing sight, and
especially the stifling atmosphere, quelled even his energy, and he went
from cell to cell, saying nothing but "All right" to the inspector's
remarks about what prisoners there were in each cell.

Nekhludoff followed as in a dream, unable either to refuse to go on or
to go away, and with the same feelings of weariness and hopelessness.



CHAPTER XXVII.

KRYLTZOFF AT REST.

In one of the exiles' cells Nekhludoff, to his surprise, recognised the
strange old man he had seen crossing the ferry that morning. This old
man was sitting on the floor by the beds, barefooted, with only a dirty
cinder-coloured shirt on, torn on one shoulder, and similar trousers.
He looked severely and enquiringly at the newcomers. His emaciated body,
visible through the holes of his shirt, looked miserably weak, but in
his face was even more concentrated seriousness and animation than when
Nekhludoff saw him crossing the ferry. As in all the other cells, so
here also the prisoners jumped up and stood erect when the official
entered, but the old man remained sitting. His eyes glittered and his
brows frowned with wrath.

"Get up," the inspector called out to him.

The old man did not rise and only smiled contemptuously.

"Thy servants are standing before thee. I am not thy servant. Thou
bearest the seal--" The old man pointed to the inspector's forehead.

"Wha-a-t?" said the inspector threateningly, and made a step towards
him.

"I know this man," Nekhludoff hastened to say; "what is he imprisoned
for?"

"The police have sent him here because he has no passport. We ask them
not to send such, but they will do it," said the inspector, casting an
angry side look at the old man.

"And so it seems thou, too, art one of Antichrist's army?" the old man
said to Nekhludoff.

"No, I am a visitor," said Nekhludoff.

"What, hast thou come to see how Antichrist tortures men? There, look,
he has locked them up in a cage, a whole army of them. Men should eat
bread in the sweat of their brow. And he has locked them up with no work
to do, and feeds them like swine, so that they should turn into beasts."

"What is he saying?" asked the Englishman.

Nekhludoff told him the old man was blaming the inspector for keeping
men imprisoned.

"Ask him how he thinks one should treat those who do not keep to the
laws," said the Englishman.

Nekhludoff translated the question. The old man laughed in a strange
manner, showing his teeth.

"The laws?" he repeated with contempt. "He first robbed everybody, took
all the earth, all the rights away from men, killed all those who were
against him, and then wrote laws, forbidding robbery and murder. He
should have written these laws before."

Nekhludoff translated. The Englishman smiled. "Well, anyhow, ask him how
one should treat thieves and murderers at present?"

Nekhludoff again translated his question.

"Tell him he should take the seal of Antichrist off himself," the
old man said, frowning severely; "then there will be no thieves and
murderers. Tell him so."

"He is crazy," said the Englishman, when Nekhludoff had translated the
old man's words, and, shrugging his shoulders, he left the cell.

"Do thy business and leave them alone. Every one for himself. God knows
whom to execute, whom to forgive, and we do not know," said the old man.
"Every man be his own chief, then the chiefs will not be wanted. Go,
go!" he added, angrily frowning and looking with glittering eyes at
Nekhludoff, who lingered in the cell. "Hast thou not looked on long
enough how the servants of Antichrist feed lice on men? Go, go!"

When Nekhludoff went out he saw the Englishman standing by the open door
of an empty cell with the inspector, asking what the cell was for. The
inspector explained that it was the mortuary.

"Oh," said the Englishman when Nekhludoff had translated, and expressed
the wish to go in.

The mortuary was an ordinary cell, not very large. A small lamp hung on
the wall and dimly lit up sacks and logs of wood that were piled up in
one corner, and four dead bodies lay on the bedshelves to the right. The
first body had a coarse linen shirt and trousers on; it was that of a
tall man with a small beard and half his head shaved. The body was quite
rigid; the bluish hands, that had evidently been folded on the breast,
had separated; the legs were also apart and the bare feet were sticking
out. Next to him lay a bare-footed old woman in a white petticoat, her
head, with its thin plait of hair, uncovered, with a little, pinched
yellow face and a sharp nose. Beyond her was another man with something
lilac on. This colour reminded Nekhludoff of something. He came nearer
and looked at the body. The small, pointed beard sticking upwards, the
firm, well-shaped nose, the high, white forehead, the thin, curly hair;
he recognised the familiar features and could hardly believe his eyes.
Yesterday he had seen this face, angry, excited, and full of suffering;
now it was quiet, motionless, and terribly beautiful. Yes, it was
Kryltzoff, or at any rate the trace that his material existence had left
behind. "Why had he suffered? Why had he lived? Does he now understand?"
Nekhludoff thought, and there seemed to be no answer, seemed to be
nothing but death, and he felt faint. Without taking leave of the
Englishman, Nekhludoff asked the inspector to lead him out into the
yard, and feeling the absolute necessity of being alone to think over
all that had happened that evening, he drove back to his hotel.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

A NEW LIFE DAWNS FOR NEKHLUDOFF.

Nekhludoff did not go to bed, but went up and down his room for a long
time. His business with Katusha was at an end. He was not wanted,
and this made him sad and ashamed. His other business was not only
unfinished, but troubled him more than ever and demanded his activity.
All this horrible evil that he had seen and learned to know lately, and
especially to-day in that awful prison, this evil, which had killed
that dear Kryltzoff, ruled and was triumphant, and he could foreseen
possibility of conquering or even knowing how to conquer it. Those
hundreds and thousands of degraded human beings locked up in the noisome
prisons by indifferent generals, procureurs, inspectors, rose up in
his imagination; he remembered the strange, free old man accusing the
officials, and therefore considered mad, and among the corpses the
beautiful, waxen face of Kryltzoff, who had died in anger. And again the
question as to whether he was mad or those who considered they were in
their right minds while they committed all these deeds stood before him
with renewed force and demanded an answer.

Tired of pacing up and down, tired of thinking, he sat down on the sofa
near the lamp and mechanically opened the Testament which the Englishman
had given him as a remembrance, and which he had thrown on the table
when he emptied his pockets on coming in.

"It is said one can find an answer to everything here," he thought, and
opened the Testament at random and began reading Matt. xviii. 1-4: "In
that hour came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who then is greatest in
the Kingdom of Heaven? And He called to Him a little child, and set him
in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye turn
and become as little children, ye shall in nowise enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child
the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven."

"Yes, yes, that is true," he said, remembering that he had known the
peace and joy of life only when he had humbled himself.

"And whosoever shall receive one such little child in My name receiveth
Me, but whoso shall cause one of these little ones to stumble, it is
more profitable for him that a great millstone should be hanged about
his neck and that he should be sunk in the depths of the sea." (Matt.
xviii. 5, 6.)

"What is this for, 'Whosoever shall receive?' Receive where? And what
does 'in my name' mean?" he asked, feeling that these words did not tell
him anything. "And why 'the millstone round his neck and the depths of
the sea?' No, that is not it: it is not clear," and he remembered how
more than once in his life he had taken to reading the Gospels, and how
want of clearness in these passages had repulsed him. He went on to
read the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth verses about the occasions of
stumbling, and that they must come, and about punishment by casting men
into hell fire, and some kind of angels who see the face of the Father
in Heaven. "What a pity that this is so incoherent," he thought, "yet
one feels that there is something good in it."

"For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost," he continued to
read.

"How think ye? If any man have a hundred sheep and one of them go
astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine and go into the mountains
and seek that which goeth astray? And if so be that he find it, verily
I say unto you, he rejoiceth over it more than over the ninety and nine
which have not gone astray.

"Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in Heaven that one
of these little ones should perish."

"Yes, it is not the will of the Father that they should perish, and
here they are perishing by hundreds and thousands. And there is no
possibility of saving them," he thought.

"Then came Peter and said to him, How oft shall my brother offend me and
I forgive him? Until seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto
thee until seven times, but until seventy times seven.

"Therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven likened unto a certain king which
made a reckoning with his servants. And when he had begun to reckon, one
was brought unto him which owed him ten thousand talents. But forasmuch
as he had not wherewith to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and
his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
The servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have
patience with me; I will pay thee all. And the lord of that servant,
being moved with compassion, released him and forgave him the debt. But
that servant went out, and found one of his fellow-servants which owed
him a hundred pence; and he laid hold on him and took him by the
throat, saying, Pay what thou owest. So his fellow-servant fell down and
besought him, saying, Have patience with me and I will pay thee. And
he would not, but went and cast him into prison till he should pay that
which was due. So when his fellow-servants saw what was done, they were
exceeding sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done.
Then his lord called him unto him and saith to him, Thou wicked servant,
I forgave thee all that debt because thou besought me; shouldst not thou
also have mercy on thy fellow-servant as I had mercy on thee?"

"And is this all?" Nekhludoff suddenly exclaimed aloud, and the inner
voice of the whole of his being said, "Yes, it is all." And it happened
to Nekhludoff, as it often happens to men who are living a spiritual
life. The thought that seemed strange at first and paradoxical or
even to be only a joke, being confirmed more and more often by life's
experience, suddenly appeared as the simplest, truest certainty. In this
way the idea that the only certain means of salvation from the
terrible evil from which men were suffering was that they should always
acknowledge themselves to be sinning against God, and therefore unable
to punish or correct others, because they were dear to Him. It became
clear to him that all the dreadful evil he had been witnessing in
prisons and jails and the quiet self-satisfaction of the perpetrators of
this evil were the consequences of men trying to do what was impossible;
trying to correct evil while being evil themselves; vicious men were
trying to correct other vicious men, and thought they could do it by
using mechanical means, and the only consequence of all this was that
the needs and the cupidity of some men induced them to take up this
so-called punishment and correction as a profession, and have themselves
become utterly corrupt, and go on unceasingly depraving those whom they
torment. Now he saw clearly what all the terrors he had seen came from,
and what ought to be done to put a stop to them. The answer he could
not find was the same that Christ gave to Peter. It was that we should
forgive always an infinite number of times because there are no men who
have not sinned themselves, and therefore none can punish or correct
others.

"But surely it cannot be so simple," thought Nekhludoff, and yet he saw
with certainty, strange as it had seemed at first, that it was not only
a theoretical but also a practical solution of the question. The usual
objection, "What is one to do with the evil doers? Surely not let them
go unpunished?" no longer confused him. This objection might have a
meaning if it were proved that punishment lessened crime, or improved
the criminal, but when the contrary was proved, and it was evident that
it was not in people's power to correct each other, the only reasonable
thing to do is to leave off doing the things which are not only useless,
but harmful, immoral and cruel.

For many centuries people who were considered criminals have been
tortured. Well, and have they ceased to exist? No; their numbers have
been increased not alone by the criminals corrupted by punishment but
also by those lawful criminals, the judges, procureurs, magistrates
and jailers, who judge and punish men. Nekhludoff now understood
that society and order in general exists not because of these lawful
criminals who judge and punish others, but because in spite of men being
thus depraved, they still pity and love one another.

In hopes of finding a confirmation of this thought in the Gospel,
Nekhludoff began reading it from the beginning. When he had read the
Sermon on the Mount, which had always touched him, he saw in it for the
first time to-day not beautiful abstract thoughts, setting forth for
the most part exaggerated and impossible demands, but simple, clear,
practical laws. If these laws were carried out in practice (and this
was quite possible) they would establish perfectly new and surprising
conditions of social life, in which the violence that filled Nekhludoff
with such indignation would cease of itself. Not only this, but the
greatest blessing that is obtainable to men, the Kingdom of Heaven on
Earth would be established. There were five of these laws.

The first (Matt. v. 21-26), that man should not only do no murder,
but not even be angry with his brother, should not consider any one
worthless: "Raca," and if he has quarrelled with any one he should make
it up with him before bringing his gift to God--i.e., before praying.

The second (Matt. v. 27-32), that man should not only not commit
adultery but should not even seek for enjoyment in a woman's beauty, and
if he has once come together with a woman he should never be faithless
to her.

The third (Matt. 33-37), that man should never bind himself by oath.

The fourth (Matt. 38-42), that man should not only not demand an eye for
an eye, but when struck on one cheek should hold out the other, should
forgive an offence and bear it humbly, and never refuse the service
others demand of him.

The fifth (Matt. 43-48), that man should not only not hate his enemy and
not fight him, but love him, help him, serve him.

Nekhludoff sat staring at the lamp and his heart stood still. Recalling
the monstrous confusion of the life we lead, he distinctly saw what that
life could be if men were brought up to obey these rules, and rapture
such as he had long not felt filled his soul, just as if after long days
of weariness and suffering he had suddenly found ease and freedom.

He did not sleep all night, and as it happens to many and many a man who
reads the Gospels he understood for the first time the full meaning of
the words read so often before but passed by unnoticed. He imbibed all
these necessary, important and joyful revelations as a sponge imbibes
water. And all he read seemed so familiar and seemed to confirm, to form
into a conception, what he had known long ago, but had never realised
and never quite believed. Now he realised and believed it, and not
only realised and believed that if men would obey these laws they would
obtain the highest blessing they can attain to, he also realised and
believed that the only duty of every man is to fulfil these laws; that
in this lies the only reasonable meaning of life, that every stepping
aside from these laws is a mistake which is immediately followed by
retribution. This flowed from the whole of the teaching, and was most
strongly and clearly illustrated in the parable of the vineyard.

The husbandman imagined that the vineyard in which they were sent to
work for their master was their own, that all that was in was made
for them, and that their business was to enjoy life in this vineyard,
forgetting the Master and killing all those who reminded them of his
existence. "Are we not doing the same," Nekhludoff thought, "when we
imagine ourselves to be masters of our lives, and that life is given us
for enjoyment? This evidently is an incongruity. We were sent here by
some one's will and for some reason. And we have concluded that we live
only for our own joy, and of course we feel unhappy as labourers do when
not fulfilling their Master's orders. The Master's will is expressed in
these commandments. If men will only fulfil these laws, the Kingdom of
Heaven will be established on earth, and men will receive the greatest
good that they can attain to.

"'Seek ye first the Kingdom and His righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you.'

"And so here it is, the business of my life. Scarcely have I finished
one and another has commenced." And a perfectly new life dawned that
night for Nekhludoff, not because he had entered into new conditions of
life, but because everything he did after that night had a new and quite
different significance than before. How this new period of his life will
end time alone will prove.



[Transcriber's Note: Corrected "Are we do not doing the same," to "Are
we not doing the same," in third last paragraph.]

========================================
========================================

CHILDHOOD

By Leo Tolstoy


Translated by C.J. Hogarth




I -- THE TUTOR, KARL IVANITCH

On the 12th of August, 18-- (just three days after my tenth birthday,
when I had been given such wonderful presents), I was awakened at seven
o'clock in the morning by Karl Ivanitch slapping the wall close to my
head with a fly-flap made of sugar paper and a stick. He did this so
roughly that he hit the image of my patron saint suspended to the oaken
back of my bed, and the dead fly fell down on my curls. I peeped out
from under the coverlet, steadied the still shaking image with my hand,
flicked the dead fly on to the floor, and gazed at Karl Ivanitch with
sleepy, wrathful eyes. He, in a parti-coloured wadded dressing-gown
fastened about the waist with a wide belt of the same material, a red
knitted cap adorned with a tassel, and soft slippers of goat skin, went
on walking round the walls and taking aim at, and slapping, flies.

"Suppose," I thought to myself, "that I am only a small boy, yet why
should he disturb me? Why does he not go killing flies around Woloda's
bed? No; Woloda is older than I, and I am the youngest of the family, so
he torments me. That is what he thinks of all day long--how to tease
me. He knows very well that he has woken me up and frightened me, but he
pretends not to notice it. Disgusting brute! And his dressing-gown and
cap and tassel too--they are all of them disgusting."

While I was thus inwardly venting my wrath upon Karl Ivanitch, he had
passed to his own bedstead, looked at his watch (which hung suspended in
a little shoe sewn with bugles), and deposited the fly-flap on a nail,
then, evidently in the most cheerful mood possible, he turned round to
us.

"Get up, children! It is quite time, and your mother is already in the
drawing-room," he exclaimed in his strong German accent. Then he crossed
over to me, sat down at my feet, and took his snuff-box out of his
pocket. I pretended to be asleep. Karl Ivanitch sneezed, wiped his
nose, flicked his fingers, and began amusing himself by teasing me and
tickling my toes as he said with a smile, "Well, well, little lazy one!"

For all my dread of being tickled, I determined not to get out of bed
or to answer him, but hid my head deeper in the pillow, kicked out with
all my strength, and strained every nerve to keep from laughing.

"How kind he is, and how fond of us!" I thought to myself. "Yet to think
that I could be hating him so just now!"

I felt angry, both with myself and with Karl Ivanitch, I wanted to laugh
and to cry at the same time, for my nerves were all on edge.

"Leave me alone, Karl!" I exclaimed at length, with tears in my eyes, as
I raised my head from beneath the bed-clothes.

Karl Ivanitch was taken aback. He left off tickling my feet, and asked
me kindly what the matter was. Had I had a disagreeable dream? His good
German face and the sympathy with which he sought to know the cause
of my tears made them flow the faster. I felt conscience-stricken, and
could not understand how, only a minute ago, I had been hating Karl,
and thinking his dressing-gown and cap and tassel disgusting. On the
contrary, they looked eminently lovable now. Even the tassel seemed
another token of his goodness. I replied that I was crying because I had
had a bad dream, and had seen Mamma dead and being buried. Of course it
was a mere invention, since I did not remember having dreamt anything
at all that night, but the truth was that Karl's sympathy as he tried to
comfort and reassure me had gradually made me believe that I HAD dreamt
such a horrible dream, and so weep the more--though from a different
cause to the one he imagined.

When Karl Ivanitch had left me, I sat up in bed and proceeded to draw
my stockings over my little feet. The tears had quite dried now, yet the
mournful thought of the invented dream was still haunting me a little.
Presently Uncle [This term is often applied by children to old servants
in Russia] Nicola came in--a neat little man who was always grave,
methodical, and respectful, as well as a great friend of Karl's. He
brought with him our clothes and boots--at least, boots for Woloda, and
for myself the old detestable, be-ribanded shoes. In his presence I
felt ashamed to cry, and, moreover, the morning sun was shining so gaily
through the window, and Woloda, standing at the washstand as he mimicked
Maria Ivanovna (my sister's governess), was laughing so loud and so
long, that even the serious Nicola--a towel over his shoulder, the soap
in one hand, and the basin in the other--could not help smiling as he
said, "Will you please let me wash you, Vladimir Petrovitch?" I had
cheered up completely.

"Are you nearly ready?" came Karl's voice from the schoolroom. The tone
of that voice sounded stern now, and had nothing in it of the kindness
which had just touched me so much. In fact, in the schoolroom Karl was
altogether a different man from what he was at other times. There he was
the tutor. I washed and dressed myself hurriedly, and, a brush still
in my hand as I smoothed my wet hair, answered to his call. Karl,
with spectacles on nose and a book in his hand, was sitting, as usual,
between the door and one of the windows. To the left of the door were
two shelves--one of them the children's (that is to say, ours), and the
other one Karl's own. Upon ours were heaped all sorts of books--lesson
books and play books--some standing up and some lying down. The only
two standing decorously against the wall were two large volumes of a
Histoire des Voyages, in red binding. On that shelf could be seen books
thick and thin and books large and small, as well as covers without
books and books without covers, since everything got crammed up together
anyhow when play time arrived and we were told to put the "library" (as
Karl called these shelves) in order. The collection of books on his own
shelf was, if not so numerous as ours, at least more varied. Three of
them in particular I remember, namely, a German pamphlet (minus a cover)
on Manuring Cabbages in Kitchen-Gardens, a History of the Seven Years'
War (bound in parchment and burnt at one corner), and a Course of
Hydrostatics. Though Karl passed so much of his time in reading that he
had injured his sight by doing so, he never read anything beyond these
books and The Northern Bee.

Another article on Karl's shelf I remember well. This was a round piece
of cardboard fastened by a screw to a wooden stand, with a sort of comic
picture of a lady and a hairdresser glued to the cardboard. Karl was
very clever at fixing pieces of cardboard together, and had devised this
contrivance for shielding his weak eyes from any very strong light.

I can see him before me now--the tall figure in its wadded dressing-gown
and red cap (a few grey hairs visible beneath the latter) sitting beside
the table; the screen with the hairdresser shading his face; one hand
holding a book, and the other one resting on the arm of the chair.
Before him lie his watch, with a huntsman painted on the dial, a
check cotton handkerchief, a round black snuff-box, and a green
spectacle-case. The neatness and orderliness of all these articles show
clearly that Karl Ivanitch has a clear conscience and a quiet mind.

Sometimes, when tired of running about the salon downstairs, I would
steal on tiptoe to the schoolroom and find Karl sitting alone in his
armchair as, with a grave and quiet expression on his face, he perused
one of his favourite books. Yet sometimes, also, there were moments when
he was not reading, and when the spectacles had slipped down his large
aquiline nose, and the blue, half-closed eyes and faintly smiling lips
seemed to be gazing before them with a curious expression. All would be
quiet in the room--not a sound being audible save his regular breathing
and the ticking of the watch with the hunter painted on the dial. He
would not see me, and I would stand at the door and think: "Poor, poor
old man! There are many of us, and we can play together and be happy,
but he sits there all alone, and has nobody to be fond of him. Surely
he speaks truth when he says that he is an orphan. And the story of his
life, too--how terrible it is! I remember him telling it to Nicola. How
dreadful to be in his position!" Then I would feel so sorry for him that
I would go to him, and take his hand, and say, "Dear Karl Ivanitch!"
and he would be visibly delighted whenever I spoke to him like this, and
would look much brighter.

On the second wall of the schoolroom hung some maps--mostly torn, but
glued together again by Karl's hand. On the third wall (in the middle of
which stood the door) hung, on one side of the door, a couple of rulers
(one of them ours--much bescratched, and the other one his--quite a new
one), with, on the further side of the door, a blackboard on which our
more serious faults were marked by circles and our lesser faults by
crosses. To the left of the blackboard was the corner in which we had to
kneel when naughty. How well I remember that corner--the shutter on the
stove, the ventilator above it, and the noise which it made when turned!
Sometimes I would be made to stay in that corner till my back and knees
were aching all over, and I would think to myself. "Has Karl Ivanitch
forgotten me? He goes on sitting quietly in his arm-chair and reading
his Hydrostatics, while I--!" Then, to remind him of my presence, I
would begin gently turning the ventilator round. Or scratching some
plaster off the wall; but if by chance an extra large piece fell upon
the floor, the fright of it was worse than any punishment. I would
glance round at Karl, but he would still be sitting there quietly, book
in hand, and pretending that he had noticed nothing.

In the middle of the room stood a table, covered with a torn black
oilcloth so much cut about with penknives that the edge of the table
showed through. Round the table stood unpainted chairs which, through
use, had attained a high degree of polish. The fourth and last wall
contained three windows, from the first of which the view was as
follows. Immediately beneath it there ran a high road on which every
irregularity, every pebble, every rut was known and dear to me. Beside
the road stretched a row of lime-trees, through which glimpses could be
caught of a wattled fence, with a meadow with farm buildings on one side
of it and a wood on the other--the whole bounded by the keeper's hut at
the further end of the meadow. The next window to the right overlooked
the part of the terrace where the "grownups" of the family used to sit
before luncheon. Sometimes, when Karl was correcting our exercises, I
would look out of that window and see Mamma's dark hair and the backs
of some persons with her, and hear the murmur of their talking and
laughter. Then I would feel vexed that I could not be there too, and
think to myself, "When am I going to be grown up, and to have no more
lessons, but sit with the people whom I love instead of with these
horrid dialogues in my hand?" Then my anger would change to sadness, and
I would fall into such a reverie that I never heard Karl when he scolded
me for my mistakes.

At last, on the morning of which I am speaking, Karl Ivanitch took
off his dressing-gown, put on his blue frockcoat with its creased and
crumpled shoulders, adjusted his tie before the looking-glass, and took
us down to greet Mamma.




II -- MAMMA

Mamma was sitting in the drawing-room and making tea. In one hand she
was holding the tea-pot, while with the other one she was drawing water
from the urn and letting it drip into the tray. Yet though she appeared
to be noticing what she doing, in reality she noted neither this fact
nor our entry.

However vivid be one's recollection of the past, any attempt to recall
the features of a beloved being shows them to one's vision as through
a mist of tears--dim and blurred. Those tears are the tears of the
imagination. When I try to recall Mamma as she was then, I see, true,
her brown eyes, expressive always of love and kindness, the small mole
on her neck below where the small hairs grow, her white embroidered
collar, and the delicate, fresh hand which so often caressed me,
and which I so often kissed; but her general appearance escapes me
altogether.

To the left of the sofa stood an English piano, at which my dark-haired
sister Lubotshka was sitting and playing with manifest effort (for
her hands were rosy from a recent washing in cold water) Clementi's
"Etudes." Then eleven years old, she was dressed in a short cotton frock
and white lace-frilled trousers, and could take her octaves only in
arpeggio. Beside her was sitting Maria Ivanovna, in a cap adorned
with pink ribbons and a blue shawl. Her face was red and cross, and it
assumed an expression even more severe when Karl Ivanitch entered the
room. Looking angrily at him without answering his bow, she went on
beating time with her foot and counting, "One, two, three--one, two,
three," more loudly and commandingly than ever.

Karl Ivanitch paid no attention to this rudeness, but went, as usual,
with German politeness to kiss Mamma's hand. She drew herself up, shook
her head as though by the movement to chase away sad thoughts from her,
and gave Karl her hand, kissing him on his wrinkled temple as he bent
his head in salutation.

"I thank you, dear Karl Ivanitch," she said in German, and then, still
using the same language asked him how we (the children) had slept.
Karl Ivanitch was deaf in one ear, and the added noise of the piano now
prevented him from hearing anything at all. He moved nearer to the sofa,
and, leaning one hand upon the table and lifting his cap above his
head, said with, a smile which in those days always seemed to me the
perfection of politeness: "You, will excuse me, will you not, Natalia
Nicolaevna?"

The reason for this was that, to avoid catching cold, Karl never took
off his red cap, but invariably asked permission, on entering the
drawing-room, to retain it on his head.

"Yes, pray replace it, Karl Ivanitch," said Mamma, bending towards him
and raising her voice, "But I asked you whether the children had slept
well?"

Still he did not hear, but, covering his bald head again with the red
cap, went on smiling more than ever.

"Stop a moment, Mimi," said Mamma (now smiling also) to Maria Ivanovna.
"It is impossible to hear anything."

How beautiful Mamma's face was when she smiled! It made her so
infinitely more charming, and everything around her seemed to grow
brighter! If in the more painful moments of my life I could have seen
that smile before my eyes, I should never have known what grief is. In
my opinion, it is in the smile of a face that the essence of what we
call beauty lies. If the smile heightens the charm of the face, then the
face is a beautiful one. If the smile does not alter the face, then the
face is an ordinary one. But if the smile spoils the face, then the face
is an ugly one indeed.

Mamma took my head between her hands, bent it gently backwards, looked
at me gravely, and said: "You have been crying this morning?"

I did not answer. She kissed my eyes, and said again in German: "Why did
you cry?"

When talking to us with particular intimacy she always used this
language, which she knew to perfection.

"I cried about a dream, Mamma" I replied, remembering the invented
vision, and trembling involuntarily at the recollection.

Karl Ivanitch confirmed my words, but said nothing as to the subject of
the dream. Then, after a little conversation on the weather, in which
Mimi also took part, Mamma laid some lumps of sugar on the tray for
one or two of the more privileged servants, and crossed over to her
embroidery frame, which stood near one of the windows.

"Go to Papa now, children," she said, "and ask him to come to me before
he goes to the home farm."

Then the music, the counting, and the wrathful looks from Mimi began
again, and we went off to see Papa. Passing through the room which had
been known ever since Grandpapa's time as "the pantry," we entered the
study.




III -- PAPA

He was standing near his writing-table, and pointing angrily to some
envelopes, papers, and little piles of coin upon it as he addressed some
observations to the bailiff, Jakoff Michaelovitch, who was standing in
his usual place (that is to say, between the door and the barometer)
and rapidly closing and unclosing the fingers of the hand which he held
behind his back. The more angry Papa grew, the more rapidly did those
fingers twirl, and when Papa ceased speaking they came to rest also.
Yet, as soon as ever Jakoff himself began to talk, they flew here,
there, and everywhere with lightning rapidity. These movements always
appeared to me an index of Jakoff's secret thoughts, though his face was
invariably placid, and expressive alike of dignity and submissiveness,
as who should say, "I am right, yet let it be as you wish." On seeing
us, Papa said, "Directly--wait a moment," and looked towards the door as
a hint for it to be shut.

"Gracious heavens! What can be the matter with you to-day, Jakoff?" he
went on with a hitch of one shoulder (a habit of his). "This envelope
here with the 800 roubles enclosed,"--Jacob took out a set of tablets,
put down "800" and remained looking at the figures while he waited
for what was to come next--"is for expenses during my absence. Do you
understand? From the mill you ought to receive 1000 roubles. Is not
that so? And from the Treasury mortgage you ought to receive some 8000
roubles. From the hay--of which, according to your calculations, we
shall be able to sell 7000 poods [The pood = 40 lbs.]at 45 copecks a
piece there should come in 3000. Consequently the sum-total that you
ought to have in hand soon is--how much?--12,000 roubles. Is that
right?"

"Precisely," answered Jakoff. Yet by the extreme rapidity with which
his fingers were twitching I could see that he had an objection to make.
Papa went on:

"Well, of this money you will send 10,000 roubles to the Petrovskoe
local council. As for the money already at the office, you will remit it
to me, and enter it as spent on this present date." Jakoff turned over
the tablet marked "12,000," and put down "21,000"--seeming, by his
action, to imply that 12,000 roubles had been turned over in the
same fashion as he had turned the tablet. "And this envelope with the
enclosed money," concluded Papa, "you will deliver for me to the person
to whom it is addressed."

I was standing close to the table, and could see the address. It was "To
Karl Ivanitch Mayer." Perhaps Papa had an idea that I had read something
which I ought not, for he touched my shoulder with his hand and made me
aware, by a slight movement, that I must withdraw from the table. Not
sure whether the movement was meant for a caress or a command, I kissed
the large, sinewy hand which rested upon my shoulder.

"Very well," said Jakoff. "And what are your orders about the accounts
for the money from Chabarovska?" (Chabarovska was Mamma's village.)

"Only that they are to remain in my office, and not to be taken thence
without my express instructions."

For a minute or two Jakoff was silent. Then his fingers began to twitch
with extraordinary rapidity, and, changing the expression of deferential
vacancy with which he had listened to his orders for one of shrewd
intelligence, he turned his tablets back and spoke.

"Will you allow me to inform you, Peter Alexandritch," he said, with
frequent pauses between his words, "that, however much you wish it, it
is out of the question to repay the local council now. You enumerated
some items, I think, as to what ought to come in from the mortgage, the
mill, and the hay (he jotted down each of these items on his tablets
again as he spoke). Yet I fear that we must have made a mistake
somewhere in the accounts." Here he paused a while, and looked gravely
at Papa.

"How so?"

"Well, will you be good enough to look for yourself? There is the
account for the mill. The miller has been to me twice to ask for time,
and I am afraid that he has no money whatever in hand. He is here now.
Would you like to speak to him?"

"No. Tell me what he says," replied Papa, showing by a movement of his
head that he had no desire to have speech with the miller.

"Well, it is easy enough to guess what he says. He declares that there
is no grinding to be got now, and that his last remaining money has gone
to pay for the dam. What good would it do for us to turn him out? As to
what you were pleased to say about the mortgage, you yourself are aware
that your money there is locked up and cannot be recovered at a moment's
notice. I was sending a load of flour to Ivan Afanovitch to-day, and
sent him a letter as well, to which he replies that he would have been
glad to oblige you, Peter Alexandritch, were it not that the matter is
out of his hands now, and that all the circumstances show that it would
take you at least two months to withdraw the money. From the hay I
understood you to estimate a return of 3000 roubles?" (Here Jakoff
jotted down "3000" on his tablets, and then looked for a moment from the
figures to Papa with a peculiar expression on his face.) "Well, surely
you see for yourself how little that is? And even then we should lose if
we were to sell the stuff now, for you must know that--"

It was clear that he would have had many other arguments to adduce had
not Papa interrupted him.

"I cannot make any change in my arrangements," said Papa. "Yet if there
should REALLY have to be any delay in the recovery of these sums, we
could borrow what we wanted from the Chabarovska funds."

"Very well, sir." The expression of Jakoff's face and the way in which
he twitched his fingers showed that this order had given him great
satisfaction. He was a serf, and a most zealous, devoted one, but,
like all good bailiffs, exacting and parsimonious to a degree in the
interests of his master. Moreover, he had some queer notions of his own.
He was forever endeavouring to increase his master's property at the
expense of his mistress's, and to prove that it would be impossible to
avoid using the rents from her estates for the benefit of Petrovskoe (my
father's village, and the place where we lived). This point he had now
gained and was delighted in consequence.

Papa then greeted ourselves, and said that if we stayed much longer in
the country we should become lazy boys; that we were growing quite big
now, and must set about doing lessons in earnest,

"I suppose you know that I am starting for Moscow to-night?" he went on,
"and that I am going to take you with me? You will live with Grandmamma,
but Mamma and the girls will remain here. You know, too, I am sure, that
Mamma's one consolation will be to hear that you are doing your lessons
well and pleasing every one around you."

The preparations which had been in progress for some days past had
made us expect some unusual event, but this news left us thunderstruck,
Woloda turned red, and, with a shaking voice, delivered Mamma's message
to Papa.

"So this was what my dream foreboded!" I thought to myself. "God send
that there come nothing worse!" I felt terribly sorry to have to leave
Mamma, but at the same rejoiced to think that I should soon be grown up,
"If we are going to-day, we shall probably have no lessons to do, and
that will be splendid. However, I am sorry for Karl Ivanitch, for he
will certainly be dismissed now. That was why that envelope had been
prepared for him. I think I would almost rather stay and do lessons here
than leave Mamma or hurt poor Karl. He is miserable enough already."

As these thoughts crossed my mind I stood looking sadly at the black
ribbons on my shoes. After a few words to Karl Ivanitch about the
depression of the barometer and an injunction to Jakoff not to feed
the hounds, since a farewell meet was to be held after luncheon, Papa
disappointed my hopes by sending us off to lessons--though he also
consoled us by promising to take us out hunting later.

On my way upstairs I made a digression to the terrace. Near the door
leading on to it Papa's favourite hound, Milka, was lying in the sun and
blinking her eyes.

"Miloshka," I cried as I caressed her and kissed her nose, "we are going
away today. Good-bye. Perhaps we shall never see each other again." I
was crying and laughing at the same time.




IV -- LESSONS

Karl Ivanitch was in a bad temper. This was clear from his contracted
brows, and from the way in which he flung his frockcoat into a drawer,
angrily donned his old dressing-gown again, and made deep dints with
his nails to mark the place in the book of dialogues to which we were
to learn by heart. Woloda began working diligently, but I was too
distracted to do anything at all. For a long while I stared vacantly
at the book; but tears at the thought of the impending separation kept
rushing to my eyes and preventing me from reading a single word. When at
length the time came to repeat the dialogues to Karl (who listened to us
with blinking eyes--a very bad sign), I had no sooner reached the place
where some one asks, "Wo kommen Sie her?" ("Where do you come from?")
and some one else answers him, "Ich komme vom Kaffeehaus" ("I come from
the coffee-house"), than I burst into tears and, for sobbing, could not
pronounce, "Haben Sie die Zeitung nicht gelesen?" ("Have you not read the
newspaper?") at all. Next, when we came to our writing lesson, the tears
kept falling from my eyes and, making a mess on the paper, as though
some one had written on blotting-paper with water, Karl was very
angry. He ordered me to go down upon my knees, declared that it was all
obstinacy and "puppet-comedy playing" (a favourite expression of his)
on my part, threatened me with the ruler, and commanded me to say that
I was sorry. Yet for sobbing and crying I could not get a word out. At
last--conscious, perhaps, that he was unjust--he departed to Nicola's
pantry, and slammed the door behind him. Nevertheless their conversation
there carried to the schoolroom.

"Have you heard that the children are going to Moscow, Nicola?" said
Karl.

"Yes. How could I help hearing it?"

At this point Nicola seemed to get up for Karl said, "Sit down, Nicola,"
and then locked the door. However, I came out of my corner and crept to
the door to listen.

"However much you may do for people, and however fond of them you may
be, never expect any gratitude, Nicola," said Karl warmly. Nicola, who
was shoe-cobbling by the window, nodded his head in assent.

"Twelve years have I lived in this house," went on Karl, lifting his
eyes and his snuff-box towards the ceiling, "and before God I can say
that I have loved them, and worked for them, even more than if they had
been my own children. You recollect, Nicola, when Woloda had the fever?
You recollect how, for nine days and nights, I never closed my eyes as
I sat beside his bed? Yes, at that time I was 'the dear, good Karl
Ivanitch'--I was wanted then; but now"--and he smiled ironically--"the
children are growing up, and must go to study in earnest. Perhaps they
never learnt anything with me, Nicola? Eh?"

"I am sure they did," replied Nicola, laying his awl down and
straightening a piece of thread with his hands.

"No, I am wanted no longer, and am to be turned out. What good are
promises and gratitude? Natalia Nicolaevna"--here he laid his hand upon
his heart--"I love and revere, but what can SHE I do here? Her will is
powerless in this house."

He flung a strip of leather on the floor with an angry gesture. "Yet I
know who has been playing tricks here, and why I am no longer wanted. It
is because I do not flatter and toady as certain people do. I am in
the habit of speaking the truth in all places and to all persons," he
continued proudly, "God be with these children, for my leaving them will
benefit them little, whereas I--well, by God's help I may be able to
earn a crust of bread somewhere. Nicola, eh?"

Nicola raised his head and looked at Karl as though to consider whether
he would indeed be able to earn a crust of bread, but he said nothing.
Karl said a great deal more of the same kind--in particular how much
better his services had been appreciated at a certain general's where
he had formerly lived (I regretted to hear that). Likewise he spoke of
Saxony, his parents, his friend the tailor, Schonheit (beauty), and so
on.

I sympathised with his distress, and felt dreadfully sorry that he and
Papa (both of whom I loved about equally) had had a difference. Then I
returned to my corner, crouched down upon my heels, and fell to thinking
how a reconciliation between them might be effected.

Returning to the study, Karl ordered me to get up and prepare to write
from dictation. When I was ready he sat down with a dignified air in
his arm-chair, and in a voice which seemed to come from a profound abyss
began to dictate: "Von al-len Lei-den-shaf-ten die grau-samste ist. Have
you written that?" He paused, took a pinch of snuff, and began again:
"Die grausamste ist die Un-dank-bar-keit [The most cruel of all passions
is ingratitude.] a capital U, mind."

The last word written, I looked at him, for him to go on.

"Punctum" (stop), he concluded, with a faintly perceptible smile, as he
signed to us to hand him our copy-books.

Several times, and in several different tones, and always with an
expression of the greatest satisfaction, did he read out that sentence,
which expressed his predominant thought at the moment. Then he set us
to learn a lesson in history, and sat down near the window. His face did
not look so depressed now, but, on the contrary, expressed eloquently
the satisfaction of a man who had avenged himself for an injury dealt
him.

By this time it was a quarter to one o'clock, but Karl Ivanitch never
thought of releasing us. He merely set us a new lesson to learn. My
fatigue and hunger were increasing in equal proportions, so that I
eagerly followed every sign of the approach of luncheon. First came the
housemaid with a cloth to wipe the plates. Next, the sound of crockery
resounded in the dining-room, as the table was moved and chairs placed
round it. After that, Mimi, Lubotshka, and Katenka. (Katenka was Mimi's
daughter, and twelve years old) came in from the garden, but Foka (the
servant who always used to come and announce luncheon) was not yet to be
seen. Only when he entered was it lawful to throw one's books aside and
run downstairs.

Hark! Steps resounded on the staircase, but they were not Foka's. Foka's
I had learnt to study, and knew the creaking of his boots well. The door
opened, and a figure unknown to me made its appearance.




V -- THE IDIOT

The man who now entered the room was about fifty years old, with a pale,
attenuated face pitted with smallpox, long grey hair, and a scanty beard
of a reddish hue. Likewise he was so tall that, on coming through the
doorway, he was forced not only to bend his head, but to incline his
whole body forward. He was dressed in a sort of smock that was much
torn, and held in his hand a stout staff. As he entered he smote this
staff upon the floor, and, contracting his brows and opening his mouth
to its fullest extent, laughed in a dreadful, unnatural way. He had lost
the sight of one eye, and its colourless pupil kept rolling about and
imparting to his hideous face an even more repellent expression than it
otherwise bore.

"Hullo, you are caught!" he exclaimed as he ran to Woloda with little
short steps and, seizing him round the head, looked at it searchingly.
Next he left him, went to the table, and, with a perfectly serious
expression on his face, began to blow under the oil-cloth, and to make
the sign of the cross over it, "O-oh, what a pity! O-oh, how it hurts!
They are angry! They fly from me!" he exclaimed in a tearful choking
voice as he glared at Woloda and wiped away the streaming tears with his
sleeve. His voice was harsh and rough, all his movements hysterical and
spasmodic, and his words devoid of sense or connection (for he used no
conjunctions). Yet the tone of that voice was so heartrending, and his
yellow, deformed face at times so sincere and pitiful in its expression,
that, as one listened to him, it was impossible to repress a mingled
sensation of pity, grief, and fear.

This was the idiot Grisha. Whence he had come, or who were his parents,
or what had induced him to choose the strange life which he led, no
one ever knew. All that I myself knew was that from his fifteenth year
upwards he had been known as an imbecile who went barefooted both in
winter and summer, visited convents, gave little images to any one who
cared to take them, and spoke meaningless words which some people took
for prophecies; that nobody remembered him as being different; that at,
rare intervals he used to call at Grandmamma's house; and that by some
people he was said to be the outcast son of rich parents and a pure,
saintly soul, while others averred that he was a mere peasant and an
idler.

At last the punctual and wished-for Foka arrived, and we went
downstairs. Grisha followed us sobbing and continuing to talk nonsense,
and knocking his staff on each step of the staircase. When we entered
the drawing-room we found Papa and Mamma walking up and down there, with
their hands clasped in each other's, and talking in low tones. Maria
Ivanovna was sitting bolt upright in an arm-chair placed at tight angles
to the sofa, and giving some sort of a lesson to the two girls sitting
beside her. When Karl Ivanitch entered the room she looked at him for a
moment, and then turned her eyes away with an expression which seemed to
say, "You are beneath my notice, Karl Ivanitch." It was easy to see from
the girls' eyes that they had important news to communicate to us as
soon as an opportunity occurred (for to leave their seats and approach
us first was contrary to Mimi's rules). It was for us to go to her
and say, "Bon jour, Mimi," and then make her a low bow; after which we
should possibly be permitted to enter into conversation with the girls.

What an intolerable creature that Mimi was! One could hardly say a word
in her presence without being found fault with. Also whenever we wanted
to speak in Russian, she would say, "Parlez, donc, francais," as though
on purpose to annoy us, while, if there was any particularly nice
dish at luncheon which we wished to enjoy in peace, she would keep on
ejaculating, "Mangez, donc, avec du pain!" or, "Comment est-ce que vous
tenez votre fourchette?" "What has SHE got to do with us?" I used to
think to myself. "Let her teach the girls. WE have our Karl Ivanitch." I
shared to the full his dislike of "certain people."

"Ask Mamma to let us go hunting too," Katenka whispered to me, as she
caught me by the sleeve just when the elders of the family were making a
move towards the dining-room.

"Very well. I will try."

Grisha likewise took a seat in the dining-room, but at a little table
apart from the rest. He never lifted his eyes from his plate, but kept
on sighing and making horrible grimaces, as he muttered to himself:
"What a pity! It has flown away! The dove is flying to heaven! The stone
lies on the tomb!" and so forth.

Ever since the morning Mamma had been absent-minded, and Grisha's
presence, words, and actions seemed to make her more so.

"By the way, there is something I forgot to ask you," she said, as she
handed Papa a plate of soup.

"What is it?"

"That you will have those dreadful dogs of yours tied up. They nearly
worried poor Grisha to death when he entered the courtyard, and I am
sure they will bite the children some day."

No sooner did Grisha hear himself mentioned that he turned towards our
table and showed us his torn clothes. Then, as he went on with his meal,
he said: "He would have let them tear me in pieces, but God would not
allow it! What a sin to let the dogs loose--a great sin! But do not beat
him, master; do not beat him! It is for God to forgive! It is past now!"

"What does he say?" said Papa, looking at him gravely and sternly. "I
cannot understand him at all."

"I think he is saying," replied Mamma, "that one of the huntsmen set
the dogs on him, but that God would not allow him to be torn in pieces.
Therefore he begs you not to punish the man."

"Oh, is that it?" said Papa, "How does he know that I intended to
punish the huntsman? You know, I am not very fond of fellows like this,"
he added in French, "and this one offends me particularly. Should it
ever happen that--"

"Oh, don't say so," interrupted Mamma, as if frightened by some thought.
"How can you know what he is?"

"I think I have plenty of opportunities for doing so, since no lack of
them come to see you--all of them the same sort, and probably all with
the same story."

I could see that Mamma's opinion differed from his, but that she did not
mean to quarrel about it.

"Please hand me the cakes," she said to him, "Are they good to-day or
not?"

"Yes, I AM angry," he went on as he took the cakes and put them where
Mamma could not reach them, "very angry at seeing supposedly reasonable
and educated people let themselves be deceived," and he struck the table
with his fork.

"I asked you to hand me the cakes," she repeated with outstretched hand.

"And it is a good thing," Papa continued as he put the hand aside, "that
the police run such vagabonds in. All they are good for is to play upon
the nerves of certain people who are already not over-strong in
that respect," and he smiled, observing that Mamma did not like the
conversation at all. However, he handed her the cakes.

"All that I have to say," she replied, "is that one can hardly believe
that a man who, though sixty years of age, goes barefooted winter and
summer, and always wears chains of two pounds' weight, and never
accepts the offers made to him to live a quiet, comfortable life--it is
difficult to believe that such a man should act thus out of laziness."
Pausing a moment, she added with a sigh: "As to predictions, je suis
payee pour y croire, I told you, I think, that Grisha prophesied the
very day and hour of poor Papa's death?"

"Oh, what HAVE you gone and done?" said Papa, laughing and putting his
hand to his cheek (whenever he did this I used to look for something
particularly comical from him). "Why did you call my attention to his
feet? I looked at them, and now can eat nothing more."

Luncheon was over now, and Lubotshka and Katenka were winking at us,
fidgeting about in their chairs, and showing great restlessness. The
winking, of course, signified, "Why don't you ask whether we too may go
to the hunt?" I nudged Woloda, and Woloda nudged me back, until at last
I took heart of grace, and began (at first shyly, but gradually with
more assurance) to ask if it would matter much if the girls too were
allowed to enjoy the sport. Thereupon a consultation was held among the
elder folks, and eventually leave was granted--Mamma, to make things
still more delightful, saying that she would come too.




VI -- PREPARATIONS FOR THE CHASE

During dessert Jakoff had been sent for, and orders given him to have
ready the carriage, the hounds, and the saddle-horses--every detail
being minutely specified, and every horse called by its own particular
name. As Woloda's usual mount was lame, Papa ordered a "hunter" to be
saddled for him; which term, "hunter" so horrified Mamma's ears, that
she imagined it to be some kind of an animal which would at once run
away and bring about Woloda's death. Consequently, in spite of all
Papa's and Woloda's assurances (the latter glibly affirming that it was
nothing, and that he liked his horse to go fast), poor Mamma continued
to exclaim that her pleasure would be quite spoilt for her.

When luncheon was over, the grown-ups had coffee in the study, while
we younger ones ran into the garden and went chattering along the
undulating paths with their carpet of yellow leaves. We talked about
Woloda's riding a hunter and said what a shame it was that Lubotshka,
could not run as fast as Katenka, and what fun it would be if we could
see Grisha's chains, and so forth; but of the impending separation
we said not a word. Our chatter was interrupted by the sound of the
carriage driving up, with a village urchin perched on each of its
springs. Behind the carriage rode the huntsmen with the hounds, and
they, again, were followed by the groom Ignat on the steed intended
for Woloda, with my old horse trotting alongside. After running to
the garden fence to get a sight of all these interesting objects, and
indulging in a chorus of whistling and hallooing, we rushed upstairs to
dress--our one aim being to make ourselves look as like the huntsmen as
possible. The obvious way to do this was to tuck one's breeches inside
one's boots. We lost no time over it all, for we were in a hurry to run
to the entrance steps again there to feast our eyes upon the horses and
hounds, and to have a chat with the huntsmen. The day was exceedingly
warm while, though clouds of fantastic shape had been gathering on the
horizon since morning and driving before a light breeze across the sun,
it was clear that, for all their menacing blackness, they did not
really intend to form a thunderstorm and spoil our last day's pleasure.
Moreover, towards afternoon some of them broke, grew pale and elongated,
and sank to the horizon again, while others of them changed to the
likeness of white transparent fish-scales. In the east, over Maslovska,
a single lurid mass was louring, but Karl Ivanitch (who always seemed to
know the ways of the heavens) said that the weather would still continue
to be fair and dry.

In spite of his advanced years, it was in quite a sprightly manner that
Foka came out to the entrance steps, to give the order "Drive up."
In fact, as he planted his legs firmly apart and took up his station
between the lowest step and the spot where the coachman was to halt,
his mien was that of a man who knew his duties and had no need to be
reminded of them by anybody. Presently the ladies, also came out, and
after a little discussions as to seats and the safety of the girls (all
of which seemed to me wholly superfluous), they settled themselves in
the vehicle, opened their parasols, and started. As the carriage was,
driving away, Mamma pointed to the hunter and asked nervously "Is that
the horse intended for Vladimir Petrovitch?" On the groom answering
in the affirmative, she raised her hands in horror and turned her head
away. As for myself, I was burning with impatience. Clambering on to
the back of my steed (I was just tall enough to see between its ears), I
proceeded to perform evolutions in the courtyard.

"Mind you don't ride over the hounds, sir," said one of the huntsmen.

"Hold your tongue. It is not the first time I have been one of the
party." I retorted with dignity.

Although Woloda had plenty of pluck, he was not altogether free from
apprehensions as he sat on the hunter. Indeed, he more than once asked
as he patted it, "Is he quiet?" He looked very well on horseback--almost
a grown-up young man, and held himself so upright in the saddle that I
envied him since my shadow seemed to show that I could not compare with
him in looks.

Presently Papa's footsteps sounded on the flagstones, the whip collected
the hounds, and the huntsmen mounted their steeds. Papa's horse came up
in charge of a groom, the hounds of his particular leash sprang up from
their picturesque attitudes to fawn upon him, and Milka, in a collar
studded with beads, came bounding joyfully from behind his heels to
greet and sport with the other dogs. Finally, as soon as Papa had
mounted we rode away.




VII -- THE HUNT

AT the head of the cavalcade rode Turka, on a hog-backed roan. On his
head he wore a shaggy cap, while, with a magnificent horn slung across
his shoulders and a knife at his belt, he looked so cruel and inexorable
that one would have thought he was going to engage in bloody strife with
his fellow men rather than to hunt a small animal. Around the hind legs
of his horse the hounds gambolled like a cluster of checkered, restless
balls. If one of them wished to stop, it was only with the greatest
difficulty that it could do so, since not only had its leash-fellow
also to be induced to halt, but at once one of the huntsmen would wheel
round, crack his whip, and shout to the delinquent,

"Back to the pack, there!"

Arrived at a gate, Papa told us and the huntsmen to continue our way
along the road, and then rode off across a cornfield. The harvest was at
its height. On the further side of a large, shining, yellow stretch of
cornland lay a high purple belt of forest which always figured in my
eyes as a distant, mysterious region behind which either the world ended
or an uninhabited waste began. This expanse of corn-land was dotted with
swathes and reapers, while along the lanes where the sickle had passed
could be seen the backs of women as they stooped among the tall, thick
grain or lifted armfuls of corn and rested them against the shocks. In
one corner a woman was bending over a cradle, and the whole stubble was
studded with sheaves and cornflowers. In another direction shirt-sleeved
men were standing on waggons, shaking the soil from the stalks of
sheaves, and stacking them for carrying. As soon as the foreman (dressed
in a blouse and high boots, and carrying a tally-stick) caught sight of
Papa, he hastened to take off his lamb's-wool cap and, wiping his red
head, told the women to get up. Papa's chestnut horse went trotting
along with a prancing gait as it tossed its head and swished its tail
to and fro to drive away the gadflies and countless other insects which
tormented its flanks, while his two greyhounds--their tails curved like
sickles--went springing gracefully over the stubble. Milka was always
first, but every now and then she would halt with a shake of her head
to await the whipper-in. The chatter of the peasants; the rumbling of
horses and waggons; the joyous cries of quails; the hum of insects as
they hung suspended in the motionless air; the smell of the soil and
grain and steam from our horses; the thousand different lights and
shadows which the burning sun cast upon the yellowish-white cornland;
the purple forest in the distance; the white gossamer threads which were
floating in the air or resting on the soil-all these things I observed
and heard and felt to the core.

Arrived at the Kalinovo wood, we found the carriage awaiting us
there, with, beside it, a one-horse waggonette driven by the butler--a
waggonette in which were a tea-urn, some apparatus for making ices, and
many other attractive boxes and bundles, all packed in straw! There was
no mistaking these signs, for they meant that we were going to have tea,
fruit, and ices in the open air. This afforded us intense delight, since
to drink tea in a wood and on the grass and where none else had ever
drunk tea before seemed to us a treat beyond expressing.

When Turka arrived at the little clearing where the carriage was
halted he took Papa's detailed instructions as to how we were to divide
ourselves and where each of us was to go (though, as a matter of fact,
he never acted according to such instructions, but always followed his
own devices). Then he unleashed the hounds, fastened the leashes to
his saddle, whistled to the pack, and disappeared among the young birch
trees the liberated hounds jumping about him in high delight, wagging
their tails, and sniffing and gambolling with one another as they
dispersed themselves in different directions.

"Has anyone a pocket-handkerchief to spare?" asked Papa. I took mine
from my pocket and offered it to him.

"Very well. Fasten it to this greyhound here."

"Gizana?" I asked, with the air of a connoisseur.

"Yes. Then run him along the road with you. When you come to a little
clearing in the wood stop and look about you, and don't come back to me
without a hare."

Accordingly I tied my handkerchief round Gizana's soft neck, and set off
running at full speed towards the appointed spot, Papa laughing as he
shouted after me, "Hurry up, hurry up or you'll be late!"

Every now and then Gizana kept stopping, pricking up his ears, and
listening to the hallooing of the beaters. Whenever he did this I was
not strong enough to move him, and could do no more than shout, "Come
on, come on!" Presently he set off so fast that I could not restrain
him, and I encountered more than one fall before we reached our
destination. Selecting there a level, shady spot near the roots of a
great oak-tree, I lay down on the turf, made Gizana crouch beside me,
and waited. As usual, my imagination far outstripped reality. I fancied
that I was pursuing at least my third hare when, as a matter of fact,
the first hound was only just giving tongue. Presently, however, Turka's
voice began to sound through the wood in louder and more excited tones,
the baying of a hound came nearer and nearer, and then another, and then
a third, and then a fourth, deep throat joined in the rising and falling
cadences of a chorus, until the whole had united their voices in one
continuous, tumultuous burst of melody. As the Russian proverb expresses
it, "The forest had found a tongue, and the hounds were burning as with
fire."

My excitement was so great that I nearly swooned where I stood. My lips
parted themselves as though smiling, the perspiration poured from me in
streams, and, in spite of the tickling sensation caused by the drops as
they trickled over my chin, I never thought of wiping them away. I felt
that a crisis was approaching. Yet the tension was too unnatural to
last. Soon the hounds came tearing along the edge of the wood, and
then--behold, they were racing away from me again, and of hares there
was not a sign to be seen! I looked in every direction and Gizana did
the same--pulling at his leash at first and whining. Then he lay down
again by my side, rested his muzzle on my knees, and resigned himself to
disappointment. Among the naked roots of the oak-tree under which I was
sitting. I could see countless ants swarming over the parched grey earth
and winding among the acorns, withered oak-leaves, dry twigs, russet
moss, and slender, scanty blades of grass. In serried files they kept
pressing forward on the level track they had made for themselves--some
carrying burdens, some not. I took a piece of twig and barred their way.
Instantly it was curious to see how they made light of the obstacle.
Some got past it by creeping underneath, and some by climbing over it. A
few, however, there were (especially those weighted with loads) who were
nonplussed what to do. They either halted and searched for a way round,
or returned whence they had come, or climbed the adjacent herbage, with
the evident intention of reaching my hand and going up the sleeve of my
jacket. From this interesting spectacle my attention was distracted by
the yellow wings of a butterfly which was fluttering alluringly before
me. Yet I had scarcely noticed it before it flew away to a little
distance and, circling over some half-faded blossoms of white clover,
settled on one of them. Whether it was the sun's warmth that delighted
it, or whether it was busy sucking nectar from the flower, at all events
it seemed thoroughly comfortable. It scarcely moved its wings at all,
and pressed itself down into the clover until I could hardly see
its body. I sat with my chin on my hands and watched it with intense
interest.

Suddenly Gizana sprang up and gave me such a violent jerk that I nearly
rolled over. I looked round. At the edge of the wood a hare had just
come into view, with one ear bent down and the other one sharply
pricked. The blood rushed to my head, and I forgot everything else as
I shouted, slipped the dog, and rushed towards the spot. Yet all was in
vain. The hare stopped, made a rush, and was lost to view.

How confused I felt when at that moment Turka stepped from the
undergrowth (he had been following the hounds as they ran along the
edges of the wood)! He had seen my mistake (which had consisted in my
not biding my time), and now threw me a contemptuous look as he said,
"Ah, master!" And you should have heard the tone in which he said it! It
would have been a relief to me if he had then and there suspended me to
his saddle instead of the hare. For a while I could only stand miserably
where I was, without attempting to recall the dog, and ejaculate as I
slapped my knees, "Good heavens! What a fool I was!" I could hear the
hounds retreating into the distance, and baying along the further side
of the wood as they pursued the hare, while Turka rallied them with
blasts on his gorgeous horn: yet I did not stir.




VIII -- WE PLAY GAMES

THE hunt was over, a cloth had been spread in the shade of some young
birch-trees, and the whole party was disposed around it. The butler,
Gabriel, had stamped down the surrounding grass, wiped the plates in
readiness, and unpacked from a basket a quantity of plums and peaches
wrapped in leaves.

Through the green branches of the young birch-trees the sun glittered
and threw little glancing balls of light upon the pattern of my napkin,
my legs, and the bald moist head of Gabriel. A soft breeze played in
the leaves of the trees above us, and, breathing softly upon my hair and
heated face, refreshed me beyond measure. When we had finished the
fruit and ices, nothing remained to be done around the empty cloth, so,
despite the oblique, scorching rays of the sun, we rose and proceeded to
play.

"Well, what shall it be?" said Lubotshka, blinking in the sunlight and
skipping about the grass, "Suppose we play Robinson?"

"No, that's a tiresome game," objected Woloda, stretching himself lazily
on the turf and gnawing some leaves, "Always Robinson! If you want to
play at something, play at building a summerhouse."

Woloda was giving himself tremendous airs. Probably he was proud of
having ridden the hunter, and so pretended to be very tired. Perhaps,
also, he had too much hard-headedness and too little imagination
fully to enjoy the game of Robinson. It was a game which consisted of
performing various scenes from The Swiss Family Robinson, a book which
we had recently been reading.

"Well, but be a good boy. Why not try and please us this time?" the
girls answered. "You may be Charles or Ernest or the father, whichever
you like best," added Katenka as she tried to raise him from the ground
by pulling at his sleeve.

"No, I'm not going to; it's a tiresome game," said Woloda again, though
smiling as if secretly pleased.

"It would be better to sit at home than not to play at ANYTHING,"
murmured Lubotshka, with tears in her eyes. She was a great weeper.

"Well, go on, then. Only, DON'T cry; I can't stand that sort of thing."

Woloda's condescension did not please us much. On the contrary, his
lazy, tired expression took away all the fun of the game. When we sat
on the ground and imagined that we were sitting in a boat and either
fishing or rowing with all our might, Woloda persisted in sitting with
folded hands or in anything but a fisherman's posture. I made a remark
about it, but he replied that, whether we moved our hands or not, we
should neither gain nor lose ground--certainly not advance at all, and I
was forced to agree with him. Again, when I pretended to go out hunting,
and, with a stick over my shoulder, set off into the wood, Woloda only
lay down on his back with his hands under his head, and said that he
supposed it was all the same whether he went or not. Such behaviour and
speeches cooled our ardour for the game and were very disagreeable--the
more so since it was impossible not to confess to oneself that Woloda
was right, I myself knew that it was not only impossible to kill birds
with a stick, but to shoot at all with such a weapon. Still, it was
the game, and if we were once to begin reasoning thus, it would become
equally impossible for us to go for drives on chairs. I think that even
Woloda himself cannot at that moment have forgotten how, in the long
winter evenings, we had been used to cover an arm-chair with a shawl
and make a carriage of it--one of us being the coachman, another one the
footman, the two girls the passengers, and three other chairs the trio
of horses abreast. With what ceremony we used to set out, and with what
adventures we used to meet on the way! How gaily and quickly those long
winter evenings used to pass! If we were always to judge from reality,
games would be nonsense; but if games were nonsense, what else would
there be left to do?




IX -- A FIRST ESSAY IN LOVE

PRETENDING to gather some "American fruit" from a tree, Lubotshka
suddenly plucked a leaf upon which was a huge caterpillar, and throwing
the insect with horror to the ground, lifted her hands and sprang away
as though afraid it would spit at her. The game stopped, and we crowded
our heads together as we stooped to look at the curiosity.

I peeped over Katenka's shoulder as she was trying to lift the
caterpillar by placing another leaf in its way. I had observed before
that the girls had a way of shrugging their shoulders whenever they were
trying to put a loose garment straight on their bare necks, as well as
that Mimi always grew angry on witnessing this manoeuvre and declared
it to be a chambermaid's trick. As Katenka bent over the caterpillar she
made that very movement, while at the same instant the breeze lifted the
fichu on her white neck. Her shoulder was close to my lips, I looked at
it and kissed it. She did not turn round, but Woloda remarked without
raising his head, "What spooniness!" I felt the tears rising to my eyes,
and could not take my gaze from Katenka. I had long been used to her
fair, fresh face, and had always been fond of her, but now I looked at
her more closely, and felt more fond of her, than I had ever done or
felt before.

When we returned to the grown-ups, Papa informed us, to our great joy,
that, at Mamma's entreaties, our departure was to be postponed until
the following morning. We rode home beside the carriage--Woloda and
I galloping near it, and vieing with one another in our exhibition of
horsemanship and daring. My shadow looked longer now than it had done
before, and from that I judged that I had grown into a fine rider. Yet
my complacency was soon marred by an unfortunate occurrence. Desiring
to outdo Woloda before the audience in the carriage, I dropped a little
behind. Then with whip and spur I urged my steed forward, and at the
same time assumed a natural, graceful attitude, with the intention of
whooting past the carriage on the side on which Katenka was seated. My
only doubt was whether to halloo or not as I did so. In the event, my
infernal horse stopped so abruptly when just level with the carriage
horses that I was pitched forward on to its neck and cut a very sorry
figure!




X -- THE SORT OF MAN MY FATHER WAS

Papa was a gentleman of the last century, with all the chivalrous
character, self-reliance, and gallantry of the youth of that time. Upon
the men of the present day he looked with a contempt arising partly from
inborn pride and partly from a secret feeling of vexation that, in this
age of ours, he could no longer enjoy the influence and success which
had been his in his youth. His two principal failings were gambling and
gallantry, and he had won or lost, in the course of his career, several
millions of roubles.

Tall and of imposing figure, he walked with a curiously quick, mincing
gait, as well as had a habit of hitching one of his shoulders. His eyes
were small and perpetually twinkling, his nose large and aquiline, his
lips irregular and rather oddly (though pleasantly) compressed, his
articulation slightly defective and lisping, and his head quite bald.
Such was my father's exterior from the days of my earliest recollection.
It was an exterior which not only brought him success and made him a
man a bonnes fortunes but one which pleased people of all ranks and
stations. Especially did it please those whom he desired to please.

At all junctures he knew how to take the lead, for, though not deriving
from the highest circles of society, he had always mixed with them, and
knew how to win their respect. He possessed in the highest degree that
measure of pride and self-confidence which, without giving offence,
maintains a man in the opinion of the world. He had much originality,
as well as the ability to use it in such a way that it benefited him as
much as actual worldly position or fortune could have done. Nothing in
the universe could surprise him, and though not of eminent attainments
in life, he seemed born to have acquired them. He understood so
perfectly how to make both himself and others forget and keep at
a distance the seamy side of life, with all its petty troubles
and vicissitudes, that it was impossible not to envy him. He was a
connoisseur in everything which could give ease and pleasure, as well
as knew how to make use of such knowledge. Likewise he prided himself on
the brilliant connections which he had formed through my mother's family
or through friends of his youth, and was secretly jealous of any one of
a higher rank than himself--any one, that is to say, of a rank higher
than a retired lieutenant of the Guards. Moreover, like all ex-officers,
he refused to dress himself in the prevailing fashion, though he attired
himself both originally and artistically--his invariable wear being
light, loose-fitting suits, very fine shirts, and large collars and
cuffs. Everything seemed to suit his upright figure and quiet, assured
air. He was sensitive to the pitch of sentimentality, and, when reading
a pathetic passage, his voice would begin to tremble and the tears to
come into his eyes, until he had to lay the book aside. Likewise he was
fond of music, and could accompany himself on the piano as he sang the
love songs of his friend A-- or gipsy songs or themes from operas;
but he had no love for serious music, and would frankly flout received
opinion by declaring that, whereas Beethoven's sonatas wearied him and
sent him to sleep, his ideal of beauty was "Do not wake me, youth"
as Semenoff sang it, or "Not one" as the gipsy Taninsha rendered that
ditty. His nature was essentially one of those which follow public
opinion concerning what is good, and consider only that good which the
public declares to be so. [It may be noted that the author has said
earlier in the chapter that his father possessed "much originality."]
God only knows whether he had any moral convictions. His life was so
full of amusement that probably he never had time to form any, and was
too successful ever to feel the lack of them.

As he grew to old age he looked at things always from a fixed point
of view, and cultivated fixed rules--but only so long as that point or
those rules coincided with expediency. The mode of life which offered
some passing degree of interest--that, in his opinion, was the right
one and the only one that men ought to affect. He had great fluency of
argument; and this, I think, increased the adaptability of his morals
and enabled him to speak of one and the same act, now as good, and now,
with abuse, as abominable.




XI -- IN THE DRAWING-ROOM AND THE STUDY

Twilight had set in when we reached home. Mamma sat down to the piano,
and we to a table, there to paint and draw in colours and pencil. Though
I had only one cake of colour, and it was blue, I determined to draw a
picture of the hunt. In exceedingly vivid fashion I painted a blue boy
on a blue horse, and--but here I stopped, for I was uncertain whether
it was possible also to paint a blue HARE. I ran to the study to consult
Papa, and as he was busy reading he never lifted his eyes from his book
when I asked, "Can there be blue hares?" but at once replied, "There
can, my boy, there can." Returning to the table I painted in my blue
hare, but subsequently thought it better to change it into a blue bush.
Yet the blue bush did not wholly please me, so I changed it into a tree,
and then into a rick, until, the whole paper having now become one blur
of blue, I tore it angrily in pieces, and went off to meditate in the
large arm-chair.

Mamma was playing Field's second concerto. Field, it may be said, had
been her master. As I dozed, the music brought up before my imagination
a kind of luminosity, with transparent dream-shapes. Next she played the
"Sonate Pathetique" of Beethoven, and I at once felt heavy, depressed,
and apprehensive. Mamma often played those two pieces, and therefore I
well recollect the feelings they awakened in me. Those feelings were a
reminiscence--of what? Somehow I seemed to remember something which had
never been.

Opposite to me lay the study door, and presently I saw Jakoff enter it,
accompanied by several long-bearded men in kaftans. Then the door shut
again.

"Now they are going to begin some business or other," I thought. I
believed the affairs transacted in that study to be the most important
ones on earth. This opinion was confirmed by the fact that people only
approached the door of that room on tiptoe and speaking in whispers.
Presently Papa's resonant voice sounded within, and I also scented
cigar smoke--always a very attractive thing to me. Next, as I dozed, I
suddenly heard a creaking of boots that I knew, and, sure enough,
saw Karl Ivanitch go on tiptoe, and with a depressed, but resolute,
expression on his face and a written document in his hand, to the study
door and knock softly. It opened, and then shut again behind him.

"I hope nothing is going to happen," I mused. "Karl Ivanitch is
offended, and might be capable of anything--" and again I dozed off.

Nevertheless something DID happen. An hour later I was disturbed by
the same creaking of boots, and saw Karl come out, and disappear up
the stairs, wiping away a few tears from his cheeks with his pocket
handkerchief as he went and muttering something between his teeth. Papa
came out behind him and turned aside into the drawing-room.

"Do you know what I have just decided to do?" he asked gaily as he laid
a hand upon Mamma's shoulder.

"What, my love?"

"To take Karl Ivanitch with the children. There will be room enough for
him in the carriage. They are used to him, and he seems greatly attached
to them. Seven hundred roubles a year cannot make much difference to us,
and the poor devil is not at all a bad sort of a fellow." I could not
understand why Papa should speak of him so disrespectfully.

"I am delighted," said Mamma, "and as much for the children's sake as
his own. He is a worthy old man."

"I wish you could have seen how moved he was when I told him that he
might look upon the 500 roubles as a present! But the most amusing thing
of all is this bill which he has just handed me. It is worth
seeing," and with a smile Papa gave Mamma a paper inscribed in Karl's
handwriting. "Is it not capital?" he concluded.

The contents of the paper were as follows: [The joke of this bill
consists chiefly in its being written in very bad Russian, with
continual mistakes as to plural and singular, prepositions and so
forth.]

"Two book for the children--70 copeck. Coloured paper, gold frames, and
a pop-guns, blockheads [This word has a double meaning in Russian.] for
cutting out several box for presents--6 roubles, 55 copecks. Several
book and a bows, presents for the childrens--8 roubles, 16 copecks. A
gold watches promised to me by Peter Alexandrovitch out of Moscow, in
the years 18-- for 140 roubles. Consequently Karl Mayer have to receive
139 rouble, 79 copecks, beside his wage."

If people were to judge only by this bill (in which Karl Ivanitch
demanded repayment of all the money he had spent on presents, as well as
the value of a present promised to himself), they would take him to have
been a callous, avaricious egotist yet they would be wrong.

It appears that he had entered the study with the paper in his hand and
a set speech in his head, for the purpose of declaiming eloquently to
Papa on the subject of the wrongs which he believed himself to have
suffered in our house, but that, as soon as ever he began to speak in
the vibratory voice and with the expressive intonations which he used in
dictating to us, his eloquence wrought upon himself more than upon Papa;
with the result that, when he came to the point where he had to say,
"however sad it will be for me to part with the children," he lost his
self-command utterly, his articulation became choked, and he was obliged
to draw his coloured pocket-handkerchief from his pocket.

"Yes, Peter Alexandrovitch," he said, weeping (this formed no part of
the prepared speech), "I am grown so used to the children that I cannot
think what I should do without them. I would rather serve you without
salary than not at all," and with one hand he wiped his eyes, while with
the other he presented the bill.

Although I am convinced that at that moment Karl Ivanitch was speaking
with absolute sincerity (for I know how good his heart was), I confess
that never to this day have I been able quite to reconcile his words
with the bill.

"Well, if the idea of leaving us grieves you, you may be sure that the
idea of dismissing you grieves me equally," said Papa, tapping him on
the shoulder. Then, after a pause, he added, "But I have changed my
mind, and you shall not leave us."

Just before supper Grisha entered the room. Ever since he had entered
the house that day he had never ceased to sigh and weep--a portent,
according to those who believed in his prophetic powers, that misfortune
was impending for the household. He had now come to take leave of us,
for to-morrow (so he said) he must be moving on. I nudged Woloda, and we
moved towards the door.

"What is the matter?" he said.

"This--that if we want to see Grisha's chains we must go upstairs at
once to the men-servants' rooms. Grisha is to sleep in the second one,
so we can sit in the store-room and see everything."

"All right. Wait here, and I'll tell the girls."

The girls came at once, and we ascended the stairs, though the question
as to which of us should first enter the store-room gave us some little
trouble. Then we cowered down and waited.




XII -- GRISHA

WE all felt a little uneasy in the thick darkness, so we pressed close
to one another and said nothing. Before long Grisha arrived with his
soft tread, carrying in one hand his staff and in the other a tallow
candle set in a brass candlestick. We scarcely ventured to breathe.

"Our Lord Jesus Christ! Holy Mother of God! Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost!" he kept repeating, with the different intonations and
abbreviations which gradually become peculiar to persons who are
accustomed to pronounce the words with great frequency.

Still praying, he placed his staff in a corner and looked at the bed;
after which he began to undress. Unfastening his old black girdle, he
slowly divested himself of his torn nankeen kaftan, and deposited
it carefully on the back of a chair. His face had now lost its usual
disquietude and idiocy. On the contrary, it had in it something restful,
thoughtful, and even grand, while all his movements were deliberate and
intelligent.

Next, he lay down quietly in his shirt on the bed, made the sign of the
cross towards every side of him, and adjusted his chains beneath his
shirt--an operation which, as we could see from his face, occasioned him
considerable pain. Then he sat up again, looked gravely at his ragged
shirt, and rising and taking the candle, lifted the latter towards the
shrine where the images of the saints stood. That done, he made the sign
of the cross again, and turned the candle upside down, when it went out
with a hissing noise.

Through the window (which overlooked the wood) the moon (nearly full)
was shining in such a way that one side of the tall white figure of the
idiot stood out in the pale, silvery moonlight, while the other side was
lost in the dark shadow which covered the floor, walls, and ceiling. In
the courtyard the watchman was tapping at intervals upon his brass alarm
plate. For a while Grisha stood silently before the images and, with
his large hands pressed to his breast and his head bent forward, gave
occasional sighs. Then with difficulty he knelt down and began to pray.

At first he repeated some well-known prayers, and only accented a word
here and there. Next, he repeated thee same prayers, but louder and
with increased accentuation. Lastly he repeated them again and with even
greater emphasis, as well as with an evident effort to pronounce them in
the old Slavonic Church dialect. Though disconnected, his prayers were
very touching. He prayed for all his benefactors (so he called every one
who had received him hospitably), with, among them, Mamma and ourselves.
Next he prayed for himself, and besought God to forgive him his sins,
at the same time repeating, "God forgive also my enemies!" Then, moaning
with the effort, he rose from his knees--only to fall to the floor again
and repeat his phrases afresh. At last he regained his feet, despite
the weight of the chains, which rattled loudly whenever they struck the
floor.

Woloda pinched me rudely in the leg, but I took no notice of that
(except that I involuntarily touched the place with my hand), as I
observed with a feeling of childish astonishment, pity, and respect
the words and gestures of Grisha. Instead of the laughter and amusement
which I had expected on entering the store-room, I felt my heart beating
and overcome.

Grisha continued for some time in this state of religious ecstasy as he
improvised prayers and repeated again and yet again, "Lord, have mercy
upon me!" Each time that he said, "Pardon me, Lord, and teach me to
do what Thou wouldst have done," he pronounced the words with added
earnestness and emphasis, as though he expected an immediate answer to
his petition, and then fell to sobbing and moaning once more. Finally,
he went down on his knees again, folded his arms upon his breast, and
remained silent. I ventured to put my head round the door (holding my
breath as I did so), but Grisha still made no movement except for the
heavy sighs which heaved his breast. In the moonlight I could see a tear
glistening on the white patch of his blind eye.

"Yes, Thy will be done!" he exclaimed suddenly, with an expression which
I cannot describe, as, prostrating himself with his forehead on the
floor, he fell to sobbing like a child.

Much sand has run out since then, many recollections of the past have
faded from my memory or become blurred in indistinct visions, and poor
Grisha himself has long since reached the end of his pilgrimage; but the
impression which he produced upon me, and the feelings which he aroused
in my breast, will never leave my mind. O truly Christian Grisha, your
faith was so strong that you could feel the actual presence of God; your
love so great that the words fell of themselves from your lips. You had
no reason to prove them, for you did so with your earnest praises of His
majesty as you fell to the ground speechless and in tears!

Nevertheless the sense of awe with which I had listened to Grisha could
not last for ever. I had now satisfied my curiosity, and, being cramped
with sitting in one position so long, desired to join in the tittering
and fun which I could hear going on in the dark store-room behind me.
Some one took my hand and whispered, "Whose hand is this?" Despite the
darkness, I knew by the touch and the low voice in my ear that it was
Katenka. I took her by the arm, but she withdrew it, and, in doing so,
pushed a cane chair which was standing near. Grisha lifted his head
looked quietly about him, and, muttering a prayer, rose and made the
sign of the cross towards each of the four corners of the room.




XIII -- NATALIA SAVISHNA

In days gone by there used to run about the seignorial courtyard of the
country-house at Chabarovska a girl called Natashka. She always wore a
cotton dress, went barefooted, and was rosy, plump, and gay. It was at
the request and entreaties of her father, the clarionet player Savi,
that my grandfather had "taken her upstairs"--that is to say, made
her one of his wife's female servants. As chamber-maid, Natashka so
distinguished herself by her zeal and amiable temper that when Mamma
arrived as a baby and required a nurse Natashka was honoured with the
charge of her. In this new office the girl earned still further praises
and rewards for her activity, trustworthiness, and devotion to her young
mistress. Soon, however, the powdered head and buckled shoes of the
young and active footman Foka (who had frequent opportunities of
courting her, since they were in the same service) captivated her
unsophisticated, but loving, heart. At last she ventured to go and ask
my grandfather if she might marry Foka, but her master took the request
in bad part, flew into a passion, and punished poor Natashka by exiling
her to a farm which he owned in a remote quarter of the Steppes. At
length, when she had been gone six months and nobody could be found to
replace her, she was recalled to her former duties. Returned, and with
her dress in rags, she fell at Grandpapa's feet, and besought him to
restore her his favour and kindness, and to forget the folly of which
she had been guilty--folly which, she assured him, should never recur
again. And she kept her word.

From that time forth she called herself, not Natashka, but Natalia
Savishna, and took to wearing a cap. All the love in her heart was now
bestowed upon her young charge. When Mamma had a governess appointed
for her education, Natalia was awarded the keys as housekeeper, and
henceforth had the linen and provisions under her care. These new duties
she fulfilled with equal fidelity and zeal. She lived only for her
master's advantage. Everything in which she could detect fraud,
extravagance, or waste she endeavoured to remedy to the best of her
power. When Mamma married and wished in some way to reward Natalia
Savishna for her twenty years of care and labour, she sent for her and,
voicing in the tenderest terms her attachment and love, presented
her with a stamped charter of her (Natalia's) freedom, [It will be
remembered that this was in the days of serfdom] telling her at the same
time that, whether she continued to serve in the household or not, she
should always receive an annual pension of 300 roubles. Natalia listened
in silence to this. Then, taking the document in her hands and regarding
it with a frown, she muttered something between her teeth, and darted
from the room, slamming the door behind her. Not understanding the
reason for such strange conduct, Mamma followed her presently to her
room, and found her sitting with streaming eyes on her trunk, crushing
her pocket-handkerchief between her fingers, and looking mournfully
at the remains of the document, which was lying torn to pieces on the
floor.

"What is the matter, dear Natalia Savishna?" said Mamma, taking her
hand.

"Nothing, ma'am," she replied; "only--only I must have displeased you
somehow, since you wish to dismiss me from the house. Well, I will go."

She withdrew her hand and, with difficulty restraining her tears, rose
to leave the room, but Mamma stopped her, and they wept a while in one
another's arms.

Ever since I can remember anything I can remember Natalia Savishna and
her love and tenderness; yet only now have I learnt to appreciate them
at their full value. In early days it never occurred to me to think what
a rare and wonderful being this old domestic was. Not only did she never
talk, but she seemed never even to think, of herself. Her whole life
was compounded of love and self-sacrifice. Yet so used was I to her
affection and singleness of heart that I could not picture things
otherwise. I never thought of thanking her, or of asking myself, "Is she
also happy? Is she also contented?" Often on some pretext or another I
would leave my lessons and run to her room, where, sitting down, I
would begin to muse aloud as though she were not there. She was forever
mending something, or tidying the shelves which lined her room,
or marking linen, so that she took no heed of the nonsense which I
talked--how that I meant to become a general, to marry a beautiful
woman, to buy a chestnut horse, to, build myself a house of glass, to
invite Karl Ivanitch's relatives to come and visit me from Saxony, and
so forth; to all of which she would only reply, "Yes, my love, yes."
Then, on my rising, and preparing to go, she would open a blue trunk
which had pasted on the inside of its lid a coloured picture of a hussar
which had once adorned a pomade bottle and a sketch made by Woloda, and
take from it a fumigation pastille, which she would light and shake for
my benefit, saying:

"These, dear, are the pastilles which your grandfather (now in Heaven)
brought back from Otchakov after fighting against the Turks." Then she
would add with a sigh: "But this is nearly the last one."

The trunks which filled her room seemed to contain almost everything in
the world. Whenever anything was wanted, people said, "Oh, go and ask
Natalia Savishna for it," and, sure enough, it was seldom that she did
not produce the object required and say, "See what comes of taking care
of everything!" Her trunks contained thousands of things which nobody in
the house but herself would have thought of preserving.

Once I lost my temper with her. This was how it happened.

One day after luncheon I poured myself out a glass of kvass, and then
dropped the decanter, and so stained the tablecloth.

"Go and call Natalia, that she may come and see what her darling has
done," said Mamma.

Natalia arrived, and shook her head at me when she saw the damage I had
done; but Mamma whispered something in her car, threw a look at myself,
and then left the room.

I was just skipping away, in the sprightliest mood possible, when
Natalia darted out upon me from behind the door with the tablecloth in
her hand, and, catching hold of me, rubbed my face hard with the stained
part of it, repeating, "Don't thou go and spoil tablecloths any more!"

I struggled hard, and roared with temper.

"What?" I said to myself as I fled to the drawing-room in a mist of
tears, "To think that Natalia Savishna-just plain Natalia-should say
'THOU' to me and rub my face with a wet tablecloth as though I were a
mere servant-boy! It is abominable!"

Seeing my fury, Natalia departed, while I continued to strut about and
plan how to punish the bold woman for her offence. Yet not more than a
few moments had passed when Natalia returned and, stealing to my side,
began to comfort me,

"Hush, then, my love. Do not cry. Forgive me my rudeness. It was wrong
of me. You WILL pardon me, my darling, will you not? There, there,
that's a dear," and she took from her handkerchief a cornet of pink
paper containing two little cakes and a grape, and offered it me with
a trembling hand. I could not look the kind old woman in the face, but,
turning aside, took the paper, while my tears flowed the faster--though
from love and shame now, not from anger.




XIV -- THE PARTING

ON the day after the events described, the carriage and the luggage-cart
drew up to the door at noon. Nicola, dressed for the journey, with his
breeches tucked into his boots and an old overcoat belted tightly about
him with a girdle, got into the cart and arranged cloaks and cushions on
the seats. When he thought that they were piled high enough he sat down
on them, but finding them still unsatisfactory, jumped up and arranged
them once more.

"Nicola Dimitvitch, would you be so good as to take master's
dressing-case with you?" said Papa's valet, suddenly standing up in the
carriage, "It won't take up much room."

"You should have told me before, Michael Ivanitch," answered Nicola
snappishly as he hurled a bundle with all his might to the floor of the
cart. "Good gracious! Why, when my head is going round like a whirlpool,
there you come along with your dressing-case!" and he lifted his cap to
wipe away the drops of perspiration from his sunburnt brow.

The courtyard was full of bareheaded peasants in kaftans or simple
shirts, women clad in the national dress and wearing striped
handkerchiefs, and barefooted little ones--the latter holding their
mothers' hands or crowding round the entrance-steps. All were chattering
among themselves as they stared at the carriage. One of the postillions,
an old man dressed in a winter cap and cloak, took hold of the pole of
the carriage and tried it carefully, while the other postillion (a
young man in a white blouse with pink gussets on the sleeves and a black
lamb's-wool cap which he kept cocking first on one side and then on the
other as he arranged his flaxen hair) laid his overcoat upon the box,
slung the reins over it, and cracked his thonged whip as he looked now
at his boots and now at the other drivers where they stood greasing the
wheels of the cart--one driver lifting up each wheel in turn and the
other driver applying the grease. Tired post-horses of various hues
stood lashing away flies with their tails near the gate--some stamping
their great hairy legs, blinking their eyes, and dozing, some leaning
wearily against their neighbours, and others cropping the leaves and
stalks of dark-green fern which grew near the entrance-steps. Some of
the dogs were lying panting in the sun, while others were slinking under
the vehicles to lick the grease from the wheels. The air was filled with
a sort of dusty mist, and the horizon was lilac-grey in colour, though
no clouds were to be seen, A strong wind from the south was raising
volumes of dust from the roads and fields, shaking the poplars and
birch-trees in the garden, and whirling their yellow leaves away. I
myself was sitting at a window and waiting impatiently for these various
preparations to come to an end.

As we sat together by the drawing-room table, to pass the last few
moments en famille, it never occurred to me that a sad moment was
impending. On the contrary, the most trivial thoughts were filling my
brain. Which driver was going to drive the carriage and which the cart?
Which of us would sit with Papa, and which with Karl Ivanitch? Why must
I be kept forever muffled up in a scarf and padded boots?

"Am I so delicate? Am I likely to be frozen?" I thought to myself.
"I wish it would all come to an end, and we could take our seats and
start."

"To whom shall I give the list of the children's linen?" asked Natalia
Savishna of Mamma as she entered the room with a paper in her hand and
her eyes red with weeping.

"Give it to Nicola, and then return to say good-bye to them," replied
Mamma. The old woman seemed about to say something more, but suddenly
stopped short, covered her face with her handkerchief, and left the
room. Something seemed to prick at my heart when I saw that gesture of
hers, but impatience to be off soon drowned all other feeling, and
I continued to listen indifferently to Papa and Mamma as they talked
together. They were discussing subjects which evidently interested
neither of them. What must be bought for the house? What would Princess
Sophia or Madame Julie say? Would the roads be good?--and so forth.

Foka entered, and in the same tone and with the same air as though he
were announcing luncheon said, "The carriages are ready." I saw Mamma
tremble and turn pale at the announcement, just as though it were
something unexpected.

Next, Foka was ordered to shut all the doors of the room. This amused
me highly. As though we needed to be concealed from some one! When
every one else was seated, Foka took the last remaining chair. Scarcely,
however, had he done so when the door creaked and every one looked that
way. Natalia Savishna entered hastily, and, without raising her eyes,
sat own on the same chair as Foka. I can see them before me now-Foka's
bald head and wrinkled, set face, and, beside him, a bent, kind figure
in a cap from beneath which a few grey hairs were straggling. The pair
settled themselves together on the chair, but neither of them looked
comfortable.

I continued preoccupied and impatient. In fact, the ten minutes during
which we sat there with closed doors seemed to me an hour. At last every
one rose, made the sign of the cross, and began to say good-bye. Papa
embraced Mamma, and kissed her again and again.

"But enough," he said presently. "We are not parting for ever."

"No, but it is-so-so sad!" replied Mamma, her voice trembling with
emotion.

When I heard that faltering voice, and saw those quivering lips and
tear-filled eyes, I forgot everything else in the world. I felt so ill
and miserable that I would gladly have run away rather than bid
her farewell. I felt, too, that when she was embracing Papa she was
embracing us all. She clasped Woloda to her several times, and made the
sign of the cross over him; after which I approached her, thinking that
it was my turn. Nevertheless she took him again and again to her heart,
and blessed him. Finally I caught hold of her, and, clinging to her,
wept--wept, thinking of nothing in the world but my grief.

As we passed out to take our seats, other servants pressed round us in
the hall to say good-bye. Yet their requests to shake hands with
us, their resounding kisses on our shoulders, [The fashion in which
inferiors salute their superiors in Russia.] and the odour of their
greasy heads only excited in me a feeling akin to impatience with these
tiresome people. The same feeling made me bestow nothing more than a
very cross kiss upon Natalia's cap when she approached to take leave of
me. It is strange that I should still retain a perfect recollection of
these servants' faces, and be able to draw them with the most minute
accuracy in my mind, while Mamma's face and attitude escape me entirely.
It may be that it is because at that moment I had not the heart to look
at her closely. I felt that if I did so our mutual grief would burst
forth too unrestrainedly.

I was the first to jump into the carriage and to take one of the hinder
seats. The high back of the carriage prevented me from actually seeing
her, yet I knew by instinct that Mamma was still there.

"Shall I look at her again or not?" I said to myself. "Well, just for
the last time," and I peeped out towards the entrance-steps. Exactly at
that moment Mamma moved by the same impulse, came to the opposite side
of the carriage, and called me by name. Hearing her voice behind me. I
turned round, but so hastily that our heads knocked together. She gave a
sad smile, and kissed me convulsively for the last time.

When we had driven away a few paces I determined to look at her once
more. The wind was lifting the blue handkerchief from her head as, bent
forward and her face buried in her hands, she moved slowly up the steps.
Foka was supporting her. Papa said nothing as he sat beside me. I felt
breathless with tears--felt a sensation in my throat as though I were
going to choke, just as we came out on to the open road I saw a white
handkerchief waving from the terrace. I waved mine in return, and the
action of so doing calmed me a little. I still went on crying, but the
thought that my tears were a proof of my affection helped to soothe and
comfort me.

After a little while I began to recover, and to look with interest at
objects which we passed and at the hind-quarters of the led horse which
was trotting on my side. I watched how it would swish its tail, how it
would lift one hoof after the other, how the driver's thong would fall
upon its back, and how all its legs would then seem to jump together and
the back-band, with the rings on it, to jump too--the whole covered with
the horse's foam. Then I would look at the rolling stretches of ripe
corn, at the dark ploughed fields where ploughs and peasants and horses
with foals were working, at their footprints, and at the box of the
carriage to see who was driving us; until, though my face was still wet
with tears, my thoughts had strayed far from her with whom I had just
parted--parted, perhaps, for ever. Yet ever and again something would
recall her to my memory. I remembered too how, the evening before, I
had found a mushroom under the birch-trees, how Lubotshka had quarrelled
with Katenka as to whose it should be, and how they had both of them
wept when taking leave of us. I felt sorry to be parted from them, and
from Natalia Savishna, and from the birch-tree avenue, and from Foka.
Yes, even the horrid Mimi I longed for. I longed for everything at home.
And poor Mamma!--The tears rushed to my eyes again. Yet even this mood
passed away before long.




XV -- CHILDHOOD

HAPPY, happy, never-returning time of childhood! How can we help loving
and dwelling upon its recollections? They cheer and elevate the soul,
and become to one a source of higher joys.

Sometimes, when dreaming of bygone days, I fancy that, tired out with
running about, I have sat down, as of old, in my high arm-chair by the
tea-table. It is late, and I have long since drunk my cup of milk. My
eyes are heavy with sleep as I sit there and listen. How could I not
listen, seeing that Mamma is speaking to somebody, and that the sound
of her voice is so melodious and kind? How much its echoes recall to
my heart! With my eyes veiled with drowsiness I gaze at her wistfully.
Suddenly she seems to grow smaller and smaller, and her face vanishes
to a point; yet I can still see it--can still see her as she looks at me
and smiles. Somehow it pleases me to see her grown so small. I blink and
blink, yet she looks no larger than a boy reflected in the pupil of an
eye. Then I rouse myself, and the picture fades. Once more I half-close
my eyes, and cast about to try and recall the dream, but it has gone.

I rise to my feet, only to fall back comfortably into the armchair.

"There! You are failing asleep again, little Nicolas," says Mamma. "You
had better go to by-by."

"No, I won't go to sleep, Mamma," I reply, though almost inaudibly, for
pleasant dreams are filling all my soul. The sound sleep of childhood is
weighing my eyelids down, and for a few moments I sink into slumber and
oblivion until awakened by some one. I feel in my sleep as though a
soft hand were caressing me. I know it by the touch, and, though still
dreaming, I seize hold of it and press it to my lips. Every one else has
gone to bed, and only one candle remains burning in the drawing-room.
Mamma has said that she herself will wake me. She sits down on the arm
of the chair in which I am asleep, with her soft hand stroking my hair,
and I hear her beloved, well-known voice say in my ear:

"Get up, my darling. It is time to go by-by."

No envious gaze sees her now. She is not afraid to shed upon me the
whole of her tenderness and love. I do not wake up, yet I kiss and kiss
her hand.

"Get up, then, my angel."

She passes her other arm round my neck, and her fingers tickle me as
they move across it. The room is quiet and in half-darkness, but the
tickling has touched my nerves and I begin to awake. Mamma is sitting
near me--that I can tell--and touching me; I can hear her voice and
feel her presence. This at last rouses me to spring up, to throw my arms
around her neck, to hide my head in her bosom, and to say with a sigh:

"Ah, dear, darling Mamma, how much I love you!"

She smiles her sad, enchanting smile, takes my head between her two
hands, kisses me on the forehead, and lifts me on to her lap.

"Do you love me so much, then?" she says. Then, after a few moments'
silence, she continues: "And you must love me always, and never forget
me. If your Mamma should no longer be here, will you promise never to
forget her--never, Nicolinka? and she kisses me more fondly than ever.

"Oh, but you must not speak so, darling Mamma, my own darling Mamma!"
I exclaim as I clasp her knees, and tears of joy and love fall from my
eyes.

How, after scenes like this, I would go upstairs, and stand before the
ikons, and say with a rapturous feeling, "God bless Papa and Mamma!" and
repeat a prayer for my beloved mother which my childish lips had learnt
to lisp-the love of God and of her blending strangely in a single
emotion!

After saying my prayers I would wrap myself up in the bedclothes. My
heart would feel light, peaceful, and happy, and one dream would follow
another. Dreams of what? They were all of them vague, but all of them
full of pure love and of a sort of expectation of happiness. I remember,
too, that I used to think about Karl Ivanitch and his sad lot. He was
the only unhappy being whom I knew, and so sorry would I feel for him,
and so much did I love him, that tears would fall from my eyes as I
thought, "May God give him happiness, and enable me to help him and to
lessen his sorrow. I could make any sacrifice for him!" Usually, also,
there would be some favourite toy--a china dog or hare--stuck into the
bed-corner behind the pillow, and it would please me to think how warm
and comfortable and well cared-for it was there. Also, I would pray God
to make every one happy, so that every one might be contented, and also
to send fine weather to-morrow for our walk. Then I would turn myself
over on to the other side, and thoughts and dreams would become jumbled
and entangled together until at last I slept soundly and peacefully,
though with a face wet with tears.

Do in after life the freshness and light-heartedness, the craving for
love and for strength of faith, ever return which we experience in our
childhood's years? What better time is there in our lives than when
the two best of virtues--innocent gaiety and a boundless yearning for
affection--are our sole objects of pursuit?

Where now are our ardent prayers? Where now are our best gifts--the pure
tears of emotion which a guardian angel dries with a smile as he sheds
upon us lovely dreams of ineffable childish joy? Can it be that life has
left such heavy traces upon one's heart that those tears and ecstasies
are for ever vanished? Can it be that there remains to us only the
recollection of them?




XVI -- VERSE-MAKING

RATHER less than a month after our arrival in Moscow I was sitting
upstairs in my Grandmamma's house and doing some writing at a large
table. Opposite to me sat the drawing master, who was giving a few
finishing touches to the head of a turbaned Turk, executed in black
pencil. Woloda, with out-stretched neck, was standing behind the drawing
master and looking over his shoulder. The head was Woloda's first
production in pencil and to-day--Grandmamma's name-day--the masterpiece
was to be presented to her.

"Aren't you going to put a little more shadow there?" said Woloda to
the master as he raised himself on tiptoe and pointed to the Turk's
neck.

"No, it is not necessary," the master replied as he put pencil and
drawing-pen into a japanned folding box. "It is just right now, and
you need not do anything more to it. As for you, Nicolinka," he added,
rising and glancing askew at the Turk, "won't you tell us your great
secret at last? What are you going to give your Grandmamma? I think
another head would be your best gift. But good-bye, gentlemen," and
taking his hat and cardboard he departed.

I too had thought that another head than the one at which I had been
working would be a better gift; so, when we were told that Grandmamma's
name-day was soon to come round and that we must each of us have a
present ready for her, I had taken it into my head to write some
verses in honour of the occasion, and had forthwith composed two rhymed
couplets, hoping that the rest would soon materialise. I really do not
know how the idea--one so peculiar for a child--came to occur to me, but
I know that I liked it vastly, and answered all questions on the subject
of my gift by declaring that I should soon have something ready for
Grandmamma, but was not going to say what it was.

Contrary to my expectation, I found that, after the first two couplets
executed in the initial heat of enthusiasm, even my most strenuous
efforts refused to produce another one. I began to read different poems
in our books, but neither Dimitrieff nor Derzhavin could help me. On
the contrary, they only confirmed my sense of incompetence. Knowing,
however, that Karl Ivanitch was fond of writing verses, I stole softly
upstairs to burrow among his papers, and found, among a number of German
verses, some in the Russian language which seemed to have come from his
own pen.

     To L

     Remember near
     Remember far,
     Remember me.
     To-day be faithful, and for ever--
     Aye, still beyond the grave--remember
     That I have well loved thee.

     "KARL MAYER."

These verses (which were written in a fine, round hand on thin
letter-paper) pleased me with the touching sentiment with which they
seemed to be inspired. I learnt them by heart, and decided to take them
as a model. The thing was much easier now. By the time the name-day had
arrived I had completed a twelve-couplet congratulatory ode, and sat
down to the table in our school-room to copy them out on vellum.

Two sheets were soon spoiled--not because I found it necessary to alter
anything (the verses seemed to me perfect), but because, after the third
line, the tail-end of each successive one would go curving upward and
making it plain to all the world that the whole thing had been written
with a want of adherence to the horizontal--a thing which I could not
bear to see.

The third sheet also came out crooked, but I determined to make it do.
In my verses I congratulated Grandmamma, wished her many happy returns,
and concluded thus:

     "Endeavouring you to please and cheer,
      We love you like our Mother dear."

This seemed to me not bad, yet it offended my ear somehow.

"Lo-ve you li-ike our Mo-ther dear," I repeated to myself. "What other
rhyme could I use instead of 'dear'? Fear? Steer? Well, it must go at
that. At least the verses are better than Karl Ivanitch's."

Accordingly I added the last verse to the rest. Then I went into
our bedroom and recited the whole poem aloud with much feeling and
gesticulation. The verses were altogether guiltless of metre, but I
did not stop to consider that. Yet the last one displeased me more than
ever. As I sat on my bed I thought:

"Why on earth did I write 'like our Mother dear'? She is not here, and
therefore she need never have been mentioned. True, I love and respect
Grandmamma, but she is not quite the same as--Why DID I write that?
What did I go and tell a lie for? They may be verses only, yet I needn't
quite have done that."

At that moment the tailor arrived with some new clothes for us.

"Well, so be it!" I said in much vexation as I crammed the verses
hastily under my pillow and ran down to adorn myself in the new Moscow
garments.

They fitted marvellously-both the brown jacket with yellow buttons (a
garment made skin-tight and not "to allow room for growth," as in
the country) and the black trousers (also close-fitting so that they
displayed the figure and lay smoothly over the boots).

"At last I have real trousers on!" I thought as I looked at my legs with
the utmost satisfaction. I concealed from every one the fact that the
new clothes were horribly tight and uncomfortable, but, on the contrary,
said that, if there were a fault, it was that they were not tight
enough. For a long while I stood before the looking-glass as I combed
my elaborately pomaded head, but, try as I would, I could not reduce the
topmost hairs on the crown to order. As soon as ever I left off combing
them, they sprang up again and radiated in different directions, thus
giving my face a ridiculous expression.

Karl Ivanitch was dressing in another room, and I heard some one
bring him his blue frockcoat and under-linen. Then at the door leading
downstairs I heard a maid-servant's voice, and went to see what she
wanted. In her hand she held a well-starched shirt which she said she
had been sitting up all night to get ready. I took it, and asked if
Grandmamma was up yet.

"Oh yes, she has had her coffee, and the priest has come. My word, but
you look a fine little fellow!" added the girl with a smile at my new
clothes.

This observation made me blush, so I whirled round on one leg, snapped
my fingers, and went skipping away, in the hope that by these manoeuvres
I should make her sensible that even yet she had not realised quite what
a fine fellow I was.

However, when I took the shirt to Karl I found that he did not need it,
having taken another one. Standing before a small looking-glass, he tied
his cravat with both hands--trying, by various motions of his head, to
see whether it fitted him comfortably or not--and then took us down to
see Grandmamma. To this day I cannot help laughing when I remember what
a smell of pomade the three of us left behind us on the staircase as we
descended.

Karl was carrying a box which he had made himself, Woloda, his drawing,
and I my verses, while each of us also had a form of words ready with
which to present his gift. Just as Karl opened the door, the priest put
on his vestment and began to say prayers.

During the ceremony Grandmamma stood leaning over the back of a chair,
with her head bent down. Near her stood Papa. He turned and smiled at us
as we hurriedly thrust our presents behind our backs and tried to remain
unobserved by the door. The whole effect of a surprise, upon which we
had been counting, was entirely lost. When at last every one had made
the sign of the cross I became intolerably oppressed with a sudden,
invincible, and deadly attack of shyness, so that the courage to, offer
my present completely failed me. I hid myself behind Karl Ivanitch, who
solemnly congratulated Grandmamma and, transferring his box from his
right hand to his left, presented it to her. Then he withdrew a few
steps to make way for Woloda. Grandmamma seemed highly pleased with
the box (which was adorned with a gold border), and smiled in the most
friendly manner in order to express her gratitude. Yet it was evident
that, she did not know where to set the box down, and this probably
accounts for the fact that she handed it to Papa, at the same time
bidding him observe how beautifully it was made.

His curiosity satisfied, Papa handed the box to the priest, who also
seemed particularly delighted with it, and looked with astonishment,
first at the article itself, and then at the artist who could make
such wonderful things. Then Woloda presented his Turk, and received a
similarly flattering ovation on all sides.

It was my turn now, and Grandmamma turned to me with her kindest smile.
Those who have experienced what embarrassment is know that it is a
feeling which grows in direct proportion to delay, while decision
decreases in similar measure. In other words the longer the condition
lasts, the more invincible does it become, and the smaller does the
power of decision come to be.

My last remnants of nerve and energy had forsaken me while Karl and
Woloda had been offering their presents, and my shyness now reached its
culminating point, I felt the blood rushing from my heart to my head,
one blush succeeding another across my face, and drops of perspiration
beginning to stand out on my brow and nose. My ears were burning, I
trembled from head to foot, and, though I kept changing from one foot to
the other, I remained rooted where I stood.

"Well, Nicolinka, tell us what you have brought?" said Papa. "Is it a
box or a drawing?"

There was nothing else to be done. With a trembling hand held out the
folded, fatal paper, but my voiced failed me completely and I stood
before Grandmamma in silence. I could not get rid of the dreadful idea
that, instead of a display of the expected drawing, some bad verses of
mine were about to be read aloud before every one, and that the words
"our Mother dear" would clearly prove that I had never loved, but had
only forgotten, her. How shall I express my sufferings when Grandmamma
began to read my poetry aloud?--when, unable to decipher it, she stopped
half-way and looked at Papa with a smile (which I took to be one of
ridicule)?--when she did not pronounce it as I had meant it to be
pronounced?--and when her weak sight not allowing her to finish it, she
handed the paper to Papa and requested him to read it all over again
from the beginning? I fancied that she must have done this last because
she did not like to read such a lot of stupid, crookedly written stuff
herself, yet wanted to point out to Papa my utter lack of feeling. I
expected him to slap me in the face with the verses and say, "You bad
boy! So you have forgotten your Mamma! Take that for it!" Yet nothing
of the sort happened. On the contrary, when the whole had been read,
Grandmamma said, "Charming!" and kissed me on the forehead. Then our
presents, together with two cambric pocket-handkerchiefs and a snuff-box
engraved with Mamma's portrait, were laid on the table attached to the
great Voltairian arm-chair in which Grandmamma always sat.

"The Princess Barbara Ilinitsha!" announced one of the two footmen who
used to stand behind Grandmamma's carriage, but Grandmamma was looking
thoughtfully at the portrait on the snuff-box, and returned no answer.

"Shall I show her in, madam?" repeated the footman.




XVII -- THE PRINCESS KORNAKOFF

"Yes, show her in," said Grandmamma, settling herself as far back in
her arm-chair as possible. The Princess was a woman of about
forty-five, small and delicate, with a shrivelled skin and disagreeable,
greyish-green eyes, the expression of which contradicted the unnaturally
suave look of the rest of her face. Underneath her velvet bonnet,
adorned with an ostrich feather, was visible some reddish hair, while
against the unhealthy colour of her skin her eyebrows and eyelashes
looked even lighter and redder that they would other wise have done.
Yet, for all that, her animated movements, small hands, and peculiarly
dry features communicated something aristocratic and energetic to her
general appearance. She talked a great deal, and, to judge from her
eloquence, belonged to that class of persons who always speak as though
some one were contradicting them, even though no one else may be saying
a word. First she would raise her voice, then lower it and then take on
a fresh access of vivacity as she looked at the persons present, but not
participating in the conversation, with an air of endeavouring to draw
them into it.

Although the Princess kissed Grandmamma's hand and repeatedly called her
"my good Aunt," I could see that Grandmamma did not care much about her,
for she kept raising her eyebrows in a peculiar way while listening
to the Princess's excuses why Prince Michael had been prevented from
calling, and congratulating Grandmamma "as he would like so-much to
have done." At length, however, she answered the Princess's French with
Russian, and with a sharp accentuation of certain words.

"I am much obliged to you for your kindness," she said. "As for Prince
Michael's absence, pray do not mention it. He has so much else to do.
Besides, what pleasure could he find in coming to see an old woman like
me?" Then, without allowing the Princess time to reply, she went on:
"How are your children my dear?"

"Well, thank God, Aunt, they grow and do their lessons and
play--particularly my eldest one, Etienne, who is so wild that it
is almost impossible to keep him in order. Still, he is a clever and
promising boy. Would you believe it, cousin," (this last to Papa, since
Grandmamma altogether uninterested in the Princess's children, had
turned to us, taken my verses out from beneath the presentation box, and
unfolded them again), "would you believe it, but one day not long ago--"
and leaning over towards Papa, the Princess related something or other
with great vivacity. Then, her tale concluded, she laughed, and, with a
questioning look at Papa, went on:

"What a boy, cousin! He ought to have been whipped, but the trick was
so spirited and amusing that I let him off." Then the Princess looked at
Grandmamma and laughed again.

"Ah! So you WHIP your children, do you" said Grandmamma, with a
significant lift of her eyebrows, and laying a peculiar stress on the
word "WHIP."

"Alas, my good Aunt," replied the Princess in a sort of tolerant tone
and with another glance at Papa, "I know your views on the subject, but
must beg to be allowed to differ with them. However much I have thought
over and read and talked about the matter, I have always been forced to
come to the conclusion that children must be ruled through FEAR. To make
something of a child, you must make it FEAR something. Is it not so,
cousin? And what, pray, do children fear so much as a rod?"

As she spoke she seemed, to look inquiringly at Woloda and myself, and I
confess that I did not feel altogether comfortable.

"Whatever you may say," she went on, "a boy of twelve, or even of
fourteen, is still a child and should be whipped as such; but with
girls, perhaps, it is another matter."

"How lucky it is that I am not her son!" I thought to myself.

"Oh, very well," said Grandmamma, folding up my verses and replacing
them beneath the box (as though, after that exposition of views, the
Princess was unworthy of the honour of listening to such a production).
"Very well, my dear," she repeated "But please tell me how, in return,
you can look for any delicate sensibility from your children?"

Evidently Grandmamma thought this argument unanswerable, for she cut the
subject short by adding:

"However, it is a point on which people must follow their own opinions."

The Princess did not choose to reply, but smiled condescendingly, and as
though out of indulgence to the strange prejudices of a person whom she
only PRETENDED to revere.

"Oh, by the way, pray introduce me to your young people," she went on
presently as she threw us another gracious smile.

Thereupon we rose and stood looking at the Princess, without in the
least knowing what we ought to do to show that we were being introduced.

"Kiss the Princess's hand," said Papa.

"Well, I hope you will love your old aunt," she said to Woloda, kissing
his hair, "even though we are not near relatives. But I value friendship
far more than I do degrees of relationship," she added to Grandmamma,
who nevertheless, remained hostile, and replied:

"Eh, my dear? Is that what they think of relationships nowadays?"

"Here is my man of the world," put in Papa, indicating Woloda; "and here
is my poet," he added as I kissed the small, dry hand of the Princess,
with a vivid picture in my mind of that same hand holding a rod and
applying it vigorously.

"WHICH one is the poet?" asked the Princess.

"This little one," replied Papa, smiling; "the one with the tuft of hair
on his top-knot."

"Why need he bother about my tuft?" I thought to myself as I retired
into a corner. "Is there nothing else for him to talk about?"

I had strange ideas on manly beauty. I considered Karl Ivanitch one of
the handsomest men in the world, and myself so ugly that I had no need
to deceive myself on that point. Therefore any remark on the subject of
my exterior offended me extremely. I well remember how, one day after
luncheon (I was then six years of age), the talk fell upon my personal
appearance, and how Mamma tried to find good features in my face, and
said that I had clever eyes and a charming smile; how, nevertheless,
when Papa had examined me, and proved the contrary, she was obliged to
confess that I was ugly; and how, when the meal was over and I went
to pay her my respects, she said as she patted my cheek; "You know,
Nicolinka, nobody will ever love you for your face alone, so you must
try all the more to be a good and clever boy."

Although these words of hers confirmed in me my conviction that I was
not handsome, they also confirmed in me an ambition to be just such
a boy as she had indicated. Yet I had my moments of despair at my
ugliness, for I thought that no human being with such a large nose, such
thick lips, and such small grey eyes as mine could ever hope to attain
happiness on this earth. I used to ask God to perform a miracle by
changing me into a beauty, and would have given all that I possessed, or
ever hoped to possess, to have a handsome face.




XVIII -- PRINCE IVAN IVANOVITCH

When the Princess had heard my verses and overwhelmed the writer of them
with praise, Grandmamma softened to her a little. She began to address
her in French and to cease calling her "my dear." Likewise she invited
her to return that evening with her children. This invitation having
been accepted, the Princess took her leave. After that, so many other
callers came to congratulate Grandmamma that the courtyard was crowded
all day long with carriages.

"Good morning, my dear cousin," was the greeting of one guest in
particular as he entered the room and kissed Grandmamma's hand. He was
a man of seventy, with a stately figure clad in a military uniform and
adorned with large epaulettes, an embroidered collar, and a white cross
round the neck. His face, with its quiet and open expression, as well
as the simplicity and ease of his manners, greatly pleased me, for, in
spite of the thin half-circle of hair which was all that was now left
to him, and the want of teeth disclosed by the set of his upper lip, his
face was a remarkably handsome one.

Thanks to his fine character, handsome exterior, remarkable valour,
influential relatives, and, above all, good fortune, Prince, Ivan
Ivanovitch had early made himself a career. As that career progressed,
his ambition had met with a success which left nothing more to be sought
for in that direction. From his earliest youth upward he had prepared
himself to fill the exalted station in the world to which fate actually
called him later; wherefore, although in his prosperous life (as in the
lives of all) there had been failures, misfortunes, and cares, he had
never lost his quietness of character, his elevated tone of thought, or
his peculiarly moral, religious bent of mind. Consequently, though he
had won the universal esteem of his fellows, he had done so less through
his important position than through his perseverance and integrity.
While not of specially distinguished intellect, the eminence of his
station (whence he could afford to look down upon all petty questions)
had caused him to adopt high points of view. Though in reality he was
kind and sympathetic, in manner he appeared cold and haughty--probably
for the reason that he had forever to be on his guard against the
endless claims and petitions of people who wished to profit through
his influence. Yet even then his coldness was mitigated by the polite
condescension of a man well accustomed to move in the highest circles
of society. Well-educated, his culture was that of a youth of the end of
the last century. He had read everything, whether philosophy or belles
lettres, which that age had produced in France, and loved to quote from
Racine, Corneille, Boileau, Moliere, Montaigne, and Fenelon. Likewise he
had gleaned much history from Segur, and much of the old classics from
French translations of them; but for mathematics, natural philosophy, or
contemporary literature he cared nothing whatever. However, he knew how
to be silent in conversation, as well as when to make general remarks
on authors whom he had never read--such as Goethe, Schiller, and Byron.
Moreover, despite his exclusively French education, he was simple in
speech and hated originality (which he called the mark of an untutored
nature). Wherever he lived, society was a necessity to him, and, both in
Moscow and the country he had his reception days, on which practically
"all the town" called upon him. An introduction from him was a passport
to every drawing-room; few young and pretty ladies in society objected
to offering him their rosy cheeks for a paternal salute; and people even
in the highest positions felt flattered by invitations to his parties.

The Prince had few friends left now like Grandmamma--that is to say, few
friends who were of the same standing as himself, who had had the same
sort of education, and who saw things from the same point of view:
wherefore he greatly valued his intimate, long-standing friendship with
her, and always showed her the highest respect.

I hardly dared to look at the Prince, since the honour paid him on all
sides, the huge epaulettes, the peculiar pleasure with which Grandmamma
received him, and the fact that he alone, seemed in no way afraid of
her, but addressed her with perfect freedom (even being so daring as to
call her "cousin"), awakened in me a feeling of reverence for his person
almost equal to that which I felt for Grandmamma herself.

On being shown my verses, he called me to his side, and said:

"Who knows, my cousin, but that he may prove to be a second Derzhavin?"
Nevertheless he pinched my cheek so hard that I was only prevented from
crying by the thought that it must be meant for a caress.

Gradually the other guests dispersed, and with them Papa and Woloda.
Thus only Grandmamma, the Prince, and myself were left in the
drawing-room.

"Why has our dear Natalia Nicolaevna not come to-day" asked the Prince
after a silence.

"Ah, my friend," replied Grandmamma, lowering her voice and laying a
hand upon the sleeve of his uniform, "she would certainly have come if
she had been at liberty to do what she likes. She wrote to me that Peter
had proposed bringing her with him to town, but that she had refused,
since their income had not been good this year, and she could see
no real reason why the whole family need come to Moscow, seeing that
Lubotshka was as yet very young and that the boys were living with me--a
fact, she said, which made her feel as safe about them as though she had
been living with them herself."

"True, it is good for the boys to be here," went on Grandmamma, yet in
a tone which showed clearly that she did not think it was so very good,
"since it was more than time that they should be sent to Moscow to
study, as well as to learn how to comport themselves in society. What
sort of an education could they have got in the country? The eldest boy
will soon be thirteen, and the second one eleven. As yet, my cousin,
they are quite untaught, and do not know even how to enter a room."

"Nevertheless" said the Prince, "I cannot understand these complaints
of ruined fortunes. He has a very handsome income, and Natalia has
Chabarovska, where we used to act plays, and which I know as well as
I do my own hand. It is a splendid property, and ought to bring in an
excellent return."

"Well," said Grandmamma with a sad expression on her face, "I do not
mind telling you, as my most intimate friend, that all this seems to me
a mere pretext on his part for living alone, for strolling about from
club to club, for attending dinner-parties, and for resorting to--well,
who knows what? She suspects nothing; you know her angelic sweetness and
her implicit trust of him in everything. He had only to tell her that
the children must go to Moscow and that she must be left behind in the
country with a stupid governess for company, for her to believe him! I
almost think that if he were to say that the children must be whipped
just as the Princess Barbara whips hers, she would believe even that!"
and Grandmamma leant back in her arm-chair with an expression of
contempt. Then, after a moment of silence, during which she took her
handkerchief out of her pocket to wipe away a few tears which had stolen
down her cheeks, she went, on:

"Yes, my friend, I often think that he cannot value and understand
her properly, and that, for all her goodness and love of him and her
endeavours to conceal her grief (which, however as I know only too well,
exists). She cannot really be happy with him. Mark my words if he does
not--" Here Grandmamma buried her face in the handkerchief.

"Ah, my dear old friend," said the Prince reproachfully. "I think you
are unreasonable. Why grieve and weep over imagined evils? That is
not right. I have known him a long time, and feel sure that he is an
attentive, kind, and excellent husband, as well as (which is the chief
thing of all) a perfectly honourable man."

At this point, having been an involuntary auditor of a conversation
not meant for my ears, I stole on tiptoe out of the room, in a state of
great distress.




XIX -- THE IWINS

"Woloda, Woloda! The Iwins are just coming." I shouted on seeing from
the window three boys in blue overcoats, and followed by a young tutor,
advancing along the pavement opposite our house.

The Iwins were related to us, and of about the same age as ourselves. We
had made their acquaintance soon after our arrival in Moscow. The second
brother, Seriosha, had dark curly hair, a turned-up, strongly pronounced
nose, very bright red lips (which, never being quite shut, showed a
row of white teeth), beautiful dark-blue eyes, and an uncommonly bold
expression of face. He never smiled but was either wholly serious or
laughing a clear, merry, agreeable laugh. His striking good looks had
captivated me from the first, and I felt an irresistible attraction
towards him. Only to see him filled me with pleasure, and at one time my
whole mental faculties used to be concentrated in the wish that I
might do so. If three or four days passed without my seeing him I felt
listless and ready to cry. Awake or asleep, I was forever dreaming of
him. On going to bed I used to see him in my dreams, and when I had
shut my eyes and called up a picture of him I hugged the vision as
my choicest delight. So much store did I set upon this feeling for my
friend that I never mentioned it to any one. Nevertheless, it must have
annoyed him to see my admiring eyes constantly fixed upon him, or else
he must have felt no reciprocal attraction, for he always preferred to
play and talk with Woloda. Still, even with that I felt satisfied, and
wished and asked for nothing better than to be ready at any time to make
any sacrifice for him. Likewise, over and above the strange fascination
which he exercised upon me, I always felt another sensation, namely,
a dread of making him angry, of offending him, of displeasing him. Was
this because his face bore such a haughty expression, or because I,
despising my own exterior, over-rated the beautiful in others, or,
lastly (and most probably), because it is a common sign of affection?
At all events, I felt as much fear, of him as I did love. The first time
that he spoke to me I was so overwhelmed with sudden happiness that I
turned pale, then red, and could not utter a word. He had an ugly habit
of blinking when considering anything seriously, as well as of twitching
his nose and eyebrows. Consequently every one thought that this habit
marred his face. Yet I thought it such a nice one that I involuntarily
adopted it for myself, until, a few days after I had made his
acquaintance, Grandmamma suddenly asked me whether my eyes were hurting
me, since I was winking like an owl! Never a word of affection passed
between us, yet he felt his power over me, and unconsciously but
tyrannically, exercised it in all our childish intercourse. I used to
long to tell him all that was in my heart, yet was too much afraid of
him to be frank in any way, and, while submitting myself to his will,
tried to appear merely careless and indifferent. Although at times his
influence seemed irksome and intolerable, to throw it off was beyond my
strength.

I often think with regret of that fresh, beautiful feeling of boundless,
disinterested love which came to an end without having ever found
self-expression or return. It is strange how, when a child, I always
longed to be like grown-up people, and yet how I have often longed,
since childhood's days, for those days to come back to me! Many times,
in my relations with Seriosha, this wish to resemble grown-up people
put a rude check upon the love that was waiting to expand, and made me
repress it. Not only was I afraid of kissing him, or of taking his hand
and saying how glad I was to see him, but I even dreaded calling him
"Seriosha" and always said "Sergius" as every one else did in our
house. Any expression of affection would have seemed like evidence of
childishness, and any one who indulged in it, a baby. Not having yet
passed through those bitter experiences which enforce upon older years
circumspection and coldness, I deprived myself of the pure delight of
a fresh, childish instinct for the absurd purpose of trying to resemble
grown-up people.

I met the Iwins in the ante-room, welcomed them, and then ran to tell
Grandmamma of their arrival with an expression as happy as though she
were certain to be equally delighted. Then, never taking my eyes off
Seriosha, I conducted the visitors to the drawing-room, and eagerly
followed every movement of my favourite. When Grandmamma spoke to
and fixed her penetrating glance upon him, I experienced that mingled
sensation of pride and solicitude which an artist might feel when
waiting for revered lips to pronounce a judgment upon his work.

With Grandmamma's permission, the Iwins' young tutor, Herr Frost,
accompanied us into the little back garden, where he seated himself
upon a bench, arranged his legs in a tasteful attitude, rested his
brass-knobbed cane between them, lighted a cigar, and assumed the air
of a man well-pleased with himself. He was a German, but of a very
different sort to our good Karl Ivanitch. In the first place, he spoke
both Russian and French correctly, though with a hard accent Indeed,
he enjoyed--especially among the ladies--the reputation of being a very
accomplished fellow. In the second place, he wore a reddish moustache,
a large gold pin set with a ruby, a black satin tie, and a very
fashionable suit. Lastly, he was young, with a handsome, self-satisfied
face and fine muscular legs. It was clear that he set the greatest store
upon the latter, and thought them beyond compare, especially as regards
the favour of the ladies. Consequently, whether sitting or standing, he
always tried to exhibit them in the most favourable light. In short,
he was a type of the young German-Russian whose main desire is to be
thought perfectly gallant and gentlemanly.

In the little garden merriment reigned. In fact, the game of "robbers"
never went better. Yet an incident occurred which came near to spoiling
it. Seriosha was the robber, and in pouncing upon some travellers he
fell down and knocked his leg so badly against a tree that I thought
the leg must be broken. Consequently, though I was the gendarme and
therefore bound to apprehend him, I only asked him anxiously, when I
reached him, if he had hurt himself very much. Nevertheless this threw
him into a passion, and made him exclaim with fists clenched and in a
voice which showed by its faltering what pain he was enduring, "Why,
whatever is the matter? Is this playing the game properly? You ought
to arrest me. Why on earth don't you do so?" This he repeated several
times, and then, seeing Woloda and the elder Iwin (who were taking the
part of the travellers) jumping and running about the path, he suddenly
threw himself upon them with a shout and loud laughter to effect
their capture. I cannot express my wonder and delight at this valiant
behaviour of my hero. In spite of the severe pain, he had not only
refrained from crying, but had repressed the least symptom of suffering
and kept his eye fixed upon the game! Shortly after this occurrence
another boy, Ilinka Grap, joined our party. We went upstairs, and
Seriosha gave me an opportunity of still further appreciating and taking
delight in his manly bravery and fortitude. This was how it was.

Ilinka was the son of a poor foreigner who had been under certain
obligations to my Grandpapa, and now thought it incumbent upon him to
send his son to us as frequently as possible. Yet if he thought that the
acquaintance would procure his son any advancement or pleasure, he was
entirely mistaken, for not only were we anything but friendly to Ilinka,
but it was seldom that we noticed him at all except to laugh at him. He
was a boy of thirteen, tall and thin, with a pale, birdlike face, and
a quiet, good-tempered expression. Though poorly dressed, he always had
his head so thickly pomaded that we used to declare that on warm days
it melted and ran down his neck. When I think of him now, it seems to
me that he was a very quiet, obliging, and good-tempered boy, but at
the time I thought him a creature so contemptible that he was not worth
either attention or pity.

Upstairs we set ourselves to astonish each other with gymnastic tours de
force. Ilinka watched us with a faint smile of admiration, but refused
an invitation to attempt a similar feat, saying that he had no strength.

Seriosha was extremely captivating. His face and eyes glowed with
laughter as he surprised us with tricks which we had never seen before.
He jumped over three chairs put together, turned somersaults right
across the room, and finally stood on his head on a pyramid of
Tatistchev's dictionaries, moving his legs about with such comical
rapidity that it was impossible not to help bursting with merriment.

After this last trick he pondered for a moment (blinking his eyes as
usual), and then went up to Ilinka with a very serious face.

"Try and do that," he said. "It is not really difficult."

Ilinka, observing that the general attention was fixed upon him,
blushed, and said in an almost inaudible voice that he could not do the
feat.

"Well, what does he mean by doing nothing at all? What a girl the fellow
is! He has just GOT to stand on his head," and Seriosha, took him by the
hand.

"Yes, on your head at once! This instant, this instant!" every one
shouted as we ran upon Ilinka and dragged him to the dictionaries,
despite his being visibly pale and frightened.

"Leave me alone! You are tearing my jacket!" cried the unhappy victim,
but his exclamations of despair only encouraged us the more. We were
dying with laughter, while the green jacket was bursting at every seam.

Woloda and the eldest Iwin took his head and placed it on the
dictionaries, while Seriosha, and I seized his poor, thin legs (his
struggles had stripped them upwards to the knees), and with boisterous,
laughter held them uptight--the youngest Iwin superintending his general
equilibrium.

Suddenly a moment of silence occurred amid our boisterous laughter--a
moment during which nothing was to be heard in the room but the panting
of the miserable Ilinka. It occurred to me at that moment that, after
all, there was nothing so very comical and pleasant in all this.

"Now, THAT'S a boy!" cried Seriosha, giving Ilinka a smack with his
hand. Ilinka said nothing, but made such desperate movements with his
legs to free himself that his foot suddenly kicked Seriosha in the
eye: with the result that, letting go of Ilinka's leg and covering the
wounded member with one hand, Seriosha hit out at him with all his might
with the other one. Of course Ilinka's legs slipped down as, sinking
exhausted to the floor and half-suffocated with tears, he stammered out:

"Why should you bully me so?"

The poor fellow's miserable figure, with its streaming tears, ruffled
hair, and crumpled trousers revealing dirty boots, touched us a little,
and we stood silent and trying to smile.

Seriosha was the first to recover himself.

"What a girl! What a gaby!" he said, giving Ilinka a slight kick. "He
can't take things in fun a bit. Well, get up, then."

"You are an utter beast! That's what YOU are!" said Ilinka, turning
miserably away and sobbing.

"Oh, oh! Would it still kick and show temper, then?" cried Seriosha,
seizing a dictionary and throwing it at the unfortunate boy's head.
Apparently it never occurred to Ilinka to take refuge from the missile;
he merely guarded his head with his hands.

"Well, that's enough now," added Seriosha, with a forced laugh. "You
DESERVE to be hurt if you can't take things in fun. Now let's go
downstairs."

I could not help looking with some compassion at the miserable creature
on the floor as, his face buried in the dictionary, he lay there sobbing
almost as though he were in a fit.

"Oh, Sergius!" I said. "Why have you done this?"

"Well, you did it too! Besides, I did not cry this afternoon when I
knocked my leg and nearly broke it."

"True enough," I thought. "Ilinka is a poor whining sort of a chap,
while Seriosha is a boy--a REAL boy."

It never occurred to my mind that possibly poor Ilinka was suffering
far less from bodily pain than from the thought that five companions
for whom he may have felt a genuine liking had, for no reason at all,
combined to hurt and humiliate him.

I cannot explain my cruelty on this occasion. Why did I not step forward
to comfort and protect him? Where was the pitifulness which often made
me burst into tears at the sight of a young bird fallen from its nest,
or of a puppy being thrown over a wall, or of a chicken being killed by
the cook for soup?

Can it be that the better instinct in me was overshadowed by my
affection for Seriosha and the desire to shine before so brave a boy? If
so, how contemptible were both the affection and the desire! They alone
form dark spots on the pages of my youthful recollections.




XX -- PREPARATIONS FOR THE PARTY

To judge from the extraordinary activity in the pantry, the shining
cleanliness which imparted such a new and festal guise to certain
articles in the salon and drawing-room which I had long known as
anything but resplendent, and the arrival of some musicians whom Prince
Ivan would certainly not have sent for nothing, no small amount of
company was to be expected that evening.

At the sound of every vehicle which chanced to pass the house I ran
to the window, leaned my head upon my arms, and peered with impatient
curiosity into the street.

At last a carriage stopped at our door, and, in the full belief that
this must be the Iwins, who had promised to come early, I at once ran
downstairs to meet them in the hall.

But, instead of the Iwins, I beheld from behind the figure of the
footman who opened the door two female figures-one tall and wrapped in a
blue cloak trimmed with marten, and the other one short and wrapped in
a green shawl from beneath which a pair of little feet, stuck into fur
boots, peeped forth.

Without paying any attention to my presence in the hall (although I
thought it my duty, on the appearance of these persons to salute them),
the shorter one moved towards the taller, and stood silently in front of
her. Thereupon the tall lady untied the shawl which enveloped the head
of the little one, and unbuttoned the cloak which hid her form; until,
by the time that the footmen had taken charge of these articles and
removed the fur boots, there stood forth from the amorphous chrysalis
a charming girl of twelve, dressed in a short muslin frock, white
pantaloons, and smart black satin shoes. Around her, white neck she wore
a narrow black velvet ribbon, while her head was covered with flaxen
curls which so perfectly suited her beautiful face in front and her bare
neck and shoulders behind that I, would have believed nobody, not even
Karl Ivanitch, if he, or she had told me that they only hung so nicely
because, ever since the morning, they had been screwed up in fragments
of a Moscow newspaper and then warmed with a hot iron. To me it seemed
as though she must have been born with those curls.

The most prominent feature in her face was a pair of unusually large
half-veiled eyes, which formed a strange, but pleasing, contrast to the
small mouth. Her lips were closed, while her eyes looked so grave that
the general expression of her face gave one the impression that a smile
was never to be looked for from her: wherefore, when a smile did come,
it was all the more pleasing.

Trying to escape notice, I slipped through the door of the salon,
and then thought it necessary to be seen pacing to and fro, seemingly
engaged in thought, as though unconscious of the arrival of guests.

BY the time, however, that the ladies had advanced to the middle of
the salon I seemed suddenly to awake from my reverie and told them that
Grandmamma was in the drawing room, Madame Valakhin, whose face pleased
me extremely (especially since it bore a great resemblance to her
daughter's), stroked my head kindly.

Grandmamma seemed delighted to see Sonetchka. She invited her to come
to her, put back a curl which had fallen over her brow, and looking
earnestly at her said, "What a charming child!"

Sonetchka blushed, smiled, and, indeed, looked so charming that I myself
blushed as I looked at her.

"I hope you are going to enjoy yourself here, my love," said
Grandmamma. "Pray be as merry and dance as much as ever you can. See, we
have two beaux for her already," she added, turning to Madame Valakhin,
and stretching out her hand to me.

This coupling of Sonetchka and myself pleased me so much that I blushed
again.

Feeling, presently, that, my embarrassment was increasing, and hearing
the sound of carriages approaching, I thought it wise to retire. In the
hall I encountered the Princess Kornakoff, her son, and an incredible
number of daughters. They had all of them the same face as their mother,
and were very ugly. None of them arrested my attention. They talked in
shrill tones as they took off their cloaks and boas, and laughed as they
bustled about--probably at the fact that there were so many of them!

Etienne was a boy of fifteen, tall and plump, with a sharp face,
deep-set bluish eyes, and very large hands and feet for his age.
Likewise he was awkward, and had a nervous, unpleasing voice.
Nevertheless he seemed very pleased with himself, and was, in my
opinion, a boy who could well bear being beaten with rods.

For a long time we confronted one another without speaking as we took
stock of each other. When the flood of dresses had swept past I made
shift to begin a conversation by asking him whether it had not been very
close in the carriage.

"I don't know," he answered indifferently. "I never ride inside it, for
it makes me feel sick directly, and Mamma knows that. Whenever we are
driving anywhere at night-time I always sit on the box. I like that, for
then one sees everything. Philip gives me the reins, and sometimes the
whip too, and then the people inside get a regular--well, you know," he
added with a significant gesture "It's splendid then."

"Master Etienne," said a footman, entering the hall, "Philip wishes me
to ask you where you put the whip."

"Where I put it? Why, I gave it back to him."

"But he says that you did not."

"Well, I laid it across the carriage-lamps!"

"No, sir, he says that you did not do that either. You had better
confess that you took it and lashed it to shreds. I suppose poor Philip
will have to make good your mischief out of his own pocket." The footman
(who looked a grave and honest man) seemed much put out by the affair,
and determined to sift it to the bottom on Philip's behalf.

Out of delicacy I pretended to notice nothing and turned aside, but the
other footmen present gathered round and looked approvingly at the old
servant.

"Hm--well, I DID tear it in pieces," at length confessed Etienne,
shrinking from further explanations. "However, I will pay for it. Did
you ever hear anything so absurd?" he added to me as he drew me towards
the drawing-room.

"But excuse me, sir; HOW are you going to pay for it? I know your ways
of paying. You have owed Maria Valericana twenty copecks these eight
months now, and you have owed me something for two years, and Peter
for--"

"Hold your tongue, will you!" shouted the young fellow, pale with rage,
"I shall report you for this."

"Oh, you may do so," said the footman. "Yet it is not fair, your
highness," he added, with a peculiar stress on the title, as he departed
with the ladies' wraps to the cloak-room. We ourselves entered the
salon.

"Quite right, footman," remarked someone approvingly from the ball
behind us.

Grandmamma had a peculiar way of employing, now the second person
singular, now the second person plural, in order to indicate her opinion
of people. When the young Prince Etienne went up to her she addressed
him as "YOU," and altogether looked at him with such an expression
of contempt that, had I been in his place, I should have been utterly
crestfallen. Etienne, however, was evidently not a boy of that sort,
for he not only took no notice of her reception of him, but none of her
person either. In fact, he bowed to the company at large in a way which,
though not graceful, was at least free from embarrassment.

Sonetchka now claimed my whole attention. I remember that, as I stood
in the salon with Etienne and Woloda, at a spot whence we could both
see and be seen by Sonetchka, I took great pleasure in talking very loud
(and all my utterances seemed to me both bold and comical) and glancing
towards the door of the drawing-room, but that, as soon as ever we
happened to move to another spot whence we could neither see nor be seen
by her, I became dumb, and thought the conversation had ceased to be
enjoyable. The rooms were now full of people--among them (as at all
children's parties) a number of elder children who wished to dance and
enjoy themselves very much, but who pretended to do everything merely in
order to give pleasure to the mistress of the house.

When the Iwins arrived I found that, instead of being as delighted as
usual to meet Seriosha, I felt a kind of vexation that he should see and
be seen by Sonetchka.




XXI -- BEFORE THE MAZURKA

"HULLO, Woloda! So we are going to dance to-night," said Seriosha,
issuing from the drawing-room and taking out of his pocket a brand new
pair of gloves. "I suppose it IS necessary to put on gloves?"

"Goodness! What shall I do? We have no gloves," I thought to myself.
"I must go upstairs and search about." Yet though I rummaged in every
drawer, I only found, in one of them, my green travelling mittens, and,
in another, a single lilac-coloured glove, a thing which could be of no
use to me, firstly, because it was very old and dirty, secondly, because
it was much too large for me, and thirdly (and principally), because the
middle finger was wanting--Karl having long ago cut it off to wear over
a sore nail.

However, I put it on--not without some diffident contemplation of the
blank left by the middle finger and of the ink-stained edges round the
vacant space.

"If only Natalia Savishna had been here," I reflected, "we should
certainly have found some gloves. I can't go downstairs in this
condition. Yet, if they ask me why I am not dancing, what am I to say?
However, I can't remain here either, or they will be sending upstairs to
fetch me. What on earth am I to do?" and I wrung my hands.

"What are you up to here?" asked Woloda as he burst into the room. "Go
and engage a partner. The dancing will be beginning directly."

"Woloda," I said despairingly, as I showed him my hand with two fingers
thrust into a single finger of the dirty glove, "Woloda, you, never
thought of this."

"Of what?" he said impatiently. "Oh, of gloves," he added with a
careless glance at my hand. "That's nothing. We can ask Grandmamma what
she thinks about it," and without further ado he departed downstairs. I
felt a trifle relieved by the coolness with which he had met a situation
which seemed to me so grave, and hastened back to the drawing-room,
completely forgetful of the unfortunate glove which still adorned my
left hand.

Cautiously approaching Grandmamma's arm-chair, I asked her in a whisper:

"Grandmamma, what are we to do? We have no gloves."

"What, my love?"

"We have no gloves," I repeated, at the same time bending over towards
her and laying both hands on the arm of her chair.

"But what is that?" she cried as she caught hold of my left hand.
"Look, my dear!" she continued, turning to Madame Valakhin. "See how
smart this young man has made himself to dance with your daughter!"

As Grandmamma persisted in retaining hold of my hand and gazing with a
mock air of gravity and interrogation at all around her, curiosity was
soon aroused, and a general roar of laughter ensued.

I should have been infuriated at the thought that Seriosha was present
to see this, as I scowled with embarrassment and struggled hard to free
my hand, had it not been that somehow Sonetchka's laughter (and she was
laughing to such a degree that the tears were standing in her eyes
and the curls dancing about her lovely face) took away my feeling
of humiliation. I felt that her laughter was not satirical, but only
natural and free; so that, as we laughed together and looked at one
another, there seemed to begin a kind of sympathy between us. Instead
of turning out badly, therefore, the episode of the glove served only
to set me at my ease among the dreaded circle of guests, and to make
me cease to feel oppressed with shyness. The sufferings of shy people
proceed only from the doubts which they feel concerning the opinions
of their fellows. No sooner are those opinions expressed (whether
flattering or the reverse) than the agony disappears.

How lovely Sonetchka looked when she was dancing a quadrille as my
vis-a-vis, with, as her partner, the loutish Prince Etienne! How
charmingly she smiled when, en chaine, she accorded me her hand! How
gracefully the curls, around her head nodded to the rhythm, and how
naively she executed the jete assemble with her little feet!

In the fifth figure, when my partner had to leave me for the other
side and I, counting the beats, was getting ready to dance my solo, she
pursed her lips gravely and looked in another direction; but her fears
for me were groundless. Boldly I performed the chasse en avant and
chasse en arriere glissade, until, when it came to my turn to move
towards her and I, with a comic gesture, showed her the poor glove with
its crumpled fingers, she laughed heartily, and seemed to move her tiny
feet more enchantingly than ever over the parquetted floor.

How well I remember how we formed the circle, and how, without
withdrawing her hand from mine, she scratched her little nose with
her glove! All this I can see before me still. Still can I hear the
quadrille from "The Maids of the Danube" to which we danced that night.

The second quadrille, I danced with Sonetchka herself; yet when we went
to sit down together during the interval, I felt overcome with shyness
and as though I had nothing to say. At last, when my silence had lasted
so long that I began to be afraid that she would think me a stupid boy,
I decided at all hazards to counteract such a notion.

"Vous etes une habitante de Moscou?" I began, and, on receiving an
affirmative answer, continued. "Et moi, je n'ai encore jamais frequente
la capitale" (with a particular emphasis on the word "frequente"). Yet I
felt that, brilliant though this introduction might be as evidence of my
profound knowledge of the French language, I could not long keep up the
conversation in that manner. Our turn for dancing had not yet arrived,
and silence again ensued between us. I kept looking anxiously at her in
the hope both of discerning what impression I had produced and of her
coming to my aid.

"Where did you get that ridiculous glove of yours?" she asked me all of
a sudden, and the question afforded me immense satisfaction and relief.
I replied that the glove belonged to Karl Ivanitch, and then went on
to speak ironically of his appearance, and to describe how comical he
looked in his red cap, and how he and his green coat had once fallen
plump off a horse into a pond.

The quadrille was soon over. Yet why had I spoken ironically of poor
Karl Ivanitch? Should I, forsooth, have sunk in Sonetchka's esteem if,
on the contrary, I had spoken of him with the love and respect which I
undoubtedly bore him?

The quadrille ended, Sonetchka said, "Thank you," with as lovely an
expression on her face as though I had really conferred, upon her a
favour. I was delighted. In fact I hardly knew myself for joy and could
not think whence I derived such case and confidence and even daring.

"Nothing in the world can abash me now," I thought as I wandered
carelessly about the salon. "I am ready for anything."

Just then Seriosha came and requested me to be his vis-a-vis.

"Very well," I said. "I have no partner as yet, but I can soon find
one."

Glancing round the salon with a confident eye, I saw that every lady was
engaged save one--a tall girl standing near the drawing-room door. Yet a
grown-up young man was approaching her-probably for the same purpose as
myself! He was but two steps from her, while I was at the further end
of the salon. Doing a glissade over the polished floor, I covered the
intervening space, and in a brave, firm voice asked the favour of her
hand in the quadrille. Smiling with a protecting air, the young lady
accorded me her hand, and the tall young man was left without a partner.
I felt so conscious of my strength that I paid no attention to his
irritation, though I learnt later that he had asked somebody who the
awkward, untidy boy was who, had taken away his lady from him.




XXII -- THE MAZURKA

AFTERWARDS the same young man formed one of the first couple in a
mazurka. He sprang to his feet, took his partner's hand, and then,
instead of executing the pas de Basques which Mimi had taught us, glided
forward till he arrived at a corner of the room, stopped, divided his
feet, turned on his heels, and, with a spring, glided back again. I, who
had found no partner for this particular dance and was sitting on the
arm of Grandmamma's chair, thought to myself:

"What on earth is he doing? That is not what Mimi taught us. And there
are the Iwins and Etienne all dancing in the same way-without the pas de
Basques! Ah! and there is Woloda too! He too is adopting the new style,
and not so badly either. And there is Sonetchka, the lovely one! Yes,
there she comes!" I felt immensely happy at that moment.

The mazurka came to an end, and already some of the guests were saying
good-bye to Grandmamma. She was evidently tired, yet she assured them
that she felt vexed at their early departure. Servants were gliding
about with plates and trays among the dancers, and the musicians were
carelessly playing the same tune for about the thirteenth time in
succession, when the young lady whom I had danced with before, and who
was just about to join in another mazurka, caught sight of me, and, with
a kindly smile, led me to Sonetchka. And one of the innumerable Kornakoff
princesses, at the same time asking me, "Rose or Hortie?"

"Ah, so it's YOU!" said Grandmamma as she turned round in her armchair.
"Go and dance, then, my boy."

Although I would fain have taken refuge behind the armchair rather than
leave its shelter, I could not refuse; so I got up, said, "Rose," and
looked at Sonetchka. Before I had time to realise it, however, a hand in
a white glove laid itself on mine, and the Kornakoff girl stepped forth
with a pleased smile and evidently no suspicion that I was ignorant of
the steps of the dance. I only knew that the pas de Basques (the only
figure of it which I had been taught) would be out of place. However,
the strains of the mazurka falling upon my ears, and imparting their
usual impulse to my acoustic nerves (which, in their turn, imparted
their usual impulse to my feet), I involuntarily, and to the amazement
of the spectators, began executing on tiptoe the sole (and fatal) pas
which I had been taught.

So long as we went straight ahead I kept fairly right, but when it came
to turning I saw that I must make preparations to arrest my course.
Accordingly, to avoid any appearance of awkwardness, I stopped short,
with the intention of imitating the "wheel about" which I had seen the
young man perform so neatly.

Unfortunately, just as I divided my feet and prepared to make a spring,
the Princess Kornakoff looked sharply round at my legs with such an
expression of stupefied amazement and curiosity that the glance undid
me. Instead of continuing to dance, I remained moving my legs up and
down on the same spot, in a sort of extraordinary fashion which bore
no relation whatever either to form or rhythm. At last I stopped
altogether. Every-one was looking at me--some with curiosity, some with
astonishment, some with disdain, and some with compassion, Grandmamma
alone seemed unmoved.

"You should not dance if you don't know the step," said Papa's angry
voice in my ear as, pushing me gently aside, he took my partner's hand,
completed the figures with her to the admiration of every one, and
finally led her back to, her place. The mazurka was at an end.

Ah me! What had I done to be punished so heavily?

*****

"Every one despises me, and will always despise me," I thought to
myself. "The way is closed for me to friendship, love, and fame! All,
all is lost!"

Why had Woloda made signs to me which every one saw, yet which could in
no way help me? Why had that disgusting princess looked at my legs? Why
had Sonetchka--she was a darling, of course!--yet why, oh why, had she
smiled at that moment?

Why had Papa turned red and taken my hand? Can it be that he was ashamed
of me?

Oh, it was dreadful! Alas, if only Mamma had been there she would never
have blushed for her Nicolinka!

How on the instant that dear image led my imagination captive! I seemed
to see once more the meadow before our house, the tall lime-trees in the
garden, the clear pond where the ducks swain, the blue sky dappled with
white clouds, the sweet-smelling ricks of hay. How those memories--aye,
and many another quiet, beloved recollection--floated through my mind at
that time!




XXIII -- AFTER THE MAZURKA

At supper the young man whom I have mentioned seated himself beside
me at the children's table, and treated me with an amount of attention
which would have flattered my self-esteem had I been able, after the
occurrence just related, to give a thought to anything beyond my failure
in the mazurka. However, the young man seemed determined to cheer me
up. He jested, called me "old boy," and finally (since none of the
elder folks were looking at us) began to help me to wine, first from one
bottle and then from another and to force me to drink it off quickly.

By the time (towards the end of supper) that a servant had poured me out
a quarter of a glass of champagne, and the young man had straightway bid
him fill it up and urged me to drink the beverage off at a draught, I
had begun to feel a grateful warmth diffusing itself through my body.
I also felt well-disposed towards my kind patron, and began to laugh
heartily at everything. Suddenly the music of the Grosvater dance struck
up, and every one rushed from the table. My friendship with the young
man had now outlived its day; so, whereas he joined a group of the older
folks, I approached Madame Valakhin to hear what she and her daughter had
to say to one another.

"Just HALF-an-hour more?" Sonetchka was imploring her.

"Impossible, my dearest."

"Yet, only to please me--just this ONCE?" Sonetchka went on
persuasively.

"Well, what if I should be ill to-morrow through all this dissipation?"
rejoined her mother, and was incautious enough to smile.

"There! You DO consent, and we CAN stay after all!" exclaimed Sonetchka,
jumping for joy.

"What is to be done with such a girl?" said Madame. "Well, run away and
dance. See," she added on perceiving myself, "here is a cavalier ready
waiting for you."

Sonetchka gave me her hand, and we darted off to the salon. The wine,
added to Sonetchka's presence and gaiety, had at once made me forget
all about the unfortunate end of the mazurka. I kept executing the most
splendid feats with my legs--now imitating a horse as he throws out his
hoofs in the trot, now stamping like a sheep infuriated at a dog, and
all the while laughing regardless of appearances.

Sonetchka also laughed unceasingly, whether we were whirling round in
a circle or whether we stood still to watch an old lady whose painful
movements with her feet showed the difficulty she had in walking.
Finally Sonetchka nearly died of merriment when I jumped half-way to the
ceiling in proof of my skill.

As I passed a mirror in Grandmamma's boudoir and glanced at myself
I could see that my face was all in a perspiration and my hair
dishevelled--the top-knot, in particular, being more erect than ever.
Yet my general appearance looked so happy, healthy, and good-tempered
that I felt wholly pleased with myself.

"If I were always as I am now," I thought, "I might yet be able to
please people with my looks." Yet as soon as I glanced at my partner's
face again, and saw there not only the expression of happiness, health,
and good temper which had just pleased me in my own, but also a fresh
and enchanting beauty besides, I felt dissatisfied with myself again.
I understood how silly of me it was to hope to attract the attention
of such a wonderful being as Sonetchka. I could not hope for
reciprocity--could not even think of it, yet my heart was overflowing
with happiness. I could not imagine that the feeling of love which was
filling my soul so pleasantly could require any happiness still greater,
or wish for more than that that happiness should never cease. I felt
perfectly contented. My heart beat like that of a dove, with the blood
constantly flowing back to it, and I almost wept for joy.

As we passed through the hall and peered into a little dark store-room
beneath the staircase I thought: "What bliss it would be if I could pass
the rest of my life with her in that dark corner, and never let anybody
know that we were there!"

"It HAS been a delightful evening, hasn't it?" I asked her in a low,
tremulous voice. Then I quickened my steps--as much out of fear of what
I had said as out of fear of what I had meant to imply.

"Yes, VERY!" she answered, and turned her face to look at me with an
expression so kind that I ceased to be afraid. I went on:

"Particularly since supper. Yet if you could only know how I regret" (I
had nearly said) "how miserable I am at your going, and to think that
we shall see each other no more!"

"But why SHOULDN'T we?" she asked, looking gravely at the corner of
her pocket-handkerchief, and gliding her fingers over a latticed screen
which we were passing. "Every Tuesday and Friday I go with Mamma to the
Iverskoi Prospect. I suppose you go for walks too sometimes?"

"Well, certainly I shall ask to go for one next Tuesday, and, if they
won't take me I shall go by myself--even without my hat, if necessary. I
know the way all right."

"Do you know what I have just thought of?" she went on. "You know, I
call some of the boys who come to see us THOU. Shall you and I call each
other THOU too? Wilt THOU?" she added, bending her head towards me and
looking me straight in the eyes.

At this moment a more lively section of the Grosvater dance began.

"Give me your hand," I said, under the impression that the music and din
would drown my exact words, but she smilingly replied, "THY hand, not
YOUR hand." Yet the dance was over before I had succeeded in saying
THOU, even though I kept conning over phrases in which the pronoun could
be employed--and employed more than once. All that I wanted was the
courage to say it.

"Wilt THOU?" and "THY hand" sounded continually in my ears, and caused
in me a kind of intoxication I could hear and see nothing but Sonetchka.
I watched her mother take her curls, lay them flat behind her ears (thus
disclosing portions of her forehead and temples which I had not yet
seen), and wrap her up so completely in the green shawl that nothing was
left visible but the tip of her nose. Indeed, I could see that, if her
little rosy fingers had not made a small, opening near her mouth, she
would have been unable to breathe. Finally I saw her leave her mother's
arm for an instant on the staircase, and turn and nod to us quickly
before she disappeared through the doorway.

Woloda, the Iwins, the young Prince Etienne, and myself were all of us
in love with Sonetchka and all of us standing on the staircase to follow
her with our eyes. To whom in particular she had nodded I do not know,
but at the moment I firmly believed it to be myself. In taking leave
of the Iwins, I spoke quite unconcernedly, and even coldly, to Seriosha
before I finally shook hands with him. Though he tried to appear
absolutely indifferent, I think that he understood that from that day
forth he had lost both my affection and his power over me, as well as
that he regretted it.




XXIV -- IN BED

"How could I have managed to be so long and so passionately devoted to
Seriosha?" I asked myself as I lay in bed that night. "He never either
understood, appreciated, or deserved my love. But Sonetchka! What a
darling SHE is! 'Wilt THOU?'--'THY hand'!"

I crept closer to the pillows, imagined to myself her lovely face,
covered my head over with the bedclothes, tucked the counterpane in on
all sides, and, thus snugly covered, lay quiet and enjoying the warmth
until I became wholly absorbed in pleasant fancies and reminiscences.

If I stared fixedly at the inside of the sheet above me I found that I
could see her as clearly as I had done an hour ago could talk to her in
my thoughts, and, though it was a conversation of irrational tenor, I
derived the greatest delight from it, seeing that "THOU" and "THINE" and
"for THEE" and "to THEE" occurred in it incessantly. These fancies were
so vivid that I could not sleep for the sweetness of my emotion, and
felt as though I must communicate my superabundant happiness to some
one.

"The darling!" I said, half-aloud, as I turned over; then, "Woloda, are
you asleep?"

"No," he replied in a sleepy voice. "What's the matter?"

"I am in love, Woloda--terribly in love with Sonetchka"

"Well? Anything else?" he replied, stretching himself.

"Oh, but you cannot imagine what I feel just now, as I lay covered over
with the counterpane, I could see her and talk to her so clearly that
it was marvellous! And, do you know, while I was lying thinking about
her--I don't know why it was, but all at once I felt so sad that I could
have cried."

Woloda made a movement of some sort.

"One thing only I wish for," I continued; "and that is that I could
always be with her and always be seeing her. Just that. You are in love
too, I believe. Confess that you are."

It was strange, but somehow I wanted every one to be in love with
Sonetchka, and every one to tell me that they were so.

"So that's how it is with you? " said Woloda, turning round to me.
"Well, I can understand it."

"I can see that you cannot sleep," I remarked, observing by his bright
eyes that he was anything but drowsy. "Well, cover yourself over SO"
(and I pulled the bedclothes over him), "and then let us talk about her.
Isn't she splendid? If she were to say to me, 'Nicolinka, jump out of
the window,' or 'jump into the fire,' I should say, 'Yes, I will do it
at once and rejoice in doing it.' Oh, how glorious she is!"

I went on picturing her again and again to my imagination, and, to enjoy
the vision the better, turned over on my side and buried my head in the
pillows, murmuring, "Oh, I want to cry, Woloda."

"What a fool you are!" he said with a slight laugh. Then, after a
moment's silence he added: "I am not like you. I think I would rather
sit and talk with her."

"Ah! Then you ARE in love with her!" I interrupted.

"And then," went on Woloda, smiling tenderly, "kiss her fingers and eyes
and lips and nose and feet--kiss all of her."

"How absurd!" I exclaimed from beneath the pillows.

"Ah, you don't understand things," said Woloda with contempt.

"I DO understand. It's you who don't understand things, and you talk
rubbish, too," I replied, half-crying.

"Well, there is nothing to cry about," he concluded. "She is only a
girl."




XXV -- THE LETTER

ON the 16th of April, nearly six months after the day just described,
Papa entered our schoolroom and told us that that night we must start
with him for our country house. I felt a pang at my heart when I heard
the news, and my thoughts at once turned to Mamma. The cause of our
unexpected departure was the following letter:

"PETROVSKOE, 12th April.

"Only this moment (i.e. at ten o'clock in the evening) have I received
your dear letter of the 3rd of April, but as usual, I answer it at once.
Fedor brought it yesterday from town, but, as it was late, he did not
give it to Mimi till this morning, and Mimi (since I was unwell) kept
it from me all day. I have been a little feverish. In fact, to tell the
truth, this is the fourth day that I have been in bed.

"Yet do not be uneasy. I feel almost myself again now, and if Ivan
Vassilitch should allow me, I think of getting up to-morrow.

"On Friday last I took the girls for a drive, and, close to the little
bridge by the turning on to the high road (the place which always makes
me nervous), the horses and carriage stuck fast in the mud. Well, the
day being fine, I thought that we would walk a little up the road until
the carriage should be extricated, but no sooner had we reached the
chapel than I felt obliged to sit down, I was so tired, and in this way
half-an-hour passed while help was being sent for to get the carriage
dug out. I felt cold, for I had only thin boots on, and they had been
wet through. After luncheon too, I had alternate cold and hot fits, yet
still continued to follow our ordinary routine.

"When tea was over I sat down to the piano to play a duct with
Lubotshka, (you would be astonished to hear what progress she has
made!), but imagine my surprise when I found that I could not count the
beats! Several times I began to do so, yet always felt confused in
my head, and kept hearing strange noises in my ears. I would begin
'One-two-three--' and then suddenly go on '-eight-fifteen,' and so on,
as though I were talking nonsense and could not help it. At last Mimi
came to my assistance and forced me to retire to bed. That was how my
illness began, and it was all through my own fault. The next day I had
a good deal of fever, and our good Ivan Vassilitch came. He has not left
us since, but promises soon to restore me to the world.

"What a wonderful old man he is! While I was feverish and delirious he
sat the whole night by my bedside without once closing his eyes; and at
this moment (since he knows I am busy writing) he is with the girls in
the divannaia, and I can hear him telling them German stories, and them
laughing as they listen to him.

"'La Belle Flamande,' as you call her, is now spending her second week
here as my guest (her mother having gone to pay a visit somewhere), and
she is most attentive and attached to me. She even tells me her secret
affairs. Under different circumstances her beautiful face, good temper,
and youth might have made a most excellent girl of her, but in the
society in which according to her own account, she moves she will be
wasted. The idea has more than once occurred to me that, had I not had
so many children of my own, it would have been a deed of mercy to have
adopted her.

"Lubotshka had meant to write to you herself, but she has torn up three
sheets of paper, saying: 'I know what a quizzer Papa always is. If he
were to find a single fault in my letter he would show it to everybody.'
Katenka is as charming as usual, and Mimi, too, is good, but tiresome.

"Now let me speak of more serious matters. You write to me that your
affairs are not going well this winter, and that you wish to break into
the revenues of Chabarovska. It seems to me strange that you should
think it necessary to ask my consent. Surely what belongs to me belongs
no less to you? You are so kind-hearted, dear, that, for fear of
worrying me, you conceal the real state of things, but I can guess that
you have lost a great deal at cards, as also that you are afraid of my
being angry at that. Yet, so long as you can tide over this crisis, I
shall not think much of it, and you need not be uneasy, I have grown
accustomed to no longer relying, so far as the children are concerned,
upon your gains at play, nor yet--excuse me for saying so--upon your
income. Therefore your losses cause me as little anxiety as your gains
give me pleasure. What I really grieve over is your unhappy passion
itself for gambling--a passion which bereaves me of part of your tender
affection and obliges me to tell you such bitter truths as (God knows
with what pain) I am now telling you. I never cease to beseech Him that
He may preserve us, not from poverty (for what is poverty?), but from
the terrible juncture which would arise should the interests of the
children, which I am called upon to protect, ever come into collision
with our own. Hitherto God has listened to my prayers. You have never
yet overstepped the limit beyond which we should be obliged either
to sacrifice property which would no longer belong to us, but to the
children, or--It is terrible to think of, but the dreadful misfortune
at which I hint is forever hanging over our heads. Yes, it is the heavy
cross which God has given us both to carry.

"Also, you write about the children, and come back to our old point
of difference by asking my consent to your placing them at a
boarding-school. You know my objection to that kind of education. I
do not know, dear, whether you will accede to my request, but I
nevertheless beseech you, by your love for me, to give me your promise
that never so long as I am alive, nor yet after my death (if God should
see fit to separate us), shall such a thing be done.

"Also you write that our affairs render it indispensable for you to
visit St. Petersburg. The Lord go with you! Go and return as, soon as
possible. Without you we shall all of us be lonely.

"Spring is coming in beautifully. We keep the door on to the terrace
always open now, while the path to the orangery is dry and the
peach-trees are in full blossom. Only here and there is there a little
snow remaining. The swallows are arriving, and to-day Lubotshka brought
me the first flowers. The doctor says that in about three days' time I
shall be well again and able to take the open air and to enjoy the April
sun. Now, au revoir, my dearest one. Do not be alarmed, I beg of you,
either on account of my illness or on account of your losses at play.
End the crisis as soon as possible, and then return here with the
children for the summer. I am making wonderful plans for our passing of
it, and I only need your presence to realise them."

The rest of the letter was written in French, as well as in a strange,
uncertain hand, on another piece of paper. I transcribe it word for
word:

"Do not believe what I have just written to you about my illness. It is
more serious than any one knows. I alone know that I shall never leave
my bed again. Do not, therefore, delay a minute in coming here with the
children. Perhaps it may yet be permitted me to embrace and bless them.
It is my last wish that it should be so. I know what a terrible blow
this will be to you, but you would have had to hear it sooner or
later--if not from me, at least from others. Let us try to, bear the
Calamity with fortitude, and place our trust in the mercy of God. Let
us submit ourselves to His will. Do not think that what I am writing is
some delusion of my sick imagination. On the contrary, I am perfectly
clear at this moment, and absolutely calm. Nor must you comfort yourself
with the false hope that these are the unreal, confused feelings of a
despondent spirit, for I feel indeed, I know, since God has deigned to
reveal it to me--that I have now but a very short time to live. Will my
love for you and the children cease with my life? I know that that can
never be. At this moment I am too full of that love to be capable of
believing that such a feeling (which constitutes a part of my very
existence) can ever, perish. My soul can never lack its love for you;
and I know that that love will exist for ever, since such a feeling
could never have been awakened if it were not to be eternal. I shall no
longer be with you, yet I firmly believe that my love will cleave to
you always, and from that thought I glean such comfort that I await the
approach of death calmly and without fear. Yes, I am calm, and God knows
that I have ever looked, and do look now, upon death as no more than the
passage to a better life. Yet why do tears blind my eyes? Why should the
children lose a mother's love? Why must you, my husband, experience such
a heavy and unlooked-for blow? Why must I die when your love was making
life so inexpressibly happy for me?

"But His holy will be done!

"The tears prevent my writing more. It may be that I shall never see you
again. I thank you, my darling beyond all price, for all the felicity
with which you have surrounded me in this life. Soon I shall appear
before God Himself to pray that He may reward you. Farewell, my dearest!
Remember that, if I am no longer here, my love will none the less NEVER
AND NOWHERE fail you. Farewell, Woloda--farewell, my pet! Farewell, my
Benjamin, my little Nicolinka! Surely they will never forget me?"

With this letter had come also a French note from Mimi, in which the
latter said:

"The sad circumstances of which she has written to you are but too
surely confirmed by the words of the doctor. Yesterday evening she
ordered the letter to be posted at once, but, thinking at she did so in
delirium, I waited until this morning, with the intention of sealing and
sending it then. Hardly had I done so when Natalia Nicolaevna asked
me what I had done with the letter and told me to burn it if not yet
despatched. She is forever speaking of it, and saying that it will kill
you. Do not delay your departure for an instant if you wish to see the
angel before she leaves us. Pray excuse this scribble, but I have not
slept now for three nights. You know how much I love her."

Later I heard from Natalia Savishna (who passed the whole of the night
of the 11th April at Mamma's bedside) that, after writing the first part
of the letter, Mamma laid it down upon the table beside her and went to
sleep for a while.

"I confess," said Natalia Savishna, "that I too fell asleep in the
arm-chair, and let my knitting slip from my hands. Suddenly, towards one
o'clock in the morning, I heard her saying something; whereupon I opened
my eyes and looked at her. My darling was sitting up in bed, with her
hands clasped together and streams of tears gushing from her eyes.

"'It is all over now,' she said, and hid her face in her hands.

"I sprang to my feet, and asked what the matter was.

"'Ah, Natalia Savishna, if you could only know what I have just
seen!' she said; yet, for all my asking, she would say no more,
beyond commanding me to hand her the letter. To that letter she added
something, and then said that it must be sent off directly. From that
moment she grew, rapidly worse."




XXVI -- WHAT AWAITED US AT THE COUNTRY-HOUSE

On the 18th of April we descended from the carriage at the front door
of the house at Petrovskoe. All the way from Moscow Papa had been
preoccupied, and when Woloda had asked him "whether Mamma was ill" he
had looked at him sadly and nodded an affirmative. Nevertheless he had
grown more composed during the journey, and it was only when we were
actually approaching the house that his face again began to grow
anxious, until, as he leaped from the carriage and asked Foka (who
had run breathlessly to meet us), "How is Natalia Nicolaevna now?" his
voice, was trembling, and his eyes had filled with tears. The good, old
Foka looked at us, and then lowered his gaze again. Finally he said as
he opened the hall-door and turned his head aside: "It is the sixth day
since she has not left her bed."

Milka (who, as we afterwards learned, had never ceased to whine from the
day when Mamma was taken ill) came leaping, joyfully to meet Papa, and
barking a welcome as she licked his hands, but Papa put her aside, and
went first to the drawing-room, and then into the divannaia, from which
a door led into the bedroom. The nearer he approached the latter, the
more, did his movements express the agitation that he felt. Entering the
divannaia he crossed it on tiptoe, seeming to hold his breath. Even then
he had to stop and make the sign of the cross before he could summon up
courage to turn the handle. At the same moment Mimi, with dishevelled
hair and eyes red with weeping came hastily out of the corridor.

"Ah, Peter Alexandritch!" she said in a whisper and with a marked
expression of despair. Then, observing that Papa was trying to open the
door, she whispered again:

"Not here. This door is locked. Go round to the door on the other side."

Oh, how terribly all this wrought upon my imagination, racked as it was
by grief and terrible forebodings!

So we went round to the other side. In the corridor we met the gardener,
Akim, who had been wont to amuse us with his grimaces, but at this
moment I could see nothing comical in him. Indeed, the sight of his
thoughtless, indifferent face struck me more painfully than anything
else. In the maidservants' hall, through which we had to pass, two maids
were sitting at their work, but rose to salute us with an expression so
mournful that I felt completely overwhelmed.

Passing also through Mimi's room, Papa opened the door of the bedroom,
and we entered. The two windows on the right were curtained over, and
close to them was seated, Natalia Savishna, spectacles on nose and
engaged in darning stockings. She did not approach us to kiss me as she
had been used to do, but just rose and looked at us, her tears beginning
to flow afresh. Somehow it frightened me to see every one, on beholding
us, begin to cry, although they had been calm enough before.

On the left stood the bed behind a screen, while in the great arm-chair
the doctor lay asleep. Beside the bed a young, fair-haired and
remarkably beautiful girl in a white morning wrapper was applying ice to
Mamma's head, but Mamma herself I could not see. This girl was "La
Belle Flamande" of whom Mamma had written, and who afterwards played so
important a part in our family life. As we entered she disengaged one
of her hands, straightened the pleats of her dress on her bosom, and
whispered, "She is insensible." Though I was in an agony of grief, I
observed at that moment every little detail.

It was almost dark in the room, and very hot, while the air was heavy
with the mingled, scent of mint, eau-de-cologne, camomile, and Hoffman's
pastilles. The latter ingredient caught my attention so strongly that
even now I can never hear of it, or even think of it, without my memory
carrying me back to that dark, close room, and all the details of that
dreadful time.

Mamma's eyes were wide open, but they could not see us. Never shall I
forget the terrible expression in them--the expression of agonies of
suffering!

Then we were taken away.

When, later, I was able to ask Natalia Savishna about Mamma's last
moments she told me the following:

"After you were taken out of the room, my beloved one struggled for a
long time, as though some one were trying to strangle her. Then at last
she laid her head back upon the pillow, and slept softly, peacefully,
like an angel from Heaven. I went away for a moment to see about her
medicine, and just as I entered the room again my darling was throwing
the bedclothes from off her and calling for your Papa. He stooped over
her, but strength failed her to say what she wanted to. All she could
do was to open her lips and gasp, 'My God, my God! The children, the
children!' I would have run to fetch you, but Ivan Vassilitch stopped
me, saying that it would only excite her--it were best not to do so.
Then suddenly she stretched her arms out and dropped them again. What
she meant by that gesture the good God alone knows, but I think that in
it she was blessing you--you the children whom she could not see. God
did not grant her to see her little ones before her death. Then she
raised herself up--did my love, my darling--yes, just so with her hands,
and exclaimed in a voice which I cannot bear to remember, 'Mother of
God, never forsake them!'"

"Then the pain mounted to her heart, and from her eyes it as, plain that
she suffered terribly, my poor one! She sank back upon the pillows, tore
the bedclothes with her teeth, and wept--wept--"

"Yes and what then?" I asked but Natalia Savishna could say no more. She
turned away and cried bitterly.

Mamma had expired in terrible agonies.




XXVII -- GRIEF

LATE the following evening I thought I would like to look at her once
more; so, conquering an involuntary sense of fear, I gently opened the
door of the salon and entered on tiptoe.

In the middle of the room, on a table, lay the coffin, with wax candles
burning all round it on tall silver candelabra. In the further corner
sat the chanter, reading the Psalms in a low, monotonous voice. I
stopped at the door and tried to look, but my eyes were so weak with
crying, and my nerves so terribly on edge, that I could distinguish
nothing. Every object seemed to mingle together in a strange blur--the
candles, the brocade, the velvet, the great candelabra, the pink satin
cushion trimmed with lace, the chaplet of flowers, the ribboned cap, and
something of a transparent, wax-like colour. I mounted a chair to see
her face, yet where it should have been I could see only that wax-like,
transparent something. I could not believe it to be her face. Yet, as
I stood grazing at it, I at last recognised the well-known, beloved
features. I shuddered with horror to realise that it WAS she. Why were
those eyes so sunken? What had laid that dreadful paleness upon her
cheeks, and stamped the black spot beneath the transparent skin on one
of them? Why was the expression of the whole face so cold and severe?
Why were the lips so white, and their outline so beautiful, so majestic,
so expressive of an unnatural calm that, as I looked at them, a chill
shudder ran through my hair and down my back?

Somehow, as I gazed, an irrepressible, incomprehensible power seemed
to compel me to keep my eyes fixed upon that lifeless face. I could not
turn away, and my imagination began to picture before me scenes of her
active life and happiness. I forgot that the corpse lying before me
now--the THING at which I was gazing unconsciously as at an object which
had nothing in common with my dreams--was SHE. I fancied I could
see her--now here, now there, alive, happy, and smiling. Then some
well-known feature in the face at which I was gazing would suddenly
arrest my attention, and in a flash I would recall the terrible reality
and shudder-though still unable to turn my eyes away.

Then again the dreams would replace reality--then again the reality put
to flight the dreams. At last the consciousness of both left me, and for
a while I became insensible.

How long I remained in that condition I do not know, nor yet how it
occurred. I only know that for a time I lost all sense of existence, and
experienced a kind of vague blissfulness which though grand and sweet,
was also sad. It may be that, as it ascended to a better world, her
beautiful soul had looked down with longing at the world in which she
had left us--that it had seen my sorrow, and, pitying me, had returned
to earth on the wings of love to console and bless me with a heavenly
smile of compassion.

The door creaked as the chanter entered who was to relieve his
predecessor. The noise awakened me, and my first thought was that,
seeing me standing on the chair in a posture which had nothing touching
in its aspect, he might take me for an unfeeling boy who had climbed
on to the chair out of mere curiosity: wherefore I hastened to make the
sign of the cross, to bend down my head, and to burst out crying. As I
recall now my impressions of that episode I find that it was only during
my moments of self-forgetfulness that my grief was wholehearted. True,
both before and after the funeral I never ceased to cry and to look
miserable, yet I feel conscience-stricken when I recall that grief
of mine, seeing that always present in it there was an element of
conceit--of a desire to show that I was more grieved than any one else,
of an interest which I took in observing the effect, produced upon
others by my tears, and of an idle curiosity leading me to remark
Mimi's bonnet and the faces of all present. The mere circumstance that
I despised myself for not feeling grief to the exclusion of everything
else, and that I endeavoured to conceal the fact, shows that my sadness
was insincere and unnatural. I took a delight in feeling that I was
unhappy, and in trying to feel more so. Consequently this egotistic
consciousness completely annulled any element of sincerity in my woe.

That night I slept calmly and soundly (as is usual after any great
emotion), and awoke with my tears dried and my nerves restored. At ten
o'clock we were summoned to attend the pre-funeral requiem.

The room was full of weeping servants and peasants who had come to bid
farewell to their late mistress. During the service I myself wept
a great deal, made frequent signs of the cross, and performed many
genuflections, but I did not pray with, my soul, and felt, if anything,
almost indifferent. My thoughts were chiefly centred upon the new coat
which I was wearing (a garment which was tight and uncomfortable) and
upon how to avoid soiling my trousers at the knees. Also I took the most
minute notice of all present.

Papa stood at the head of the coffin. He was as white as snow, and
only with difficulty restrained his tears. His tall figure in its black
frockcoat, his pale, expressive face, the graceful, assured manner in
which, as usual, he made the sign of the cross or bowed until he touched
the floor with his hand [A custom of the Greek funeral rite.] or took
the candle from the priest or went to the coffin--all were exceedingly
effective; yet for some reason or another I felt a grudge against him
for that very ability to appear effective at such a moment. Mimi stood
leaning against the wall as though scarcely able to support herself. Her
dress was all awry and covered with feathers, and her cap cocked to one
side, while her eyes were red with weeping, her legs trembling under
her, and she sobbed incessantly in a heartrending manner as ever and
again she buried her face in her handkerchief or her hands. I imagine
that she did this to check her continual sobbing without being seen by
the spectators. I remember, too, her telling Papa, the evening before,
that Mamma's death had come upon her as a blow from which she could
never hope to recover; that with Mamma she had lost everything; but that
"the angel," as she called my mother, had not forgotten her when at the
point of death, since she had declared her wish to render her (Mimi's)
and Katenka's fortunes secure for ever. Mimi had shed bitter tears
while relating this, and very likely her sorrow, if not wholly pure and
disinterested, was in the main sincere. Lubotshka, in black garments
and suffused with tears, stood with her head bowed upon her breast. She
rarely looked at the coffin, yet whenever she did so her face expressed
a sort of childish fear. Katenka stood near her mother, and, despite
her lengthened face, looked as lovely as ever. Woloda's frank nature
was frank also in grief. He stood looking grave and as though he were
staring at some object with fixed eyes. Then suddenly his lips would
begin to quiver, and he would hastily make the sign of the cross, and
bend his head again.

Such of those present as were strangers I found intolerable. In fact,
the phrases of condolence with which they addressed Papa (such, for
instance, as that "she is better off now" "she was too good for this
world," and so on) awakened in me something like fury. What right had
they to weep over or to talk about her? Some of them, in referring to
ourselves, called us "orphans"--just as though it were not a matter of
common knowledge that children who have lost their mother are known as
orphans! Probably (I thought) they liked to be the first to give us that
name, just as some people find pleasure in being the first to address a
newly-married girl as "Madame."

In a far corner of the room, and almost hidden by the open door, of the
dining-room, stood a grey old woman with bent knees. With hands clasped
together and eyes lifted to heaven, she prayed only--not wept. Her soul
was in the presence of God, and she was asking Him soon to reunite her
to her whom she had loved beyond all beings on this earth, and whom she
steadfastly believed that she would very soon meet again.

"There stands one who SINCERELY loved her," I thought to myself, and
felt ashamed.

The requiem was over. They uncovered the face of the deceased, and all
present except ourselves went to the coffin to give her the kiss of
farewell.

One of the last to take leave of her departed mistress was a peasant
woman who was holding by the hand a pretty little girl of five whom she
had brought with her, God knows for what reason. Just at a moment when
I chanced to drop my wet handkerchief and was stooping to pick it up
again, a loud, piercing scream startled me, and filled me with such
terror that, were I to live a hundred years more, I should never forget
it. Even now the recollection always sends a cold shudder through my
frame. I raised my head. Standing on the chair near the coffin was the
peasant woman, while struggling and fighting in her arms was the
little girl, and it was this same poor child who had screamed with such
dreadful, desperate frenzy as, straining her terrified face away, she
still, continued to gaze with dilated eyes at the face of the corpse.
I too screamed in a voice perhaps more dreadful still, and ran headlong
from the room.

Only now did I understand the source of the strong, oppressive smell
which, mingling with the scent of the incense, filled the chamber, while
the thought that the face which, but a few days ago, had been full of
freshness and beauty--the face which I loved more than anything else in
all the world--was now capable of inspiring horror at length revealed to
me, as though for the first time, the terrible truth, and filled my soul
with despair.




XXVIII -- SAD RECOLLECTIONS

Mamma was no longer with us, but our life went on as usual. We went
to bed and got up at the same times and in the same rooms; breakfast,
luncheon, and supper continued to be at their usual hours; everything
remained standing in its accustomed place; nothing in the house or in
our mode of life was altered: only, she was not there.

Yet it seemed to me as though such a misfortune ought to have changed
everything. Our old mode of life appeared like an insult to her memory.
It recalled too vividly her presence.

The day before the funeral I felt as though I should like to rest a
little after luncheon, and accordingly went to Natalia Savishna's room
with the intention of installing myself comfortably under the warm, soft
down of the quilt on her bed. When I entered I found Natalia herself
lying on the bed and apparently asleep, but, on hearing my footsteps,
she raised herself up, removed the handkerchief which had been
protecting her face from the flies, and, adjusting her cap, sat forward
on the edge of the bed. Since it frequently happened that I came to lie
down in her room, she guessed my errand at once, and said:

"So you have come to rest here a little, have you? Lie down, then, my
dearest."

"Oh, but what is the matter with you, Natalia Savishna?" I exclaimed
as I forced her back again. "I did not come for that. No, you are tired
yourself, so you LIE down."

"I am quite rested now, darling," she said (though I knew that it was
many a night since she had closed her eyes). "Yes, I am indeed, and have
no wish to sleep again," she added with a deep sigh.

I felt as though I wanted to speak to her of our misfortune, since I
knew her sincerity and love, and thought that it would be a consolation
to me to weep with her.

"Natalia Savishna," I said after a pause, as I seated myself upon the
bed, "who would ever have thought of this?"

The old woman looked at me with astonishment, for she did not quite
understand my question.

"Yes, who would ever have thought of it?" I repeated.

"Ah, my darling," she said with a glance of tender compassion, "it is
not only 'Who would ever have thought of it?' but 'Who, even now, would
ever believe it?' I am old, and my bones should long ago have gone to
rest rather than that I should have lived to see the old master, your
Grandpapa, of blessed memory, and Prince Nicola Michaelovitch, and his
two brothers, and your sister Amenka all buried before me, though all
younger than myself--and now my darling, to my never-ending sorrow, gone
home before me! Yet it has been God's will. He took her away because she
was worthy to be taken, and because He has need of the good ones."

This simple thought seemed to me a consolation, and I pressed closer to
Natalia. She laid her hands upon my head as she looked upward with eyes
expressive of a deep, but resigned, sorrow. In her soul was a sure and
certain hope that God would not long separate her from the one upon whom
the whole strength of her love had for many years been concentrated.

"Yes, my dear," she went on, "it is a long time now since I used to
nurse and fondle her, and she used to call me Natasha. She used to come
jumping upon me, and caressing and kissing me, and say, 'MY Nashik, MY
darling, MY ducky,' and I used to answer jokingly, 'Well, my love, I
don't believe that you DO love me. You will be a grown-up young
lady soon, and going away to be married, and will leave your Nashik
forgotten.' Then she would grow thoughtful and say, 'I think I had
better not marry if my Nashik cannot go with me, for I mean never to
leave her.' Yet, alas! She has left me now! Who was there in the world
she did not love? Yes, my dearest, it must never be POSSIBLE for you to
forget your Mamma. She was not a being of earth--she was an angel from
Heaven. When her soul has entered the heavenly kingdom she will continue
to love you and to be proud of you even there."

"But why do you say 'when her soul has entered the heavenly kingdom'?" I
asked. "I believe it is there now."

"No, my dearest," replied Natalia as she lowered her voice and pressed
herself yet closer to me, "her soul is still here," and she pointed
upwards. She spoke in a whisper, but with such an intensity of
conviction that I too involuntarily raised my eyes and looked at the
ceiling, as though expecting to see something there. "Before the souls
of the just enter Paradise they have to undergo forty trials for forty
days, and during that time they hover around their earthly home." [A
Russian popular legend.]

She went on speaking for some time in this strain--speaking with the
same simplicity and conviction as though she were relating common things
which she herself had witnessed, and to doubt which could never enter
into any one's head. I listened almost breathlessly, and though I did
not understand all she said, I never for a moment doubted her word.

"Yes, my darling, she is here now, and perhaps looking at us and
listening to what we are saying," concluded Natalia. Raising her head,
she remained silent for a while. At length she wiped away the tears
which were streaming from her eyes, looked me straight in the face, and
said in a voice trembling with emotion:

"Ah, it is through many trials that God is leading me to Him. Why,
indeed, am I still here? Whom have I to live for? Whom have I to love?"

"Do you not love US, then?" I asked sadly, and half-choking with my
tears.

"Yes, God knows that I love you, my darling; but to love any one as I
loved HER--that I cannot do."

She could say no more, but turned her head aside and wept bitterly. As
for me, I no longer thought of going to sleep, but sat silently with her
and mingled my tears with hers.

Presently Foka entered the room, but, on seeing our emotion and not
wishing to disturb us, stopped short at the door.

"Do you want anything, my good Foka?" asked Natalia as she wiped away
her tears.

"If you please, half-a-pound of currants, four pounds of sugar, and
three pounds of rice for the kutia." [Cakes partaken of by the mourners
at a Russian funeral.]

"Yes, in one moment," said Natalia as she took a pinch of snuff and
hastened to her drawers. All traces of the grief, aroused by our
conversation disappeared on, the instant that she had duties to fulfil,
for she looked upon those duties as of paramount importance.

"But why FOUR pounds?" she objected as she weighed the sugar on a
steelyard. "Three and a half would be sufficient," and she withdrew a
few lumps. "How is it, too, that, though I weighed out eight pounds of
rice yesterday, more is wanted now? No offence to you, Foka, but I am
not going to waste rice like that. I suppose Vanka is glad that there
is confusion in the house just now, for he thinks that nothing will be
looked after, but I am not going to have any careless extravagance with
my master's goods. Did one ever hear of such a thing? Eight pounds!"

"Well, I have nothing to do with it. He says it is all gone, that's
all."

"Hm, hm! Well, there it is. Let him take it."

I was struck by the sudden transition from the touching sensibility
with which she had just been speaking to me to this petty reckoning and
captiousness. Yet, thinking it over afterwards, I recognised that it was
merely because, in spite of what was lying on her heart, she retained
the habit of duty, and that it was the strength of that habit which
enabled her to pursue her functions as of old. Her grief was too strong
and too true to require any pretence of being unable to fulfil trivial
tasks, nor would she have understood that any one could so pretend.
Vanity is a sentiment so entirely at variance with genuine grief, yet
a sentiment so inherent in human nature, that even the most poignant
sorrow does not always drive it wholly forth. Vanity mingled with grief
shows itself in a desire to be recognised as unhappy or resigned;
and this ignoble desire--an aspiration which, for all that we may
not acknowledge it is rarely absent, even in cases of the utmost
affliction--takes off greatly from the force, the dignity, and the
sincerity of grief. Natalia Savishna had been so sorely smitten by her
misfortune that not a single wish of her own remained in her soul--she
went on living purely by habit.

Having handed over the provisions to Foka, and reminded him of the
refreshments which must be ready for the priests, she took up her
knitting and seated herself by my side again. The conversation reverted
to the old topic, and we once more mourned and shed tears together.
These talks with Natalia I repeated every day, for her quiet tears
and words of devotion brought me relief and comfort. Soon, however, a
parting came. Three days after the funeral we returned to Moscow, and I
never saw her again.

Grandmamma received the sad tidings only on our return to her house, and
her grief was extraordinary. At first we were not allowed to see her,
since for a whole week she was out of her mind, and the doctors were
afraid for her life. Not only did she decline all medicine whatsoever,
but she refused to speak to anybody or to take nourishment, and never
closed her eyes in sleep. Sometimes, as she sat alone in the arm-chair in
her room, she would begin laughing and crying at the same time, with a
sort of tearless grief, or else relapse into convulsions, and scream out
dreadful, incoherent words in a horrible voice. It was the first dire
sorrow which she had known in her life, and it reduced her almost
to distraction. She would begin accusing first one person, and then
another, of bringing this misfortune upon her, and rail at and blame
them with the most extraordinary virulence. Finally she would rise from
her arm-chair, pace the room for a while, and end by falling senseless
to the floor.

Once, when I went to her room, she appeared to be sitting quietly in her
chair, yet with an air which struck me as curious. Though her eyes were
wide open, their glance was vacant and meaningless, and she seemed to
gaze in my direction without seeing me. Suddenly her lips parted slowly
in a smile, and she said in a touchingly, tender voice: "Come here,
then, my dearest one; come here, my angel." Thinking that it was myself
she was addressing, I moved towards her, but it was not I whom she was
beholding at that moment. "Oh, my love," she went on, "if only you could
know how distracted I have been, and how delighted I am to see you once
more!" I understood then that she believed herself to be looking
upon Mamma, and halted where I was. "They told me you were gone," she
concluded with a frown; "but what nonsense! As if you could die before
ME!" and she laughed a terrible, hysterical laugh.

Only those who can love strongly can experience an overwhelming grief.
Yet their very need of loving sometimes serves to throw off their grief
from them and to save them. The moral nature of man is more tenacious of
life than the physical, and grief never kills.

After a time Grandmamma's power of weeping came back to her, and she
began to recover. Her first thought when her reason returned was for us
children, and her love for us was greater than ever. We never left her
arm-chair, and she would talk of Mamma, and weep softly, and caress us.

Nobody who saw her grief could say that it was consciously exaggerated,
for its expression was too strong and touching; yet for some reason or
another my sympathy went out more to Natalia Savishna, and to this day
I am convinced that nobody loved and regretted Mamma so purely and
sincerely as did that simple-hearted, affectionate being.

With Mamma's death the happy time of my childhood came to an end, and
a new epoch--the epoch of my boyhood--began; but since my memories of
Natalia Savishna (who exercised such a strong and beneficial influence
upon the bent of my mind and the development of my sensibility) belong
rather to the first period, I will add a few words about her and her
death before closing this portion of my life.

I heard later from people in the village that, after our return to
Moscow, she found time hang very heavy on her hands. Although the
drawers and shelves were still under her charge, and she never ceased
to arrange and rearrange them--to take things out and to dispose of them
afresh--she sadly missed the din and bustle of the seignorial mansion to
which she had been accustomed from her childhood up. Consequently
grief, the alteration in her mode of life, and her lack of activity soon
combined to develop in her a malady to which she had always been more or
less subject.

Scarcely more than a year after Mamma's death dropsy showed itself, and
she took to her bed. I can imagine how sad it must have been for her
to go on living--still more, to die--alone in that great empty house
at Petrovskoe, with no relations or any one near her. Every one there
esteemed and loved her, but she had formed no intimate friendships in
the place, and was rather proud of the fact. That was because, enjoying
her master's confidence as she did, and having so much property
under her care, she considered that intimacies would lead to culpable
indulgence and condescension. Consequently (and perhaps, also, because
she had nothing really in common with the other servants) she kept them
all at a distance, and used to say that she "recognised neither kinsman
nor godfather in the house, and would permit of no exceptions with
regard to her master's property."

Instead, she sought and found consolation in fervent prayers to God. Yet
sometimes, in those moments of weakness to which all of us are
subject, and when man's best solace is the tears and compassion of his
fellow-creatures, she would take her old dog Moska on to her bed, and
talk to it, and weep softly over it as it answered her caresses by
licking her hands, with its yellow eyes fixed upon her. When Moska
began to whine she would say as she quieted it: "Enough, enough! I know
without thy telling me that my time is near." A month before her death
she took out of her chest of drawers some fine white calico, white
cambric, and pink ribbon, and, with the help of the maidservants,
fashioned the garments in which she wished to be buried. Next she put
everything on her shelves in order and handed the bailiff an inventory
which she had made out with scrupulous accuracy. All that she kept
back was a couple of silk gowns, an old shawl, and Grandpapa's military
uniform--things which had been presented to her absolutely, and which,
thanks to her care and orderliness, were in an excellent state of
preservation--particularly the handsome gold embroidery on the uniform.

Just before her death, again, she expressed a wish that one of the gowns
(a pink one) should be made into a robe de chambre for Woloda; that the
other one (a many-coloured gown) should be made into a similar garment
for myself; and that the shawl should go to Lubotshka. As for the
uniform, it was to devolve either to Woloda or to myself, according as
the one or the other of us should first become an officer. All the rest
of her property (save only forty roubles, which she set aside for her
commemorative rites and to defray the costs of her burial) was to pass
to her brother, a person with whom, since he lived a dissipated life
in a distant province, she had had no intercourse during her lifetime.
When, eventually, he arrived to claim the inheritance, and found that
its sum-total only amounted to twenty-five roubles in notes, he refused
to believe it, and declared that it was impossible that his sister-a
woman who for sixty years had had sole charge in a wealthy house, as
well as all her life had been penurious and averse to giving away even
the smallest thing should have left no more: yet it was a fact.

Though Natalia's last illness lasted for two months, she bore her
sufferings with truly Christian fortitude. Never did she fret or
complain, but, as usual, appealed continually to God. An hour before
the end came she made her final confession, received the Sacrament with
quiet joy, and was accorded extreme unction. Then she begged forgiveness
of every one in the house for any wrong she might have done them, and
requested the priest to send us word of the number of times she had
blessed us for our love of her, as well as of how in her last moments
she had implored our forgiveness if, in her ignorance, she had ever at
any time given us offence. "Yet a thief have I never been. Never have I
used so much as a piece of thread that was not my own." Such was the one
quality which she valued in herself.

Dressed in the cap and gown prepared so long beforehand, and with her
head resting, upon the cushion made for the purpose, she conversed with
the priest up to the very last moment, until, suddenly, recollecting
that she had left him nothing for the poor, she took out ten roubles,
and asked him to distribute them in the parish. Lastly she made the sign
of the cross, lay down, and expired--pronouncing with a smile of joy the
name of the Almighty.

She quitted life without a pang, and, so far from fearing death,
welcomed it as a blessing. How often do we hear that said, and how
seldom is it a reality! Natalia Savishna had no reason to fear death
for the simple reason that she died in a sure and certain faith and in
strict obedience to the commands of the Gospel. Her whole life had
been one of pure, disinterested love, of utter self-negation. Had her
convictions been of a more enlightened order, her life directed to a
higher aim, would that pure soul have been the more worthy of love and
reverence? She accomplished the highest and best achievement in this
world: she died without fear and without repining.

They buried her where she had wished to lie--near the little mausoleum
which still covers Mamma's tomb. The little mound beneath which she
sleeps is overgrown with nettles and burdock, and surrounded by a black
railing, but I never forget, when leaving the mausoleum, to approach
that railing, and to salute the plot of earth within by bowing
reverently to the ground.

Sometimes, too, I stand thoughtfully between the railing and the
mausoleum, and sad memories pass through my mind. Once the idea came to
me as I stood there: "Did Providence unite me to those two beings solely
in order to make me regret them my life long?"

========================================
========================================

RESURRECTION

By Leo Tolstoy


Translated by Mrs. Louise Maude



[Transcriber's Note: The following paragraph is on a page of its own, in
cursive writing, apparently in Tolstoy's own hand.]

     This English version
     of "Resurrection" is pub-
     lished by Dodd, Mead and
     Company by my authority.
                 Leo Tolstoy




TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

Opinions about Tolstoy and his work differ, but on one point there
surely might be unanimity. A writer of world-wide reputation should be
at least allowed to know how to spell his own name. Why should any one
insist on spelling it "Tolstoi" (with one, two or three dots over the
"i"), when he himself writes it "Tolstoy"? The only reason I have ever
heard suggested is, that in England and America such outlandish views
are attributed to him, that an outlandish spelling is desirable to match
those views.

This novel, written in the rough by Tolstoy some years ago and founded
upon an actual occurrence, was completely rewritten by him during the
last year and a half, and all the proceeds have been devoted by him
to aiding the Doukhobors, a sect who were persecuted in the Caucasus
(especially from 1895 to 1898) for refusing to learn war. About seven
thousand three hundred of them are settled in Canada, and about a
hundred of the leaders are exiled to the remote parts of Siberia.

Anything I may receive for my work in translating the book will go to
the same cause. "Prevention is better than cure," and I would rather
help people to abstain from killing and wounding each other than devote
the money to patch up their wounds after the battle.

LOUISE MAUDE




RESURRECTION



CHAPTER I.

MASLOVA IN PRISON.

Though hundreds of thousands had done their very best to disfigure the
small piece of land on which they were crowded together, by paving the
ground with stones, scraping away every vestige of vegetation, cutting
down the trees, turning away birds and beasts, and filling the air with
the smoke of naphtha and coal, still spring was spring, even in the
town.

The sun shone warm, the air was balmy; everywhere, where it did not get
scraped away, the grass revived and sprang up between the paving-stones
as well as on the narrow strips of lawn on the boulevards. The birches,
the poplars, and the wild cherry unfolded their gummy and fragrant
leaves, the limes were expanding their opening buds; crows, sparrows,
and pigeons, filled with the joy of spring, were getting their nests
ready; the flies were buzzing along the walls, warmed by the sunshine.
All were glad, the plants, the birds, the insects, and the children. But
men, grown-up men and women, did not leave off cheating and tormenting
themselves and each other. It was not this spring morning men thought
sacred and worthy of consideration not the beauty of God's world, given
for a joy to all creatures, this beauty which inclines the heart to
peace, to harmony, and to love, but only their own devices for enslaving
one another.

Thus, in the prison office of the Government town, it was not the fact
that men and animals had received the grace and gladness of spring that
was considered sacred and important, but that a notice, numbered and
with a superscription, had come the day before, ordering that on this
28th day of April, at 9 a.m., three prisoners at present detained in the
prison, a man and two women (one of these women, as the chief criminal,
to be conducted separately), had to appear at Court. So now, on the 28th
of April, at 8 o'clock, a jailer and soon after him a woman warder with
curly grey hair, dressed in a jacket with sleeves trimmed with gold,
with a blue-edged belt round her waist, and having a look of suffering
on her face, came into the corridor.

"You want Maslova?" she asked, coming up to the cell with the jailer who
was on duty.

The jailer, rattling the iron padlock, opened the door of the cell, from
which there came a whiff of air fouler even than that in the corridor,
and called out, "Maslova! to the Court," and closed the door again.

Even into the prison yard the breeze had brought the fresh vivifying air
from the fields. But in the corridor the air was laden with the germs of
typhoid, the smell of sewage, putrefaction, and tar; every newcomer felt
sad and dejected in it. The woman warder felt this, though she was
used to bad air. She had just come in from outside, and entering the
corridor, she at once became sleepy.

From inside the cell came the sound of bustle and women's voices, and
the patter of bare feet on the floor.

"Now, then, hurry up, Maslova, I say!" called out the jailer, and in a
minute or two a small young woman with a very full bust came briskly out
of the door and went up to the jailer. She had on a grey cloak over a
white jacket and petticoat. On her feet she wore linen stockings and
prison shoes, and round her head was tied a white kerchief, from under
which a few locks of black hair were brushed over the forehead with
evident intent. The face of the woman was of that whiteness peculiar to
people who have lived long in confinement, and which puts one in mind of
shoots of potatoes that spring up in a cellar. Her small broad hands and
full neck, which showed from under the broad collar of her cloak, were
of the same hue. Her black, sparkling eyes, one with a slight squint,
appeared in striking contrast to the dull pallor of her face.

She carried herself very straight, expanding her full bosom.

With her head slightly thrown back, she stood in the corridor, looking
straight into the eyes of the jailer, ready to comply with any order.

The jailer was about to lock the door when a wrinkled and severe-looking
old woman put out her grey head and began speaking to Maslova. But the
jailer closed the door, pushing the old woman's head with it. A woman's
laughter was heard from the cell, and Maslova smiled, turning to the
little grated opening in the cell door. The old woman pressed her face
to the grating from the other side, and said, in a hoarse voice:

"Now mind, and when they begin questioning you, just repeat over the
same thing, and stick to it; tell nothing that is not wanted."

"Well, it could not be worse than it is now, anyhow; I only wish it was
settled one way or another."

"Of course, it will be settled one way or another," said the jailer,
with a superior's self-assured witticism. "Now, then, get along! Take
your places!"

The old woman's eyes vanished from the grating, and Maslova stepped out
into the middle of the corridor. The warder in front, they descended
the stone stairs, past the still fouler, noisy cells of the men's
ward, where they were followed by eyes looking out of every one of the
gratings in the doors, and entered the office, where two soldiers were
waiting to escort her. A clerk who was sitting there gave one of the
soldiers a paper reeking of tobacco, and pointing to the prisoner,
remarked, "Take her."

The soldier, a peasant from Nijni Novgorod, with a red, pock-marked
face, put the paper into the sleeve of his coat, winked to his
companion, a broad-shouldered Tchouvash, and then the prisoner and the
soldiers went to the front entrance, out of the prison yard, and through
the town up the middle of the roughly-paved street.

Isvostchiks [cabmen], tradespeople, cooks, workmen, and government
clerks, stopped and looked curiously at the prisoner; some shook their
heads and thought, "This is what evil conduct, conduct unlike ours,
leads to." The children stopped and gazed at the robber with frightened
looks; but the thought that the soldiers were preventing her from doing
more harm quieted their fears. A peasant, who had sold his charcoal, and
had had some tea in the town, came up, and, after crossing himself, gave
her a copeck. The prisoner blushed and muttered something; she noticed
that she was attracting everybody's attention, and that pleased her. The
comparatively fresh air also gladdened her, but it was painful to step
on the rough stones with the ill-made prison shoes on her feet, which
had become unused to walking. Passing by a corn-dealer's shop, in front
of which a few pigeons were strutting about, unmolested by any one, the
prisoner almost touched a grey-blue bird with her foot; it fluttered up
and flew close to her ear, fanning her with its wings. She smiled, then
sighed deeply as she remembered her present position.



CHAPTER II.

MASLOVA'S EARLY LIFE.

The story of the prisoner Maslova's life was a very common one.

Maslova's mother was the unmarried daughter of a village woman,
employed on a dairy farm, which belonged to two maiden ladies who were
landowners. This unmarried woman had a baby every year, and, as often
happens among the village people, each one of these undesired babies,
after it had been carefully baptised, was neglected by its mother, whom
it hindered at her work, and left to starve. Five children had died in
this way. They had all been baptised and then not sufficiently fed, and
just left to die. The sixth baby, whose father was a gipsy tramp, would
have shared the same fate, had it not so happened that one of the maiden
ladies came into the farmyard to scold the dairymaids for sending up
cream that smelt of the cow. The young woman was lying in the cowshed
with a fine, healthy, new-born baby. The old maiden lady scolded the
maids again for allowing the woman (who had just been confined) to lie
in the cowshed, and was about to go away, but seeing the baby her heart
was touched, and she offered to stand godmother to the little girl, and
pity for her little god-daughter induced her to give milk and a little
money to the mother, so that she should feed the baby; and the little
girl lived. The old ladies spoke of her as "the saved one." When the
child was three years old, her mother fell ill and died, and the maiden
ladies took the child from her old grandmother, to whom she was nothing
but a burden.

The little black-eyed maiden grew to be extremely pretty, and so full of
spirits that the ladies found her very entertaining.

The younger of the ladies, Sophia Ivanovna, who had stood godmother to
the girl, had the kinder heart of the two sisters; Maria Ivanovna, the
elder, was rather hard. Sophia Ivanovna dressed the little girl in nice
clothes, and taught her to read and write, meaning to educate her like a
lady. Maria Ivanovna thought the child should be brought up to work, and
trained her to be a good servant. She was exacting; she punished, and,
when in a bad temper, even struck the little girl. Growing up under
these two different influences, the girl turned out half servant, half
young lady. They called her Katusha, which sounds less refined than
Katinka, but is not quite so common as Katka. She used to sew, tidy up
the rooms, polish the metal cases of the icons and do other light work,
and sometimes she sat and read to the ladies.

Though she had more than one offer, she would not marry. She felt that
life as the wife of any of the working men who were courting her would
be too hard; spoilt as she was by a life of case.

She lived in this manner till she was sixteen, when the nephew of the
old ladies, a rich young prince, and a university student, came to
stay with his aunts, and Katusha, not daring to acknowledge it even to
herself, fell in love with him.

Then two years later this same nephew stayed four days with his aunts
before proceeding to join his regiment, and the night before he left he
betrayed Katusha, and, after giving her a 100-rouble note, went away.
Five months later she knew for certain that she was to be a mother.
After that everything seemed repugnant to her, her only thought being
how to escape from the shame that awaited her. She began not only to
serve the ladies in a half-hearted and negligent way, but once, without
knowing how it happened, was very rude to them, and gave them notice,
a thing she repented of later, and the ladies let her go, noticing
something wrong and very dissatisfied with her. Then she got a
housemaid's place in a police-officer's house, but stayed there only
three months, for the police officer, a man of fifty, began to torment
her, and once, when he was in a specially enterprising mood, she fired
up, called him "a fool and old devil," and gave him such a knock in the
chest that he fell. She was turned out for her rudeness. It was useless
to look for another situation, for the time of her confinement was
drawing near, so she went to the house of a village midwife, who also
sold wine. The confinement was easy; but the midwife, who had a case of
fever in the village, infected Katusha, and her baby boy had to be sent
to the foundlings' hospital, where, according to the words of the old
woman who took him there, he at once died. When Katusha went to the
midwife she had 127 roubles in all, 27 which she had earned and 100
given her by her betrayer. When she left she had but six roubles; she
did not know how to keep money, but spent it on herself, and gave to
all who asked. The midwife took 40 roubles for two months' board and
attendance, 25 went to get the baby into the foundlings' hospital, and
40 the midwife borrowed to buy a cow with. Twenty roubles went just for
clothes and dainties. Having nothing left to live on, Katusha had to
look out for a place again, and found one in the house of a forester.
The forester was a married man, but he, too, began to annoy her from the
first day. He disgusted her, and she tried to avoid him. But he, more
experienced and cunning, besides being her master, who could send her
wherever he liked, managed to accomplish his object. His wife found it
out, and, catching Katusha and her husband in a room all by themselves,
began beating her. Katusha defended herself, and they had a fight, and
Katusha got turned out of the house without being paid her wages.

Then Katusha went to live with her aunt in town. The aunt's husband,
a bookbinder, had once been comfortably off, but had lost all his
customers, and had taken to drink, and spent all he could lay hands
on at the public-house. The aunt kept a little laundry, and managed to
support herself, her children, and her wretched husband. She offered
Katusha the place of an assistant laundress; but seeing what a life of
misery and hardship her aunt's assistants led, Katusha hesitated, and
applied to a registry office for a place. One was found for her with a
lady who lived with her two sons, pupils at a public day school. A
week after Katusha had entered the house the elder, a big fellow with
moustaches, threw up his studies and made love to her, continually
following her about. His mother laid all the blame on Katusha, and gave
her notice.

It so happened that, after many fruitless attempts to find a situation,
Katusha again went to the registry office, and there met a woman with
bracelets on her bare, plump arms and rings on most of her fingers.
Hearing that Katusha was badly in want of a place, the woman gave her
her address, and invited her to come to her house. Katusha went. The
woman received her very kindly, set cake and sweet wine before her,
then wrote a note and gave it to a servant to take to somebody. In the
evening a tall man, with long, grey hair and a white beard, entered the
room, and sat down at once near Katusha, smiling and gazing at her with
glistening eyes. He began joking with her. The hostess called him away
into the next room, and Katusha heard her say, "A fresh one from the
country," Then the hostess called Katusha aside and told her that the
man was an author, and that he had a great deal of money, and that if
he liked her he would not grudge her anything. He did like her, and gave
her 25 roubles, promising to see her often. The 25 roubles soon went;
some she paid to her aunt for board and lodging; the rest was spent on
a hat, ribbons, and such like. A few days later the author sent for her,
and she went. He gave her another 25 roubles, and offered her a separate
lodging.

Next door to the lodging rented for her by the author there lived a
jolly young shopman, with whom Katusha soon fell in love. She told
the author, and moved to a little lodging of her own. The shopman, who
promised to marry her, went to Nijni on business without mentioning it
to her, having evidently thrown her up, and Katusha remained alone. She
meant to continue living in the lodging by herself, but was informed
by the police that in this case she would have to get a license. She
returned to her aunt. Seeing her fine dress, her hat, and mantle, her
aunt no longer offered her laundry work. As she understood things, her
niece had risen above that sort of thing. The question as to whether she
was to become a laundress or not did not occur to Katusha, either. She
looked with pity at the thin, hard-worked laundresses, some already in
consumption, who stood washing or ironing with their thin arms in the
fearfully hot front room, which was always full of soapy steam and
draughts from the windows, and thought with horror that she might have
shared the same fate.

Katusha had begun to smoke some time before, and since the young shopman
had thrown her up she was getting more and more into the habit of
drinking. It was not so much the flavour of wine that tempted her as the
fact that it gave her a chance of forgetting the misery she suffered,
making her feel more unrestrained and more confident of her own worth,
which she was not when quite sober; without wine she felt sad and
ashamed. Just at this time a woman came along who offered to place her
in one of the largest establishments in the city, explaining all the
advantages and benefits of the situation. Katusha had the choice before
her of either going into service or accepting this offer--and she chose
the latter. Besides, it seemed to her as though, in this way, she could
revenge herself on her betrayer and the shopman and all those who had
injured her. One of the things that tempted her, and was the cause
of her decision, was the woman telling her she might order her own
dresses--velvet, silk, satin, low-necked ball dresses, anything she
liked. A mental picture of herself in a bright yellow silk trimmed with
black velvet with low neck and short sleeves conquered her, and she gave
up her passport. On the same evening the procuress took an isvostchik
and drove her to the notorious house kept by Carolina Albertovna
Kitaeva.

From that day a life of chronic sin against human and divine laws
commenced for Katusha Maslova, a life which is led by hundreds of
thousands of women, and which is not merely tolerated but sanctioned by
the Government, anxious for the welfare of its subjects; a life
which for nine women out of ten ends in painful disease, premature
decrepitude, and death.

Katusha Maslova lived this life for seven years. During these years she
twice changed houses, and had once been to the hospital. In the seventh
year of this life, when she was twenty-six years old, happened that for
which she was put in prison and for which she was now being taken to
be tried, after more than three months of confinement with thieves and
murderers in the stifling air of a prison.



CHAPTER III.

NEKHLUDOFF.

When Maslova, wearied out by the long walk, reached the building,
accompanied by two soldiers, Prince Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff, who
had seduced her, was still lying on his high bedstead, with a feather
bed on the top of the spring mattress, in a fine, clean, well-ironed
linen night shirt, smoking a cigarette, and considering what he had to
do to-day, and what had happened yesterday.

Recalling the evening he had spent with the Korchagins, a wealthy and
aristocratic family, whose daughter every one expected he would marry,
he sighed, and, throwing away the end of his cigarette, was going
to take another out of the silver case; but, changing his mind, he
resolutely raised his solid frame, and, putting down his smooth, white
legs, stepped into his slippers, threw his silk dressing gown over his
broad shoulders, and passed into his dressing-room, walking heavily
and quickly. There he carefully cleaned his teeth, many of which were
filled, with tooth powder, and rinsed his mouth with scented elixir.
After that he washed his hands with perfumed soap, cleaned his long
nails with particular care, then, from a tap fixed to his marble
washstand, he let a spray of cold water run over his face and stout
neck. Having finished this part of the business, he went into a third
room, where a shower bath stood ready for him. Having refreshed his
full, white, muscular body, and dried it with a rough bath sheet, he put
on his fine undergarments and his boots, and sat down before the glass
to brush his black beard and his curly hair, that had begun to get thin
above the forehead. Everything he used, everything belonging to his
toilet, his linen, his clothes, boots, necktie, pin, studs, was of the
best quality, very quiet, simple, durable and costly.

Nekhludoff dressed leisurely, and went into the dining-room. A table,
which looked very imposing with its four legs carved in the shape of
lions' paws, and a huge side-board to match, stood in the oblong room,
the floor of which had been polished by three men the day before. On
the table, which was covered with a fine, starched cloth, stood a silver
coffeepot full of aromatic coffee, a sugar basin, a jug of fresh cream,
and a bread basket filled with fresh rolls, rusks, and biscuits; and
beside the plate lay the last number of the _Revue des Deux Mondes_, a
newspaper, and several letters.

Nekhludoff was just going to open his letters, when a stout, middle-aged
woman in mourning, a lace cap covering the widening parting of her hair,
glided into the room. This was Agraphena Petrovna, formerly lady's maid
to Nekhludoff's mother. Her mistress had died quite recently in this
very house, and she remained with the son as his housekeeper. Agraphena
Petrovna had spent nearly ten years, at different times, abroad with
Nekhludoff's mother, and had the appearance and manners of a lady. She
had lived with the Nekhludoffs from the time she was a child, and had
known Dmitri Ivanovitch at the time when he was still little Mitinka.

"Good-morning, Dmitri Ivanovitch."

"Good-morning, Agraphena Petrovna. What is it you want?" Nekhludoff
asked.

"A letter from the princess; either from the mother or the daughter.
The maid brought it some time ago, and is waiting in my room," answered
Agraphena Petrovna, handing him the letter with a significant smile.

"All right! Directly!" said Nekhludoff, taking the letter and frowning
as he noticed Agraphena Petrovna's smile.

That smile meant that the letter was from the younger Princess
Korchagin, whom Agraphena Petrovna expected him to marry. This
supposition of hers annoyed Nekhludoff.

"Then I'll tell her to wait?" and Agraphena Petrovna took a crumb brush
which was not in its place, put it away, and sailed out of the room.

Nekhludoff opened the perfumed note, and began reading it.

The note was written on a sheet of thick grey paper, with rough edges;
the writing looked English. It said:

Having assumed the task of acting as your memory, I take the liberty of
reminding you that on this the 28th day of April you have to appear
at the Law Courts, as juryman, and, in consequence, can on no account
accompany us and Kolosoff to the picture gallery, as, with your habitual
flightiness, you promised yesterday; _a moins que vous ne soyez dispose
a payer la cour d'assise les 300 roubles d'amende que vous vous refusez
pour votre cheval,_ for not appearing in time. I remembered it last
night after you were gone, so do not forget.

                      Princess M. Korchagin.

On the other side was a postscript.

_Maman vous fait dire que votre convert vous attendra jusqu'a la nuit.
Venez absolument a quelle heure que cela soit._

                                    M. K.

Nekhludoff made a grimace. This note was a continuation of that skilful
manoeuvring which the Princess Korchagin had already practised for two
months in order to bind him closer and closer with invisible threads.
And yet, beside the usual hesitation of men past their youth to marry
unless they are very much in love, Nekhludoff had very good reasons why,
even if he did make up his mind to it, he could not propose at once. It
was not that ten years previously he had betrayed and forsaken Maslova;
he had quite forgotten that, and he would not have considered it a
reason for not marrying. No! The reason was that he had a liaison with a
married woman, and, though he considered it broken off, she did not.

Nekhludoff was rather shy with women, and his very shyness awakened in
this married woman, the unprincipled wife of the marechal de noblesse
of a district where Nekhludoff was present at an election, the desire
of vanquishing him. This woman drew him into an intimacy which entangled
him more and more, while it daily became more distasteful to him. Having
succumbed to the temptation, Nekhludoff felt guilty, and had not the
courage to break the tie without her consent. And this was the reason he
did not feel at liberty to propose to Korchagin even if he had wished to
do so. Among the letters on the table was one from this woman's husband.
Seeing his writing and the postmark, Nekhludoff flushed, and felt his
energies awakening, as they always did when he was facing any kind of
danger.

But his excitement passed at once. The marechal do noblesse, of the
district in which his largest estate lay, wrote only to let Nekhludoff
know that there was to be a special meeting towards the end of May, and
that Nekhludoff was to be sure and come to "_donner un coup d'epaule_,"
at the important debates concerning the schools and the roads, as a
strong opposition by the reactionary party was expected.

The marechal was a liberal, and was quite engrossed in this fight, not
even noticing the misfortune that had befallen him.

Nekhludoff remembered the dreadful moments he had lived through; once
when he thought that the husband had found him out and was going to
challenge him, and he was making up his mind to fire into the air; also
the terrible scene he had with her when she ran out into the park, and
in her excitement tried to drown herself in the pond.

"Well, I cannot go now, and can do nothing until I get a reply from
her," thought Nekhludoff. A week ago he had written her a decisive
letter, in which he acknowledged his guilt, and his readiness to atone
for it; but at the same time he pronounced their relations to be at an
end, for her own good, as he expressed it. To this letter he had as yet
received no answer. This might prove a good sign, for if she did not
agree to break off their relations, she would have written at once, or
even come herself, as she had done before. Nekhludoff had heard that
there was some officer who was paying her marked attention, and this
tormented him by awakening jealousy, and at the same time encouraged him
with the hope of escape from the deception that was oppressing him.

The other letter was from his steward. The steward wrote to tell
him that a visit to his estates was necessary in order to enter into
possession, and also to decide about the further management of his
lands; whether it was to continue in the same way as when his mother was
alive, or whether, as he had represented to the late lamented princess,
and now advised the young prince, they had not better increase their
stock and farm all the land now rented by the peasants themselves. The
steward wrote that this would be a far more profitable way of managing
the property; at the same time, he apologised for not having forwarded
the 3,000 roubles income due on the 1st. This money would be sent on by
the next mail. The reason for the delay was that he could not get the
money out of the peasants, who had grown so untrustworthy that he had
to appeal to the authorities. This letter was partly disagreeable, and
partly pleasant. It was pleasant to feel that he had power over so
large a property, and yet disagreeable, because Nekhludoff had been an
enthusiastic admirer of Henry George and Herbert Spencer. Being himself
heir to a large property, he was especially struck by the position
taken up by Spencer in Social Statics, that justice forbids private
landholding, and with the straightforward resoluteness of his age, had
not merely spoken to prove that land could not be looked upon as private
property, and written essays on that subject at the university, but had
acted up to his convictions, and, considering it wrong to hold landed
property, had given the small piece of land he had inherited from his
father to the peasants. Inheriting his mother's large estates, and thus
becoming a landed proprietor, he had to choose one of two things: either
to give up his property, as he had given up his father's land ten years
before, or silently to confess that all his former ideas were mistaken
and false.

He could not choose the former because he had no means but the landed
estates (he did not care to serve); moreover, he had formed luxurious
habits which he could not easily give up. Besides, he had no longer the
same inducements; his strong convictions, the resoluteness of youth, and
the ambitious desire to do something unusual were gone. As to the second
course, that of denying those clear and unanswerable proofs of the
injustice of landholding, which he had drawn from Spencer's Social
Statics, and the brilliant corroboration of which he had at a later
period found in the works of Henry George, such a course was impossible
to him.



CHAPTER IV.

MISSY.

When Nekhludoff had finished his coffee, he went to his study to look
at the summons, and find out what time he was to appear at the court,
before writing his answer to the princess. Passing through his studio,
where a few studies hung on the walls and, facing the easel, stood an
unfinished picture, a feeling of inability to advance in art, a sense of
his incapacity, came over him. He had often had this feeling, of late,
and explained it by his too finely-developed aesthetic taste; still, the
feeling was a very unpleasant one. Seven years before this he had given
up military service, feeling sure that he had a talent for art, and had
looked down with some disdain at all other activity from the height of
his artistic standpoint. And now it turned out that he had no right
to do so, and therefore everything that reminded him of all this was
unpleasant. He looked at the luxurious fittings of the studio with a
heavy heart, and it was in no cheerful mood that he entered his study,
a large, lofty room fitted up with a view to comfort, convenience,
and elegant appearance. He found the summons at once in a pigeon hole,
labelled "immediate," of his large writing table. He had to appear at
the court at 11 o'clock.

Nekhludoff sat down to write a note in reply to the princess, thanking
her for the invitation, and promising to try and come to dinner. Having
written one note, he tore it up, as it seemed too intimate. He wrote
another, but it was too cold; he feared it might give offence, so he
tore it up, too. He pressed the button of an electric bell, and his
servant, an elderly, morose-looking man, with whiskers and shaved chin
and lip, wearing a grey cotton apron, entered at the door.

"Send to fetch an isvostchik, please."

"Yes, sir."

"And tell the person who is waiting that I send thanks for the
invitation, and shall try to come."

"Yes, sir."

"It is not very polite, but I can't write; no matter, I shall see her
today," thought Nekhludoff, and went to get his overcoat.

When he came out of the house, an isvostchik he knew, with india-rubber
tires to his trap, was at the door waiting for him. "You had hardly gone
away from Prince Korchagin's yesterday," he said, turning half round,
"when I drove up, and the Swiss at the door says, 'just gone.'" The
isvostchik knew that Nekhludoff visited at the Korchagins, and called
there on the chance of being engaged by him.

"Even the isvostchiks know of my relations with the Korchagins," thought
Nekhludoff, and again the question whether he should not marry Princess
Korchagin presented itself to him, and he could not decide it either
way, any more than most of the questions that arose in his mind at this
time.

It was in favour of marriage in general, that besides the comforts
of hearth and home, it made a moral life possible, and chiefly that a
family would, so Nekhludoff thought, give an aim to his now empty life.

Against marriage in general was the fear, common to bachelors past
their first youth, of losing freedom, and an unconscious awe before this
mysterious creature, a woman.

In this particular case, in favour of marrying Missy (her name was Mary,
but, as is usual among a certain set, a nickname had been given her)
was that she came of good family, and differed in everything, manner
of speaking, walking, laughing, from the common people, not by anything
exceptional, but by her "good breeding"--he could find no other term
for this quality, though he prized it very highly---and, besides, she
thought more of him than of anybody else, therefore evidently understood
him. This understanding of him, i.e., the recognition of his superior
merits, was to Nekhludoff a proof of her good sense and correct
judgment. Against marrying Missy in particular, was, that in all
likelihood, a girl with even higher qualities could be found, that she
was already 27, and that he was hardly her first love. This last idea
was painful to him. His pride would not reconcile itself with the
thought that she had loved some one else, even in the past. Of course,
she could not have known that she should meet him, but the thought that
she was capable of loving another offended him. So that he had as many
reasons for marrying as against it; at any rate, they weighed equally
with Nekhludoff, who laughed at himself, and called himself the ass of
the fable, remaining like that animal undecided which haycock to turn
to.

"At any rate, before I get an answer from Mary Vasilievna (the
marechal's wife), and finish completely with her, I can do nothing," he
said to himself. And the conviction that he might, and was even obliged,
to delay his decision, was comforting. "Well, I shall consider all that
later on," he said to himself, as the trap drove silently along the
asphalt pavement up to the doors of the Court.

"Now I must fulfil my public duties conscientiously, as I am in the
habit of always doing, and as I consider it right to do. Besides, they
are often interesting." And he entered the hall of the Law Courts, past
the doorkeeper.



CHAPTER V.

THE JURYMEN.

The corridors of the Court were already full of activity. The attendants
hurried, out of breath, dragging their feet along the ground without
lifting them, backwards and forwards, with all sorts of messages and
papers. Ushers, advocates, and law officers passed hither and thither.
Plaintiffs, and those of the accused who were not guarded, wandered
sadly along the walls or sat waiting.

"Where is the Law Court?" Nekhludoff asked of an attendant.

"Which? There is the Civil Court and the Criminal Court."

"I am on the jury."

"The Criminal Court you should have said. Here to the right, then to the
left--the second door."

Nekhludoff followed the direction.

Meanwhile some of the Criminal Court jurymen who were late had hurriedly
passed into a separate room. At the door mentioned two men stood
waiting.

One, a tall, fat merchant, a kind-hearted fellow, had evidently partaken
of some refreshments and a glass of something, and was in most pleasant
spirits. The other was a shopman of Jewish extraction. They were talking
about the price of wool when Nekhludoff came up and asked them if this
was the jurymen's room.

"Yes, my dear sir, this is it. One of us? On the jury, are you?" asked
the merchant, with a merry wink.

"Ah, well, we shall have a go at the work together," he continued, after
Nekhludoff had answered in the affirmative. "My name is Baklasheff,
merchant of the Second Guild," he said, putting out his broad, soft,
flexible hand.

"With whom have I the honour?"

Nekhludoff gave his name and passed into the jurymen's room.

Inside the room were about ten persons of all sorts. They had come but
a short while ago, and some were sitting, others walking up and down,
looking at each other, and making each other's acquaintance. There was a
retired colonel in uniform; some were in frock coats, others in morning
coats, and only one wore a peasant's dress.

Their faces all had a certain look of satisfaction at the prospect of
fulfilling a public duty, although many of them had had to leave their
businesses, and most were complaining of it.

The jurymen talked among themselves about the weather, the early spring,
and the business before them, some having been introduced, others just
guessing who was who. Those who were not acquainted with Nekhludoff made
haste to get introduced, evidently looking upon this as an honour, and
he taking it as his due, as he always did when among strangers. Had he
been asked why he considered himself above the majority of people, he
could not have given an answer; the life he had been living of late was
not particularly meritorious. The fact of his speaking English, French,
and German with a good accent, and of his wearing the best linen,
clothes, ties, and studs, bought from the most expensive dealers in
these goods, he quite knew would not serve as a reason for claiming
superiority. At the same time he did claim superiority, and accepted the
respect paid him as his due, and was hurt if he did not get it. In the
jurymen's room his feelings were hurt by disrespectful treatment. Among
the jury there happened to be a man whom he knew, a former teacher of
his sister's children, Peter Gerasimovitch. Nekhludoff never knew his
surname, and even bragged a bit about this. This man was now a master
at a public school. Nekhludoff could not stand his familiarity, his
self-satisfied laughter, his vulgarity, in short.

"Ah ha! You're also trapped." These were the words, accompanied with
boisterous laughter, with which Peter Gerasimovitch greeted Nekhludoff.
"Have you not managed to get out of it?"

"I never meant to get out of it," replied Nekhludoff, gloomily, and in a
tone of severity.

"Well, I call this being public spirited. But just wait until you get
hungry or sleepy; you'll sing to another tune then."

"This son of a priest will be saying 'thou' [in Russian, as in many
other languages, 'thou' is used generally among people very familiar
with each other, or by superiors to inferiors] to me next," thought
Nekhludoff, and walked away, with such a look of sadness on his face,
as might have been natural if he had just heard of the death of all
his relations. He came up to a group that had formed itself round a
clean-shaven, tall, dignified man, who was recounting something with
great animation. This man was talking about the trial going on in the
Civil Court as of a case well known to himself, mentioning the judges
and a celebrated advocate by name. He was saying that it seemed
wonderful how the celebrated advocate had managed to give such a clever
turn to the affair that an old lady, though she had the right on her
side, would have to pay a large sum to her opponent. "The advocate is a
genius," he said.

The listeners heard it all with respectful attention, and several of
them tried to put in a word, but the man interrupted them, as if he
alone knew all about it.

Though Nekhludoff had arrived late, he had to wait a long time. One
of the members of the Court had not yet come, and everybody was kept
waiting.



CHAPTER VI.

THE JUDGES.

The president, who had to take the chair, had arrived early. The
president was a tall, stout man, with long grey whiskers. Though
married, he led a very loose life, and his wife did the same, so they
did not stand in each other's way. This morning he had received a note
from a Swiss girl, who had formerly been a governess in his house, and
who was now on her way from South Russia to St. Petersburg. She wrote
that she would wait for him between five and six p.m. in the Hotel
Italia. This made him wish to begin and get through the sitting as soon
as possible, so as to have time to call before six p.m. on the little
red-haired Clara Vasilievna, with whom he had begun a romance in the
country last summer. He went into a private room, latched the door, took
a pair of dumb-bells out of a cupboard, moved his arms 20 times upwards,
downwards, forwards, and sideways, then holding the dumb-bells above his
head, lightly bent his knees three times.

"Nothing keeps one going like a cold bath and exercise," he said,
feeling the biceps of his right arm with his left hand, on the third
finger of which he wore a gold ring. He had still to do the moulinee
movement (for he always went through those two exercises before a long
sitting), when there was a pull at the door. The president quickly put
away the dumb-bells and opened the door, saying, "I beg your pardon."

One of the members, a high-shouldered, discontented-looking man, with
gold spectacles, came into the room. "Matthew Nikitich has again not
come," he said, in a dissatisfied tone.

"Not yet?" said the president, putting on his uniform. "He is always
late."

"It is extraordinary. He ought to be ashamed of himself," said the
member, angrily, and taking out a cigarette.

This member, a very precise man, had had an unpleasant encounter with
his wife in the morning, because she had spent her allowance before the
end of the month, and had asked him to give her some money in advance,
but he would not give way to her, and they had a quarrel. The wife told
him that if he were going to behave so, he need not expect any dinner;
there would be no dinner for him at home. At this point he left, fearing
that she might carry out her threat, for anything might be expected from
her. "This comes of living a good, moral life," he thought, looking at
the beaming, healthy, cheerful, and kindly president, who, with elbows
far apart, was smoothing his thick grey whiskers with his fine white
hands over the embroidered collar of his uniform. "He is always
contented and merry while I am suffering."

The secretary came in and brought some document.

"Thanks, very much," said the president, lighting a cigarette. "Which
case shall we take first, then?"

"The poisoning case, I should say," answered the secretary, with
indifference.

"All right; the poisoning case let it be," said the president, thinking
that he could get this case over by four o'clock, and then go away. "And
Matthew Nikitich; has he come?"

"Not yet."

"And Breve?"

"He is here," replied the secretary.

"Then if you see him, please tell him that we begin with the poisoning
case." Breve was the public prosecutor, who was to read the indictment
in this case.

In the corridor the secretary met Breve, who, with up lifted shoulders,
a portfolio under one arm, the other swinging with the palm turned to
the front, was hurrying along the corridor, clattering with his heels.

"Michael Petrovitch wants to know if you are ready?" the secretary
asked.

"Of course; I am always ready," said the public prosecutor. "What are we
taking first?"

"The poisoning case."

"That's quite right," said the public prosecutor, but did not think it
at all right. He had spent the night in a hotel playing cards with a
friend who was giving a farewell party. Up to five in the morning they
played and drank, so he had no time to look at this poisoning case,
and meant to run it through now. The secretary, happening to know this,
advised the president to begin with the poisoning case. The secretary
was a Liberal, even a Radical, in opinion.

Breve was a Conservative; the secretary disliked him, and envied him his
position.

"Well, and how about the Skoptzy?" [a religious sect] asked the
secretary.

"I have already said that I cannot do it without witnesses, and so I
shall say to the Court."

"Dear me, what does it matter?"

"I cannot do it," said Breve; and, waving his arm, he ran into his
private room.

He was putting off the case of the Skoptzy on account of the absence
of a very unimportant witness, his real reason being that if they were
tried by an educated jury they might possibly be acquitted.

By an agreement with the president this case was to be tried in the
coming session at a provincial town, where there would be more peasants,
and, therefore, more chances of conviction.

The movement in the corridor increased. The people crowded most at
the doors of the Civil Court, in which the case that the dignified man
talked about was being heard.

An interval in the proceeding occurred, and the old woman came out of
the court, whose property that genius of an advocate had found means of
getting for his client, a person versed in law who had no right to it
whatever. The judges knew all about the case, and the advocate and his
client knew it better still, but the move they had invented was such
that it was impossible not to take the old woman's property and not to
hand it over to the person versed in law.

The old woman was stout, well dressed, and had enormous flowers on her
bonnet; she stopped as she came out of the door, and spreading out her
short fat arms and turning to her advocate, she kept repeating. "What
does it all mean? just fancy!"

The advocate was looking at the flowers in her bonnet, and evidently not
listening to her, but considering some question or other.

Next to the old woman, out of the door of the Civil Court, his broad,
starched shirt front glistening from under his low-cut waistcoat, with
a self-satisfied look on his face, came the celebrated advocate who had
managed to arrange matters so that the old woman lost all she had, and
the person versed in the law received more than 100,000 roubles. The
advocate passed close to the old woman, and, feeling all eyes directed
towards him, his whole bearing seemed to say: "No expressions of
deference are required."



CHAPTER VII.

THE OFFICIALS OF THE COURT.

At last Matthew Nikitich also arrived, and the usher, a thin man, with a
long neck and a kind of sideways walk, his nether lip protruding to one
side, which made him resemble a turkey, came into the jurymen's room.

This usher was an honest man, and had a university education, but could
not keep a place for any length of time, as he was subject to fits of
drunkenness. Three months before a certain countess, who patronised his
wife, had found him this place, and he was very pleased to have kept it
so long.

"Well, sirs, is everybody here?" he asked, putting his pince-nez on his
nose, and looking round.

"Everybody, I think," said the jolly merchant.

"All right; we'll soon see." And, taking a list from his pocket, he
began calling out the names, looking at the men, sometimes through and
sometimes over his pince-nez.

"Councillor of State, [grades such as this are common in Russia, and
mean very little] J. M. Nikiforoff!"

"I am he," said the dignified-looking man, well versed in the habits of
the law court.

"Ivan Semionovitch Ivanoff, retired colonel!"

"Here!" replied a thin man, in the uniform of a retired officer.

"Merchant of the Second Guild, Peter Baklasheff!"

"Here we are, ready!" said the good-humoured merchant, with a broad
smile.

"Lieutenant of the Guards, Prince Dmitri Nekhludoff!"

"I am he," answered Nekhludoff.

The usher bowed to him, looking over his pince-nez, politely and
pleasantly, as if wishing to distinguish him from the others.

"Captain Youri Demitrievitch-Dantchenko, merchant; Grigori Euphimitch
Kouleshoff," etc. All but two were present.

"Now please to come to the court, gentlemen," said the usher, pointing
to the door, with an amiable wave of his hand.

All moved towards the door, pausing to let each other pass. Then they
went through the corridor into the court.

The court was a large, long room. At one end there was a raised
platform, with three steps leading up to it, on which stood a table,
covered with a green cloth trimmed with a fringe of a darker shade. At
the table were placed three arm-chairs, with high-carved oak backs; on
the wall behind them hung a full-length, brightly-coloured portrait of
the Emperor in uniform and ribbon, with one foot in advance, and holding
a sword. In the right corner hung a case, with an image of Christ
crowned with thorns, and beneath it stood a lectern, and on the same
side the prosecuting attorney's desk. On the left, opposite the desk,
was the secretary's table, and in front of it, nearer the public, an
oak grating, with the prisoners' bench, as yet unoccupied, behind
it. Besides all this, there were on the right side of the platform
high-backed ashwood chairs for the jury, and on the floor below tables
for the advocates. All this was in the front part of the court, divided
from the back by a grating.

The back was all taken up by seats in tiers. Sitting on the front seats
were four women, either servant or factory girls, and two working men,
evidently overawed by the grandeur of the room, and not venturing to
speak above a whisper.

Soon after the jury had come in the usher entered, with his sideward
gait, and stepping to the front, called out in a loud voice, as if he
meant to frighten those present, "The Court is coming!" Every one got
up as the members stepped on to the platform. Among them the president,
with his muscles and fine whiskers. Next came the gloomy member of the
Court, who was now more gloomy than ever, having met his brother-in-law,
who informed him that he had just called in to see his sister (the
member's wife), and that she had told him that there would be no dinner
there.

"So that, evidently, we shall have to call in at a cook shop," the
brother-in-law added, laughing.

"It is not at all funny," said the gloomy member, and became gloomier
still.

Then at last came the third member of the Court, the same Matthew
Nikitich, who was always late. He was a bearded man, with large, round,
kindly eyes. He was suffering from a catarrh of the stomach, and,
according to his doctor's advice, he had begun trying a new treatment,
and this had kept him at home longer than usual. Now, as he was
ascending the platform, he had a pensive air. He was in the habit of
making guesses in answer to all sorts of self-put questions by different
curious means. Just now he had asked whether the new treatment would be
beneficial, and had decided that it would cure his catarrh if the number
of steps from the door to his chair would divide by three. He made 26
steps, but managed to get in a 27th just by his chair.

The figures of the president and the members in their uniforms, with
gold-embroidered collars, looked very imposing. They seemed to feel this
themselves, and, as if overpowered by their own grandeur, hurriedly sat
down on the high backed chairs behind the table with the green cloth,
on which were a triangular article with an eagle at the top, two glass
vases--something like those in which sweetmeats are kept in refreshment
rooms--an inkstand, pens, clean paper, and good, newly-cut pencils of
different kinds.

The public prosecutor came in with the judges. With his portfolio under
one arm, and swinging the other, he hurriedly walked to his seat near
the window, and was instantly absorbed in reading and looking through
the papers, not wasting a single moment, in hope of being ready when the
business commenced. He had been public prosecutor but a short time, and
had only prosecuted four times before this. He was very ambitious,
and had firmly made up his mind to get on, and therefore thought it
necessary to get a conviction whenever he prosecuted. He knew the chief
facts of the poisoning case, and had already formed a plan of action. He
only wanted to copy out a few points which he required.

The secretary sat on the opposite side of the platform, and, having
got ready all the papers he might want, was looking through an article,
prohibited by the censor, which he had procured and read the day before.
He was anxious to have a talk about this article with the bearded
member, who shared his views, but wanted to look through it once more
before doing so.



CHAPTER VIII.

SWEARING IN THE JURY.

The president, having looked through some papers and put a few questions
to the usher and the secretary, gave the order for the prisoners to be
brought in.

The door behind the grating was instantly opened, and two gendarmes,
with caps on their heads, and holding naked swords in their hands,
came in, followed by the prisoners, a red-haired, freckled man, and two
women. The man wore a prison cloak, which was too long and too wide for
him. He stuck out his thumbs, and held his arms close to his sides, thus
keeping the sleeves, which were also too long, from slipping over his
hands. Without looking at the judges he gazed steadfastly at the form,
and passing to the other side of it, he sat down carefully at the very
edge, leaving plenty of room for the others. He fixed his eyes on the
president, and began moving the muscles of his cheeks, as if whispering
something. The woman who came next was also dressed in a prison cloak,
and had a prison kerchief round her head. She had a sallow complexion,
no eyebrows or lashes, and very red eyes. This woman appeared perfectly
calm. Having caught her cloak against something, she detached it
carefully, without any haste, and sat down.

The third prisoner was Maslova.

As soon as she appeared, the eyes of all the men in the court turned
her way, and remained fixed on her white face, her sparklingly-brilliant
black eyes and the swelling bosom under the prison cloak. Even the
gendarme whom she passed on her way to her seat looked at her fixedly
till she sat down, and then, as if feeling guilty, hurriedly turned
away, shook himself, and began staring at the window in front of him.

The president paused until the prisoners had taken their seats, and when
Maslova was seated, turned to the secretary.

Then the usual procedure commenced; the counting of the jury, remarks
about those who had not come, the fixing of the fines to be exacted
from them, the decisions concerning those who claimed exemption, the
appointing of reserve jurymen.

Having folded up some bits of paper and put them in one of the glass
vases, the president turned up the gold-embroidered cuffs of his uniform
a little way, and began drawing the lots, one by one, and opening them.
Nekhludoff was among the jurymen thus drawn. Then, having let down his
sleeves, the president requested the priest to swear in the jury.

The old priest, with his puffy, red face, his brown gown, and his gold
cross and little order, laboriously moving his stiff legs, came up to
the lectern beneath the icon.

The jurymen got up, and crowded towards the lectern.

"Come up, please," said the priest, pulling at the cross on his breast
with his plump hand, and waiting till all the jury had drawn near. When
they had all come up the steps of the platform, the priest passed his
bald, grey head sideways through the greasy opening of the stole, and,
having rearranged his thin hair, he again turned to the jury. "Now,
raise your right arms in this way, and put your fingers together, thus,"
he said, with his tremulous old voice, lifting his fat, dimpled hand,
and putting the thumb and two first fingers together, as if taking a
pinch of something. "Now, repeat after me, 'I promise and swear, by the
Almighty God, by His holy gospels, and by the life-giving cross of
our Lord, that in this work which,'" he said, pausing between each
sentence--"don't let your arm down; hold it like this," he remarked to a
young man who had lowered his arm--"'that in this work which . . . '"

The dignified man with the whiskers, the colonel, the merchant, and
several more held their arms and fingers as the priest required of
them, very high, very exactly, as if they liked doing it; others did it
unwillingly and carelessly. Some repeated the words too loudly, and with
a defiant tone, as if they meant to say, "In spite of all, I will and
shall speak." Others whispered very low, and not fast enough, and
then, as if frightened, hurried to catch up the priest. Some kept their
fingers tightly together, as if fearing to drop the pinch of invisible
something they held; others kept separating and folding theirs. Every
one save the old priest felt awkward, but he was sure he was fulfilling
a very useful and important duty.

After the swearing in, the president requested the jury to choose
a foreman, and the jury, thronging to the door, passed out into
the debating-room, where almost all of them at once began to smoke
cigarettes. Some one proposed the dignified man as foreman, and he was
unanimously accepted. Then the jurymen put out their cigarettes and
threw them away and returned to the court. The dignified man informed
the president that he was chosen foreman, and all sat down again on the
high-backed chairs.

Everything went smoothly, quickly, and not without a certain solemnity.
And this exactitude, order, and solemnity evidently pleased those
who took part in it: it strengthened the impression that they were
fulfilling a serious and valuable public duty. Nekhludoff, too, felt
this.

As soon as the jurymen were seated, the president made a speech on
their rights, obligations, and responsibilities. While speaking he kept
changing his position; now leaning on his right, now on his left hand,
now against the back, then on the arms of his chair, now putting the
papers straight, now handling his pencil and paper-knife.

According to his words, they had the right of interrogating the
prisoners through the president, to use paper and pencils, and to
examine the articles put in as evidence. Their duty was to judge not
falsely, but justly. Their responsibility meant that if the secrecy of
their discussion were violated, or communications were established with
outsiders, they would be liable to punishment. Every one listened with
an expression of respectful attention. The merchant, diffusing a smell
of brandy around him, and restraining loud hiccups, approvingly nodded
his head at every sentence.



CHAPTER IX.

THE TRIAL--THE PRISONERS QUESTIONED.

When he had finished his speech, the president turned to the male
prisoner.

"Simeon Kartinkin, rise."

Simeon jumped up, his lips continuing to move nervously and inaudibly.

"Your name?"

"Simon Petrov Kartinkin," he said, rapidly, with a cracked voice, having
evidently prepared the answer.

"What class do you belong to?"

"Peasant."

"What government, district, and parish?"

"Toula Government, Krapivinskia district, Koupianovski parish, the
village Borki."

"Your age?"

"Thirty-three; born in the year one thousand eight--"

"What religion?"

"Of the Russian religion, orthodox."

"Married?"

"Oh, no, sir."

"Your occupation?"

"I had a place in the Hotel Mauritania."

"Have you ever been tried before?"

"I never got tried before, because, as we used to live formerly--"

"So you never were tried before?"

"God forbid, never."

"Have you received a copy of the indictment?"

"I have."

"Sit down."

"Euphemia Ivanovna Botchkova," said the president, turning to the next
prisoner.

But Simon continued standing in front of Botchkova.

"Kartinkin, sit down!" Kartinkin continued standing.

"Kartinkin, sit down!" But Kartinkin sat down only when the usher, with
his head on one side, and with preternaturally wide-open eyes, ran up,
and said, in a tragic whisper, "Sit down, sit down!"

Kartinkin sat down as hurriedly as he had risen, wrapping his cloak
round him, and again began moving his lips silently.

"Your name?" asked the president, with a weary sigh at being obliged to
repeat the same questions, without looking at the prisoner, but glancing
over a paper that lay before him. The president was so used to his task
that, in order to get quicker through it all, he did two things at a
time.

Botchkova was forty-three years old, and came from the town of Kalomna.
She, too, had been in service at the Hotel Mauritania.

"I have never been tried before, and have received a copy of the
indictment." She gave her answers boldly, in a tone of voice as if she
meant to add to each answer, "And I don't care who knows it, and I won't
stand any nonsense."

She did not wait to be told, but sat down as soon as she had replied to
the last question.

"Your name?" turning abruptly to the third prisoner. "You will have to
rise," he added, softly and gently, seeing that Maslova kept her seat.

Maslova got up and stood, with her chest expanded, looking at the
president with that peculiar expression of readiness in her smiling
black eyes.

"What is your name?"

"Lubov," she said.

Nekhludoff had put on his pince-nez, looking at the prisoners while they
were being questioned.

"No, it is impossible," he thought, not taking his eyes off the
prisoner. "Lubov! How can it be?" he thought to himself, after hearing
her answer. The president was going to continue his questions, but
the member with the spectacles interrupted him, angrily whispering
something. The president nodded, and turned again to the prisoner.

"How is this," he said, "you are not put down here as Lubov?"

The prisoner remained silent.

"I want your real name."

"What is your baptismal name?" asked the angry member.

"Formerly I used to be called Katerina."

"No, it cannot be," said Nekhludoff to himself; and yet he was now
certain that this was she, that same girl, half ward, half servant to
his aunts; that Katusha, with whom he had once been in love, really
in love, but whom he had betrayed and then abandoned, and never again
brought to mind, for the memory would have been too painful, would
have convicted him too clearly, proving that he who was so proud of his
integrity had treated this woman in a revolting, scandalous way.

Yes, this was she. He now clearly saw in her face that strange,
indescribable individuality which distinguishes every face from all
others; something peculiar, all its own, not to be found anywhere else.
In spite of the unhealthy pallor and the fulness of the face, it was
there, this sweet, peculiar individuality; on those lips, in the slight
squint of her eyes, in the voice, particularly in the naive smile, and
in the expression of readiness on the face and figure.

"You should have said so," remarked the president, again in a gentle
tone. "Your patronymic?"

"I am illegitimate."

"Well, were you not called by your godfather's name?"

"Yes, Mikhaelovna."

"And what is it she can be guilty of?" continued Nekhludoff, in his
mind, unable to breathe freely.

"Your family name--your surname, I mean?" the president went on.

"They used to call me by my mother's surname, Maslova."

"What class?"

"Meschanka." [the lowest town class or grade]

"Religion--orthodox?"

"Orthodox."

"Occupation. What was your occupation?"

Maslova remained silent.

"What was your employment?"

"You know yourself," she said, and smiled. Then, casting a hurried look
round the room, again turned her eyes on the president.

There was something so unusual in the expression of her face, so
terrible and piteous in the meaning of the words she had uttered, in
this smile, and in the furtive glance she had cast round the room, that
the president was abashed, and for a few minutes silence reigned in the
court. The silence was broken by some one among the public laughing,
then somebody said "Ssh," and the president looked up and continued:

"Have you ever been tried before?"

"Never," answered Maslova, softly, and sighed.

"Have you received a copy of the indictment?"

"I have," she answered.

"Sit down."

The prisoner leant back to pick up her skirt in the way a fine lady
picks up her train, and sat down, folding her small white hands in the
sleeves of her cloak, her eyes fixed on the president. Her face was calm
again.

The witnesses were called, and some sent away; the doctor who was to act
as expert was chosen and called into the court.

Then the secretary got up and began reading the indictment. He read
distinctly, though he pronounced the "I" and "r" alike, with a loud
voice, but so quickly that the words ran into one another and formed one
uninterrupted, dreary drone.

The judges bent now on one, now on the other arm of their chairs, then
on the table, then back again, shut and opened their eyes, and whispered
to each other. One of the gendarmes several times repressed a yawn.

The prisoner Kartinkin never stopped moving his cheeks. Botchkova sat
quite still and straight, only now and then scratching her head under
the kerchief.

Maslova sat immovable, gazing at the reader; only now and then she gave
a slight start, as if wishing to reply, blushed, sighed heavily, and
changed the position of her hands, looked round, and again fixed her
eyes on the reader.

Nekhludoff sat in the front row on his high-backed chair, without
removing his pince-nez, and looked at Maslova, while a complicated and
fierce struggle was going on in his soul.



CHAPTER X.

THE TRIAL--THE INDICTMENT.

The indictment ran as follows: On the 17th of January, 18--, in the
lodging-house Mauritania, occurred the sudden death of the Second Guild
merchant, Therapont Emilianovich Smelkoff, of Kourgan.

The local police doctor of the fourth district certified that death was
due to rupture of the heart, owing to the excessive use of alcoholic
liquids. The body of the said Smelkoff was interred. After several days
had elapsed, the merchant Timokhin, a fellow-townsman and companion
of the said Smelkoff, returned from St. Petersburg, and hearing the
circumstances that accompanied the death of the latter, notified his
suspicions that the death was caused by poison, given with intent to
rob the said Smelkoff of his money. This suspicion was corroborated on
inquiry, which proved:

1. That shortly before his death the said Smelkoff had received the sum
of 3,800 roubles from the bank. When an inventory of the property of the
deceased was made, only 312 roubles and 16 copecks were found.

2. The whole day and night preceding his death the said Smelkoff spent
with Lubka (alias Katerina Maslova) at her home and in the lodging-house
Mauritania, which she also visited at the said Smelkoff's request during
his absence, to get some money, which she took out of his portmanteau in
the presence of the servants of the lodging-house Mauritania, Euphemia
Botchkova and Simeon Kartinkin, with a key given her by the said
Smelkoff. In the portmanteau opened by the said Maslova, the said
Botchkova and Kartinkin saw packets of 100-rouble bank-notes.

3. On the said Smelkoff's return to the lodging-house Mauritania,
together with Lubka, the latter, in accordance with the attendant
Kartinkin's advice, gave the said Smelkoff some white powder given to
her by the said Kartinkin, dissolved in brandy.

4. The next morning the said Lubka (alias Katerina Maslova) sold to her
mistress, the witness Kitaeva, a brothel-keeper, a diamond ring given to
her, as she alleged, by the said Smelkoff.

5. The housemaid of the lodging-house Mauritania, Euphemia Botchkova,
placed to her account in the local Commercial Bank 1,800 roubles. The
postmortem examination of the body of the said Smelkoff and the chemical
analysis of his intestines proved beyond doubt the presence of poison
in the organism, so that there is reason to believe that the said
Smelkoff's death was caused by poisoning.

When cross-examined, the accused, Maslova, Botchkova, and Kartinkin,
pleaded not guilty, deposing--Maslova, that she had really been sent by
Smelkoff from the brothel, where she "works," as she expresses it, to
the lodging-house Mauritania to get the merchant some money, and that,
having unlocked the portmanteau with a key given her by the merchant,
she took out 40 roubles, as she was told to do, and that she had taken
nothing more; that Botchkova and Kartinkin, in whose presence she
unlocked and locked the portmanteau, could testify to the truth of the
statement.

She gave this further evidence--that when she came to the lodging-house
for the second time she did, at the instigation of Simeon Kartinkin,
give Smelkoff some kind of powder, which she thought was a narcotic,
in a glass of brandy, hoping he would fall asleep and that she would be
able to get away from him; and that Smelkoff, having beaten her, himself
gave her the ring when she cried and threatened to go away.

The accused, Euphemia Botchkova, stated that she knew nothing about the
missing money, that she had not even gone into Smelkoff's room, but
that Lubka had been busy there all by herself; that if anything had
been stolen, it must have been done by Lubka when she came with the
merchant's key to get his money.

At this point Maslova gave a start, opened her mouth, and looked at
Botchkova. "When," continued the secretary, "the receipt for 1,800
roubles from the bank was shown to Botchkova, and she was asked where
she had obtained the money, she said that it was her own earnings for
12 years, and those of Simeon, whom she was going to marry. The accused
Simeon Kartinkin, when first examined, confessed that he and Botchkova,
at the instigation of Maslova, who had come with the key from the
brothel, had stolen the money and divided it equally among themselves
and Maslova." Here Maslova again started, half-rose from her seat, and,
blushing scarlet, began to say something, but was stopped by the usher.
"At last," the secretary continued, reading, "Kartinkin confessed also
that he had supplied the powders in order to get Smelkoff to sleep. When
examined the second time he denied having had anything to do with the
stealing of the money or giving Maslova the powders, accusing her of
having done it alone."

Concerning the money placed in the bank by Botchkova, he said the same
as she, that is, that the money was given to them both by the lodgers in
tips during 12 years' service.

The indictment concluded as follows:

In consequence of the foregoing, the peasant of the village Borki,
Simeon Kartinkin, 33 years of age, the meschanka Euphemia Botchkova, 43
years of age, and the meschanka Katerina Maslova, 27 years of age, are
accused of having on the 17th day of January, 188--, jointly stolen from
the said merchant, Smelkoff, a ring and money, to the value of 2,500
roubles, and of having given the said merchant, Smelkoff, poison to
drink, with intent of depriving him of life, and thereby causing his
death. This crime is provided for in clause 1,455 of the Penal Code,
paragraphs 4 and 5.



CHAPTER XI.

THE TRIAL--MASLOVA CROSS-EXAMINED.

When the reading of the indictment was over, the president, after having
consulted the members, turned to Kartinkin, with an expression that
plainly said: Now we shall find out the whole truth down to the minutest
detail.

"Peasant Simeon Kartinkin," he said, stooping to the left.

Simeon Kartinkin got up, stretched his arms down his sides, and leaning
forward with his whole body, continued moving his cheeks inaudibly.

"You are accused of having on the 17th January, 188--, together with
Euphemia Botchkova and Katerina Maslova, stolen money from a portmanteau
belonging to the merchant Smelkoff, and then, having procured some
arsenic, persuaded Katerina Maslova to give it to the merchant Smelkoff
in a glass of brandy, which was the cause of Smelkoff's death. Do you
plead guilty?" said the president, stooping to the right.

"Not nohow, because our business is to attend on the lodgers, and--"

"You'll tell us that afterwards. Do you plead guilty?"

"Oh, no, sir. I only,--"

"You'll tell us that afterwards. Do you plead guilty?" quietly and
firmly asked the president.

"Can't do such a thing, because that--"

The usher again rushed up to Simeon Kartinkin, and stopped him in a
tragic whisper.

The president moved the hand with which he held the paper and placed the
elbow in a different position with an air that said: "This is finished,"
and turned to Euphemia Botchkova.

"Euphemia Botchkova, you are accused of having, on the 17th of January,
188-, in the lodging-house Mauritania, together with Simeon Kartinkin
and Katerina Maslova, stolen some money and a ring out of the merchant
Smelkoff's portmanteau, and having shared the money among yourselves,
given poison to the merchant Smelkoff, thereby causing his death. Do you
plead guilty?"

"I am not guilty of anything," boldly and firmly replied the prisoner.
"I never went near the room, but when this baggage went in she did the
whole business."

"You will say all this afterwards," the president again said, quietly
and firmly. "So you do not plead guilty?"

"I did not take the money nor give the drink, nor go into the room. Had
I gone in I should have kicked her out."

"So you do not plead guilty?"

"Never."

"Very well."

"Katerina Maslova," the president began, turning to the third prisoner,
"you are accused of having come from the brothel with the key of the
merchant Smelkoff's portmanteau, money, and a ring." He said all this
like a lesson learned by heart, leaning towards the member on his left,
who was whispering into his ear that a bottle mentioned in the list
of the material evidence was missing. "Of having stolen out of the
portmanteau money and a ring," he repeated, "and shared it. Then,
returning to the lodging house Mauritania with Smelkoff, of giving
him poison in his drink, and thereby causing his death. Do you plead
guilty?"

"I am not guilty of anything," she began rapidly. "As I said before
I say again, I did not take it--I did not take it; I did not take
anything, and the ring he gave me himself."

"You do not plead guilty of having stolen 2,500 roubles?" asked the
president.

"I've said I took nothing but the 40 roubles."

"Well, and do you plead guilty of having given the merchant Smelkoff a
powder in his drink?"

"Yes, that I did. Only I believed what they told me, that they were
sleeping powders, and that no harm could come of them. I never thought,
and never wished. . . God is my witness; I say, I never meant this," she
said.

"So you do not plead guilty of having stolen the money and the ring from
the merchant Smelkoff, but confess that you gave him the powder?" said
the president.

"Well, yes, I do confess this, but I thought they were sleeping powders.
I only gave them to make him sleep; I never meant and never thought of
worse."

"Very well," said the president, evidently satisfied with the results
gained. "Now tell us how it all happened," and he leaned back in his
chair and put his folded hands on the table. "Tell us all about it. A
free and full confession will be to your advantage."

Maslova continued to look at the president in silence, and blushing.

"Tell us how it happened."

"How it happened?" Maslova suddenly began, speaking quickly. "I came to
the lodging-house, and was shown into the room. He was there, already
very drunk." She pronounced the word _he_ with a look of horror in her
wide-open eyes. "I wished to go away, but he would not let me." She
stopped, as if having lost the thread, or remembered some thing else.

"Well, and then?"

"Well, what then? I remained a bit, and went home again."

At this moment the public prosecutor raised himself a little, leaning on
one elbow in an awkward manner.

"You would like to put a question?" said the president, and having
received an answer in the affirmative, he made a gesture inviting the
public prosecutor to speak.

"I want to ask, was the prisoner previously acquainted with Simeon
Kartinkin?" said the public prosecutor, without looking at Maslova, and,
having put the question, he compressed his lips and frowned.

The president repeated the question. Maslova stared at the public
prosecutor, with a frightened look.

"With Simeon? Yes," she said.

"I should like to know what the prisoner's acquaintance with Kartinkin
consisted in. Did they meet often?"

"Consisted in? . . . He invited me for the lodgers; it was not an
acquaintance at all," answered Maslova, anxiously moving her eyes from
the president to the public prosecutor and back to the president.

"I should like to know why Kartinkin invited only Maslova, and none
of the other girls, for the lodgers?" said the public prosecutor, with
half-closed eyes and a cunning, Mephistophelian smile.

"I don't know. How should I know?" said Maslova, casting a frightened
look round, and fixing her eyes for a moment on Nekhludoff. "He asked
whom he liked."

"Is it possible that she has recognised me?" thought Nekhludoff, and the
blood rushed to his face. But Maslova turned away without distinguishing
him from the others, and again fixed her eyes anxiously on the public
prosecutor.

"So the prisoner denies having had any intimate relations with
Kartinkin? Very well, I have no more questions to ask."

And the public prosecutor took his elbow off the desk, and began writing
something. He was not really noting anything down, but only going over
the letters of his notes with a pen, having seen the procureur and
leading advocates, after putting a clever question, make a note, with
which, later on, to annihilate their adversaries.

The president did not continue at once, because he was consulting the
member with the spectacles, whether he was agreed that the questions
(which had all been prepared be forehand and written out) should be put.

"Well! What happened next?" he then went on.

"I came home," looking a little more boldly only at the president, "and
went to bed. Hardly had I fallen asleep when one of our girls, Bertha,
woke me. 'Go, your merchant has come again!' He"--she again uttered the
word _he_ with evident horror--"he kept treating our girls, and then
wanted to send for more wine, but his money was all gone, and he sent me
to his lodgings and told me where the money was, and how much to take.
So I went."

The president was whispering to the member on his left, but, in order to
appear as if he had heard, he repeated her last words.

"So you went. Well, what next?"

"I went, and did all he told me; went into his room. I did not go alone,
but called Simeon Kartinkin and her," she said, pointing to Botchkova.

"That's a lie; I never went in," Botchkova began, but was stopped.

"In their presence I took out four notes," continued Maslova, frowning,
without looking at Botchkova.

"Yes, but did the prisoner notice," again asked the prosecutor, "how
much money there was when she was getting out the 40 roubles?"

Maslova shuddered when the prosecutor addressed her; she did not know
why it was, but she felt that he wished her evil.

"I did not count it, but only saw some 100-rouble notes."

"Ah! The prisoner saw 100-rouble notes. That's all?"

"Well, so you brought back the money," continued the president, looking
at the clock.

"I did."

"Well, and then?"

"Then he took me back with him," said Maslova.

"Well, and how did you give him the powder? In his drink?"

"How did I give it? I put them in and gave it him."

"Why did you give it him?"

She did not answer, but sighed deeply and heavily.

"He would not let me go," she said, after a moment's silence, "and I was
quite tired out, and so I went out into the passage and said to Simeon,
'If he would only let me go, I am so tired.' And he said, 'We are also
sick of him; we were thinking of giving him a sleeping draught; he will
fall asleep, and then you can go.' So I said all right. I thought they
were harmless, and he gave me the packet. I went in. He was lying behind
the partition, and at once called for brandy. I took a bottle of 'fine
champagne' from the table, poured out two glasses, one for him and one
for myself, and put the powders into his glass, and gave it him. Had I
known how could I have given them to him?"

"Well, and how did the ring come into your possession?" asked the
president. "When did he give it you?"

"That was when we came back to his lodgings. I wanted to go away, and he
gave me a knock on the head and broke my comb. I got angry and said I'd
go away, and he took the ring off his finger and gave it to me so that I
should not go," she said.

Then the public prosecutor again slightly raised himself, and, putting
on an air of simplicity, asked permission to put a few more questions,
and, having received it, bending his head over his embroidered collar,
he said: "I should like to know how long the prisoner remained in the
merchant Smelkoff's room."

Maslova again seemed frightened, and she again looked anxiously from the
public prosecutor to the president, and said hurriedly:

"I do not remember how long."

"Yes, but does the prisoner remember if she went anywhere else in the
lodging-house after she left Smelkoff?"

Maslova considered for a moment. "Yes, I did go into an empty room next
to his."

"Yes, and why did you go in?" asked the public prosecutor, forgetting
himself, and addressing her directly.

"I went in to rest a bit, and to wait for an isvostchik."

"And was Kartinkin in the room with the prisoner, or not?"

"He came in."

"Why did he come in?"

"There was some of the merchant's brandy left, and we finished it
together."

"Oh, finished it together. Very well! And did the prisoner talk to
Kartinkin, and, if so, what about?"

Maslova suddenly frowned, blushed very red, and said, hurriedly, "What
about? I did not talk about anything, and that's all I know. Do what you
like with me; I am not guilty, and that's all."

"I have nothing more to ask," said the prosecutor, and, drawing up his
shoulders in an unnatural manner, began writing down, as the prisoner's
own evidence, in the notes for his speech, that she had been in the
empty room with Kartinkin.

There was a short silence.

"You have nothing more to say?"

"I have told everything," she said, with a sigh, and sat down.

Then the president noted something down, and, having listened to
something that the member on his left whispered to him, he announced
a ten-minutes' interval, rose hurriedly, and left the court. The
communication he had received from the tall, bearded member with
the kindly eyes was that the member, having felt a slight stomach
derangement, wished to do a little massage and to take some drops. And
this was why an interval was made.

When the judges had risen, the advocates, the jury, and the witnesses
also rose, with the pleasant feeling that part of the business was
finished, and began moving in different directions.

Nekhludoff went into the jury's room, and sat down by the window.



CHAPTER XII.

TWELVE YEARS BEFORE.

"Yes, this was Katusha."

The relations between Nekhludoff and Katusha had been the following:

Nekhludoff first saw Katusha when he was a student in his third year
at the University, and was preparing an essay on land tenure during
the summer vacation, which he passed with his aunts. Until then he had
always lived, in summer, with his mother and sister on his mother's
large estate near Moscow. But that year his sister had married, and his
mother had gone abroad to a watering-place, and he, having his essay to
write, resolved to spend the summer with his aunts. It was very quiet
in their secluded estate and there was nothing to distract his mind; his
aunts loved their nephew and heir very tenderly, and he, too, was fond
of them and of their simple, old-fashioned life.

During that summer on his aunts' estate, Nekhludoff passed through that
blissful state of existence when a young man for the first time, without
guidance from any one outside, realises all the beauty and significance
of life, and the importance of the task allotted in it to man; when he
grasps the possibility of unlimited advance towards perfection for one's
self and for all the world, and gives himself to this task, not only
hopefully, but with full conviction of attaining to the perfection
he imagines. In that year, while still at the University, he had read
Spencer's Social Statics, and Spencer's views on landholding especially
impressed him, as he himself was heir to large estates. His father had
not been rich, but his mother had received 10,000 acres of land for her
dowry. At that time he fully realised all the cruelty and injustice of
private property in land, and being one of those to whom a sacrifice
to the demands of conscience gives the highest spiritual enjoyment, he
decided not to retain property rights, but to give up to the peasant
labourers the land he had inherited from his father. It was on this land
question he wrote his essay.

He arranged his life on his aunts' estate in the following manner. He
got up very early, sometimes at three o'clock, and before sunrise went
through the morning mists to bathe in the river, under the hill.
He returned while the dew still lay on the grass and the flowers.
Sometimes, having finished his coffee, he sat down with his books of
reference and his papers to write his essay, but very often, instead of
reading or writing, he left home again, and wandered through the fields
and the woods. Before dinner he lay down and slept somewhere in the
garden. At dinner he amused and entertained his aunts with his bright
spirits, then he rode on horseback or went for a row on the river, and
in the evening he again worked at his essay, or sat reading or playing
patience with his aunts.

His joy in life was so great that it agitated him, and kept him awake
many a night, especially when it was moonlight, so that instead of
sleeping he wandered about in the garden till dawn, alone with his
dreams and fancies.

And so, peacefully and happily, he lived through the first month of his
stay with his aunts, taking no particular notice of their half-ward,
half-servant, the black-eyed, quick-footed Katusha. Then, at the age
of nineteen, Nekhludoff, brought up under his mother's wing, was still
quite pure. If a woman figured in his dreams at all it was only as a
wife. All the other women, who, according to his ideas he could not
marry, were not women for him, but human beings.

But on Ascension Day that summer, a neighbour of his aunts', and her
family, consisting of two young daughters, a schoolboy, and a young
artist of peasant origin who was staying with them, came to spend the
day. After tea they all went to play in the meadow in front of the
house, where the grass had already been mown. They played at the game
of gorelki, and Katusha joined them. Running about and changing partners
several times, Nekhludoff caught Katusha, and she became his partner.
Up to this time he had liked Katusha's looks, but the possibility of any
nearer relations with her had never entered his mind.

"Impossible to catch those two," said the merry young artist, whose turn
it was to catch, and who could run very fast with his short, muscular
legs.

"You! And not catch us?" said Katusha.

"One, two, three," and the artist clapped his hands. Katusha, hardly
restraining her laughter, changed places with Nekhludoff, behind the
artist's back, and pressing his large hand with her little rough one,
and rustling with her starched petticoat, ran to the left. Nekhludoff
ran fast to the right, trying to escape from the artist, but when he
looked round he saw the artist running after Katusha, who kept well
ahead, her firm young legs moving rapidly. There was a lilac bush in
front of them, and Katusha made a sign with her head to Nekhludoff to
join her behind it, for if they once clasped hands again they were safe
from their pursuer, that being a rule of the game. He understood the
sign, and ran behind the bush, but he did not know that there was a
small ditch overgrown with nettles there. He stumbled and fell into the
nettles, already wet with dew, stinging his bands, but rose immediately,
laughing at his mishap.

Katusha, with her eyes black as sloes, her face radiant with joy, was
flying towards him, and they caught hold of each other's hands.

"Got stung, I daresay?" she said, arranging her hair with her free hand,
breathing fast and looking straight up at him with a glad, pleasant
smile.

"I did not know there was a ditch here," he answered, smiling also, and
keeping her hand in his. She drew nearer to him, and he himself, not
knowing how it happened, stooped towards her. She did not move away, and
he pressed her hand tight and kissed her on the lips.

"There! You've done it!" she said; and, freeing her hand with a swift
movement, ran away from him. Then, breaking two branches of white lilac
from which the blossoms were already falling, she began fanning her hot
face with them; then, with her head turned back to him, she walked away,
swaying her arms briskly in front of her, and joined the other players.

After this there grew up between Nekhludoff and Katusha those peculiar
relations which often exist between a pure young man and girl who are
attracted to each other.

When Katusha came into the room, or even when he saw her white apron
from afar, everything brightened up in Nekhludoff's eyes, as when the
sun appears everything becomes more interesting, more joyful, more
important. The whole of life seemed full of gladness. And she felt the
same. But it was not only Katusha's presence that had this effect on
Nekhludoff. The mere thought that Katusha existed (and for her that
Nekhludoff existed) had this effect.

When he received an unpleasant letter from his mother, or could not get
on with his essay, or felt the unreasoning sadness that young people are
often subject to, he had only to remember Katusha and that he should see
her, and it all vanished. Katusha had much work to do in the house, but
she managed to get a little leisure for reading, and Nekhludoff gave her
Dostoievsky and Tourgeneff (whom he had just read himself) to read. She
liked Tourgeneff's Lull best. They had talks at moments snatched when
meeting in the passage, on the veranda, or the yard, and sometimes
in the room of his aunts' old servant, Matrona Pavlovna, with whom he
sometimes used to drink tea, and where Katusha used to work.

These talks in Matrona Pavlovna's presence were the pleasantest. When
they were alone it was worse. Their eyes at once began to say something
very different and far more important than what their mouths uttered.
Their lips puckered, and they felt a kind of dread of something that
made them part quickly. These relations continued between Nekhludoff
and Katusha during the whole time of his first visit to his aunts'.
They noticed it, and became frightened, and even wrote to Princess
Elena Ivanovna, Nekhludoff's mother. His aunt, Mary Ivanovna, was
afraid Dmitri would form an intimacy with Katusha; but her fears were
groundless, for Nekhludoff, himself hardly conscious of it, loved
Katusha, loved her as the pure love, and therein lay his safety--his and
hers. He not only did not feel any desire to possess her, but the very
thought of it filled him with horror. The fears of the more poetical
Sophia Ivanovna, that Dmitri, with his thoroughgoing, resolute
character, having fallen in love with a girl, might make up his mind to
marry her, without considering either her birth or her station, had more
ground.

Had Nekhludoff at that time been conscious of his love for Katusha, and
especially if he had been told that he could on no account join his life
with that of a girl in her position, it might have easily happened
that, with his usual straight-forwardness, he would have come to the
conclusion that there could be no possible reason for him not to marry
any girl whatever, as long as he loved her. But his aunts did not
mention their fears to him; and, when he left, he was still unconscious
of his love for Katusha. He was sure that what he felt for Katusha was
only one of the manifestations of the joy of life that filled his whole
being, and that this sweet, merry little girl shared this joy with him.
Yet, when he was going away, and Katusha stood with his aunts in the
porch, and looked after him, her dark, slightly-squinting eyes filled
with tears, he felt, after all, that he was leaving something beautiful,
precious, something which would never reoccur. And he grew very sad.

"Good-bye, Katusha," he said, looking across Sophia Ivanovna's cap as he
was getting into the trap. "Thank you for everything."

"Good-bye, Dmitri Ivanovitch," she said, with her pleasant, tender
voice, keeping back the tears that filled her eyes--and ran away into
the hall, where she could cry in peace.



CHAPTER XIII.

LIFE IN THE ARMY.

After that Nekhludoff did not see Katusha for more than three years.
When he saw her again he had just been promoted to the rank of officer
and was going to join his regiment. On the way he came to spend a few
days with his aunts, being now a very different young man from the one
who had spent the summer with them three years before. He then had been
an honest, unselfish lad, ready to sacrifice himself for any good cause;
now he was depraved and selfish, and thought only of his own enjoyment.
Then God's world seemed a mystery which he tried enthusiastically and
joyfully to solve; now everything in life seemed clear and simple,
defined by the conditions of the life he was leading. Then he had felt
the importance of, and had need of intercourse with, nature, and with
those who had lived and thought and felt before him--philosophers
and poets. What he now considered necessary and important were human
institutions and intercourse with his comrades. Then women seemed
mysterious and charming--charming by the very mystery that enveloped
them; now the purpose of women, all women except those of his own family
and the wives of his friends, was a very definite one: women were the
best means towards an already experienced enjoyment. Then money was not
needed, and he did not require even one-third of what his mother allowed
him; but now this allowance of 1,500 roubles a month did not suffice,
and he had already had some unpleasant talks about it with his mother.

Then he had looked on his spirit as the I; now it was his healthy strong
animal I that he looked upon as himself.

And all this terrible change had come about because he had ceased to
believe himself and had taken to believing others. This he had done
because it was too difficult to live believing one's self; believing
one's self, one had to decide every question not in favour of one's own
animal life, which is always seeking for easy gratifications, but almost
in every case against it. Believing others there was nothing to decide;
everything had been decided already, and decided always in favour of the
animal I and against the spiritual. Nor was this all. Believing in his
own self he was always exposing himself to the censure of those around
him; believing others he had their approval. So, when Nekhludoff had
talked of the serious matters of life, of God, truth, riches, and
poverty, all round him thought it out of place and even rather funny,
and his mother and aunts called him, with kindly irony, notre cher
philosophe. But when he read novels, told improper anecdotes, went
to see funny vaudevilles in the French theatre and gaily repeated the
jokes, everybody admired and encouraged him. When he considered it
right to limit his needs, wore an old overcoat, took no wine, everybody
thought it strange and looked upon it as a kind of showing off; but
when he spent large sums on hunting, or on furnishing a peculiar and
luxurious study for himself, everybody admired his taste and gave him
expensive presents to encourage his hobby. While he kept pure and meant
to remain so till he married his friends prayed for his health, and even
his mother was not grieved but rather pleased when she found out that
he had become a real man and had gained over some French woman from his
friend. (As to the episode with Katusha, the princess could not without
horror think that he might possibly have married her.) In the same way,
when Nekhludoff came of age, and gave the small estate he had inherited
from his father to the peasants because he considered the holding
of private property in land wrong, this step filled his mother and
relations with dismay and served as an excuse for making fun of him to
all his relatives. He was continually told that these peasants, after
they had received the land, got no richer, but, on the contrary, poorer,
having opened three public-houses and left off doing any work. But when
Nekhludoff entered the Guards and spent and gambled away so much with
his aristocratic companions that Elena Ivanovna, his mother, had to draw
on her capital, she was hardly pained, considering it quite natural
and even good that wild oats should be sown at an early age and in good
company, as her son was doing. At first Nekhludoff struggled, but all
that he had considered good while he had faith in himself was considered
bad by others, and what he had considered evil was looked upon as good
by those among whom he lived, and the struggle grew too hard. And at
last Nekhludoff gave in, i.e., left off believing himself and began
believing others. At first this giving up of faith in himself was
unpleasant, but it did not long continue to be so. At that time he
acquired the habit of smoking, and drinking wine, and soon got over this
unpleasant feeling and even felt great relief.

Nekhludoff, with his passionate nature, gave himself thoroughly to the
new way of life so approved of by all those around, and he entirely
stifled the inner voice which demanded something different. This began
after he moved to St. Petersburg, and reached its highest point when he
entered the army.

Military life in general depraves men. It places them in conditions of
complete idleness, i.e., absence of all useful work; frees them of their
common human duties, which it replaces by merely conventional ones to
the honour of the regiment, the uniform, the flag; and, while giving
them on the one hand absolute power over other men, also puts them into
conditions of servile obedience to those of higher rank than themselves.

But when, to the usual depraving influence of military service with its
honours, uniforms, flags, its permitted violence and murder, there is
added the depraving influence of riches and nearness to and intercourse
with members of the Imperial family, as is the case in the chosen
regiment of the Guards in which all the officers are rich and of good
family, then this depraving influence creates in the men who succumb
to it a perfect mania of selfishness. And this mania of selfishness
attacked Nekhludoff from the moment he entered the army and began living
in the way his companions lived. He had no occupation whatever except
to dress in a uniform, splendidly made and well brushed by other people,
and, with arms also made and cleaned and handed to him by others, ride
to reviews on a fine horse which had been bred, broken in and fed by
others. There, with other men like himself, he had to wave a sword,
shoot off guns, and teach others to do the same. He had no other work,
and the highly-placed persons, young and old, the Tsar and those near
him, not only sanctioned his occupation but praised and thanked him for
it.

After this was done, it was thought important to eat, and particularly
to drink, in officers' clubs or the salons of the best restaurants,
squandering large sums of money, which came from some invisible source;
then theatres, ballets, women, then again riding on horseback, waving
of swords and shooting, and again the squandering of money, the wine,
cards, and women. This kind of life acts on military men even more
depravingly than on others, because if any other than a military man
lead such a life he cannot help being ashamed of it in the depth of his
heart. A military man is, on the contrary, proud of a life of this kind
especially at war time, and Nekhludoff had entered the army just after
war with the Turks had been declared. "We are prepared to sacrifice
our lives at the wars, and therefore a gay, reckless life is not only
pardonable, but absolutely necessary for us, and so we lead it."

Such were Nekhludoff's confused thoughts at this period of his
existence, and he felt all the time the delight of being free of the
moral barriers he had formerly set himself. And the state he lived in
was that of a chronic mania of selfishness. He was in this state when,
after three years' absence, he came again to visit his aunts.



CHAPTER XIV.

THE SECOND MEETING WITH MASLOVA.

Nekhludoff went to visit his aunts because their estate lay near the
road he had to travel in order to join his regiment, which had gone
forward, because they had very warmly asked him to come, and especially
because he wanted to see Katusha. Perhaps in his heart he had already
formed those evil designs against Katusha which his now uncontrolled
animal self suggested to him, but he did not acknowledge this as his
intention, but only wished to go back to the spot where he had been so
happy, to see his rather funny, but dear, kind-hearted old aunts, who
always, without his noticing it, surrounded him with an atmosphere of
love and admiration, and to see sweet Katusha, of whom he had retained
so pleasant a memory.

He arrived at the end of March, on Good Friday, after the thaw had set
in. It was pouring with rain so that he had not a dry thread on him and
was feeling very cold, but yet vigorous and full of spirits, as always
at that time. "Is she still with them?" he thought, as he drove into the
familiar, old-fashioned courtyard, surrounded by a low brick wall, and
now filled with snow off the roofs.

He expected she would come out when she heard the sledge bells but she
did not. Two bare-footed women with pails and tucked-up skirts, who had
evidently been scrubbing the floors, came out of the side door. She was
not at the front door either, and only Tikhon, the man-servant, with his
apron on, evidently also busy cleaning, came out into the front porch.
His aunt Sophia Ivanovna alone met him in the ante-room; she had a silk
dress on and a cap on her head. Both aunts had been to church and had
received communion.

"Well, this is nice of you to come," said Sophia Ivanovna, kissing him.
"Mary is not well, got tired in church; we have been to communion."

"I congratulate you, Aunt Sophia," [it is usual in Russia to
congratulate those who have received communion] said Nekhludoff, kissing
Sophia Ivanovna's hand. "Oh, I beg your pardon, I have made you wet."

"Go to your room--why you are soaking wet. Dear me, you have got
moustaches! . . . Katusha! Katusha! Get him some coffee; be quick."

"Directly," came the sound of a well-known, pleasant voice from the
passage, and Nekhludoff's heart cried out "She's here!" and it was as if
the sun had come out from behind the clouds.

Nekhludoff, followed by Tikhon, went gaily to his old room to change his
things. He felt inclined to ask Tikhon about Katusha; how she was,
what she was doing, was she not going to be married? But Tikhon was so
respectful and at the same time so severe, insisted so firmly on pouring
the water out of the jug for him, that Nekhludoff could not make up
his mind to ask him about Katusha, but only inquired about Tikhon's
grandsons, about the old so-called "brother's" horse, and about the
dog Polkan. All were alive except Polkan, who had gone mad the summer
before.

When he had taken off all his wet things and just begun to dress again,
Nekhludoff heard quick, familiar footsteps and a knock at the door.
Nekhludoff knew the steps and also the knock. No one but she walked and
knocked like that.

Having thrown his wet greatcoat over his shoulders, he opened the door.

"Come in." It was she, Katusha, the same, only sweeter than before. The
slightly squinting naive black eyes looked up in the same old way. Now
as then, she had on a white apron. She brought him from his aunts
a piece of scented soap, with the wrapper just taken off, and two
towels--one a long Russian embroidered one, the other a bath towel. The
unused soap with the stamped inscription, the towels, and her own self,
all were equally clean, fresh, undefiled and pleasant. The irrepressible
smile of joy at the sight of him made the sweet, firm lips pucker up as
of old.

"How do you do, Dmitri Ivanovitch?" she uttered with difficulty, her
face suffused with a rosy blush.

"Good-morning! How do you do?" he said, also blushing. "Alive and well?"

"Yes, the Lord be thanked. And here is your favorite pink soap and
towels from your aunts," she said, putting the soap on the table and
hanging the towels over the back of a chair.

"There is everything here," said Tikhon, defending the visitor's
independence, and pointing to Nekhludoff's open dressing case filled
with brushes, perfume, fixatoire, a great many bottles with silver lids
and all sorts of toilet appliances.

"Thank my aunts, please. Oh, how glad I am to be here," said Nekhludoff,
his heart filling with light and tenderness as of old.

She only smiled in answer to these words, and went out. The aunts, who
had always loved Nekhludoff, welcomed him this time more warmly than
ever. Dmitri was going to the war, where he might be wounded or killed,
and this touched the old aunts. Nekhludoff had arranged to stay only a
day and night with his aunts, but when he had seen Katusha he agreed to
stay over Easter with them and telegraphed to his friend Schonbock, whom
he was to have joined in Odessa, that he should come and meet him at his
aunts' instead.

As soon as he had seen Katusha Nekhludoff's old feelings toward her
awoke again. Now, just as then, he could not see her white apron without
getting excited; he could not listen to her steps, her voice, her laugh,
without a feeling of joy; he could not look at her eyes, black as sloes,
without a feeling of tenderness, especially when she smiled; and, above
all, he could not notice without agitation how she blushed when they
met. He felt he was in love, but not as before, when this love was a
kind of mystery to him and he would not own, even to himself, that he
loved, and when he was persuaded that one could love only once; now he
knew he was in love and was glad of it, and knew dimly what this love
consisted of and what it might lead to, though he sought to conceal
it even from himself. In Nekhludoff, as in every man, there were two
beings: one the spiritual, seeking only that kind of happiness for him
self which should tend towards the happiness of all; the other, the
animal man, seeking only his own happiness, and ready to sacrifice to it
the happiness of the rest of the world. At this period of his mania of
self-love brought on by life in Petersburg and in the army, this animal
man ruled supreme and completely crushed the spiritual man in him.

But when he saw Katusha and experienced the same feelings as he had had
three years before, the spiritual man in him raised its head once more
and began to assert its rights. And up to Easter, during two whole days,
an unconscious, ceaseless inner struggle went on in him.

He knew in the depths of his soul that he ought to go away, that there
was no real reason for staying on with his aunts, knew that no good
could come of it; and yet it was so pleasant, so delightful, that he did
not honestly acknowledge the facts to himself and stayed on. On Easter
eve, the priest and the deacon who came to the house to say mass had had
(so they said) the greatest difficulty in getting over the three miles
that lay between the church and the old ladies' house, coming across the
puddles and the bare earth in a sledge.

Nekhludoff attended the mass with his aunts and the servants, and kept
looking at Katusha, who was near the door and brought in the censers
for the priests. Then having given the priests and his aunts the Easter
kiss, though it was not midnight and therefore not Easter yet, he was
already going to bed when he heard the old servant Matrona Pavlovna
preparing to go to the church to get the koulitch and paski [Easter
cakes] blest after the midnight service. "I shall go too," he thought.

The road to the church was impassable either in a sledge or on wheels,
so Nekhludoff, who behaved in his aunts' house just as he did at home,
ordered the old horse, "the brother's horse," to be saddled, and instead
of going to bed he put on his gay uniform, a pair of tight-fitting
riding breeches and his overcoat, and got on the old over-fed and heavy
horse, which neighed continually all the way as he rode in the dark
through the puddles and snow to the church.



CHAPTER XV.

THE EARLY MASS.

For Nekhludoff this early mass remained for ever after one of the
brightest and most vivid memories of his life. When he rode out of the
darkness, broken only here and there by patches of white snow, into the
churchyard illuminated by a row of lamps around the church, the service
had already begun.

The peasants, recognising Mary Ivanovna's nephew, led his horse, which
was pricking up its ears at the sight of the lights, to a dry place
where he could get off, put it up for him, and showed him into the
church, which was full of people. On the right stood the peasants; the
old men in home-spun coats, and clean white linen bands [long strips of
linen are worn by the peasants instead of stockings] wrapped round their
legs, the young men in new cloth coats, bright-coloured belts round
their waists, and top-boots.

On the left stood the women, with red silk kerchiefs on their
heads, black velveteen sleeveless jackets, bright red shirt-sleeves,
gay-coloured green, blue, and red skirts, and thick leather boots.
The old women, dressed more quietly, stood behind them, with white
kerchiefs, homespun coats, old-fashioned skirts of dark home-spun
material, and shoes on their feet. Gaily-dressed children, their hair
well oiled, went in and out among them.

The men, making the sign of the cross, bowed down and raised their heads
again, shaking back their hair.

The women, especially the old ones, fixed their eyes on an icon
surrounded with candies and made the sign of the cross, firmly pressing
their folded fingers to the kerchief on their foreheads, to their
shoulders, and their stomachs, and, whispering something, stooped
or knelt down. The children, imitating the grown-up people, prayed
earnestly when they knew that they were being observed. The gilt case
containing the icon glittered, illuminated on all sides by tall candles
ornamented with golden spirals. The candelabra was filled with tapers,
and from the choir sounded most merry tunes sung by amateur choristers,
with bellowing bass and shrill boys' voices among them.

Nekhludoff passed up to the front. In the middle of the church stood
the aristocracy of the place: a landed proprietor, with his wife and
son (the latter dressed in a sailor's suit), the police officer, the
telegraph clerk, a tradesman in top-boots, and the village elder, with
a medal on his breast; and to the right of the ambo, just behind the
landed proprietor's wife, stood Matrona Pavlovna in a lilac dress and
fringed shawl and Katusha in a white dress with a tucked bodice, blue
sash, and red bow in her black hair.

Everything seemed festive, solemn, bright, and beautiful: the priest in
his silver cloth vestments with gold crosses; the deacon, the clerk and
chanter in their silver and gold surplices; the amateur choristers in
their best clothes, with their well-oiled hair; the merry tunes of the
holiday hymns that sounded like dance music; and the continual blessing
of the people by the priests, who held candles decorated with flowers,
and repeated the cry of "Christ is risen!" "Christ is risen!" All was
beautiful; but, above all, Katusha, in her white dress, blue sash, and
the red bow on her black head, her eyes beaming with rapture.

Nekhludoff knew that she felt his presence without looking at him. He
noticed this as he passed her, walking up to the altar. He had nothing
to tell her, but he invented something to say and whispered as he passed
her: "Aunt told me that she would break her fast after the late mass."
The young blood rushed up to Katusha's sweet face, as it always did
when she looked at him. The black eyes, laughing and full of joy, gazed
naively up and remained fixed on Nekhludoff.

"I know," she said, with a smile.

At this moment the clerk was going out with a copper coffee-pot
[coffee-pots are often used for holding holy water in Russia] of holy
water in his hand, and, not noticing Katusha, brushed her with his
surplice. Evidently he brushed against Katusha through wishing to pass
Nekhludoff at a respectful distance, and Nekhludoff was surprised that
he, the clerk, did not understand that everything here, yes, and in
all the world, only existed for Katusha, and that everything else might
remain unheeded, only not she, because she was the centre of all. For
her the gold glittered round the icons; for her all these candles in
candelabra and candlesticks were alight; for her were sung these
joyful hymns, "Behold the Passover of the Lord" "Rejoice, O ye people!"
All--all that was good in the world was for her. And it seemed to him
that Katusha was aware that it was all for her when he looked at her
well-shaped figure, the tucked white dress, the wrapt, joyous expression
of her face, by which he knew that just exactly the same that was
singing in his own soul was also singing in hers.

In the interval between the early and the late mass Nekhludoff left the
church. The people stood aside to let him pass, and bowed. Some knew
him; others asked who he was.

He stopped on the steps. The beggars standing there came clamouring
round him, and he gave them all the change he had in his purse and went
down. It was dawning, but the sun had not yet risen. The people grouped
round the graves in the churchyard. Katusha had remained inside.
Nekhludoff stood waiting for her.

The people continued coming out, clattering with their nailed boots on
the stone steps and dispersing over the churchyard. A very old man with
shaking head, his aunts' cook, stopped Nekhludoff in order to give
him the Easter kiss, his old wife took an egg, dyed yellow, out of her
handkerchief and gave it to Nekhludoff, and a smiling young peasant in a
new coat and green belt also came up.

"Christ is risen," he said, with laughing eyes, and coming close to
Nekhludoff he enveloped him in his peculiar but pleasant peasant smell,
and, tickling him with his curly beard, kissed him three times straight
on the mouth with his firm, fresh lips.

While the peasant was kissing Nekhludoff and giving him a dark brown
egg, the lilac dress of Matrona Pavlovna and the dear black head with
the red bow appeared.

Katusha caught sight of him over the heads of those in front of her, and
he saw how her face brightened up.

She had come out with Matrona Pavlovna on to the porch, and stopped
there distributing alms to the beggars. A beggar with a red scab in
place of a nose came up to Katusha. She gave him something, drew nearer
him, and, evincing no sign of disgust, but her eyes still shining with
joy, kissed him three times. And while she was doing this her eyes met
Nekhludoff's with a look as if she were asking, "Is this that I am doing
right?" "Yes, dear, yes, it is right; everything is right, everything is
beautiful. I love!"

They came down the steps of the porch, and he came up to them.

He did not mean to give them the Easter kiss, but only to be nearer to
her. Matrona Pavlovna bowed her head, and said with a smile, "Christ is
risen!" and her tone implied, "To-day we are all equal." She wiped her
mouth with her handkerchief rolled into a ball and stretched her lips
towards him.

"He is, indeed," answered Nekhludoff, kissing her. Then he looked
at Katusha; she blushed, and drew nearer. "Christ is risen, Dmitri
Ivanovitch."

"He is risen, indeed," answered Nekhludoff, and they kissed twice, then
paused as if considering whether a third kiss were necessary, and,
having decided that it was, kissed a third time and smiled.

"You are going to the priests?" asked Nekhludoff.

"No, we shall sit out here a bit, Dmitri Ivanovitch," said Katusha with
effort, as if she had accomplished some joyous task, and, her whole
chest heaving with a deep sigh, she looked straight in his face with
a look of devotion, virgin purity, and love, in her very slightly
squinting eyes.

In the love between a man and a woman there always comes a moment when
this love has reached its zenith--a moment when it is unconscious,
unreasoning, and with nothing sensual about it. Such a moment had come
for Nekhludoff on that Easter eve. When he brought Katusha back to his
mind, now, this moment veiled all else; the smooth glossy black head,
the white tucked dress closely fitting her graceful maidenly form, her,
as yet, un-developed bosom, the blushing cheeks, the tender shining
black eyes with their slight squint heightened by the sleepless night,
and her whole being stamped with those two marked features, purity and
chaste love, love not only for him (he knew that), but for everybody and
everything, not for the good alone, but for all that is in the world,
even for that beggar whom she had kissed.

He knew she had that love in her because on that night and morning
he was conscious of it in himself, and conscious that in this love he
became one with her. Ah! if it had all stopped there, at the point it
had reached that night. "Yes, all that horrible business had not yet
happened on that Easter eve!" he thought, as he sat by the window of the
jurymen's room.



CHAPTER XVI.

THE FIRST STEP.

When he returned from church Nekhludoff broke the fast with his aunts
and took a glass of spirits and some wine, having got into that habit
while with his regiment, and when he reached his room fell asleep at
once, dressed as he was. He was awakened by a knock at the door. He knew
it was her knock, and got up, rubbing his eyes and stretching himself.

"Katusha, is it you? Come in," said he.

She opened the door.

"Dinner is ready," she said. She still had on the same white dress, but
not the bow in her hair. She looked at him with a smile, as if she had
communicated some very good news to him.

"I am coming," he answered, as he rose, taking his comb to arrange his
hair.

She stood still for a minute, and he, noticing it, threw down his comb
and made a step towards her, but at that very moment she turned suddenly
and went with quick light steps along the strip of carpet in the middle
of the passage.

"Dear me, what a fool I am," thought Nekhludoff. "Why did I not stop
her?" What he wanted her for he did not know himself, but he felt that
when she came into his room something should have been done, something
that is generally done on such occasions, and that he had left it
undone.

"Katusha, wait," he said.

"What do you want?" she said, stopping.

"Nothing, only--" and, with an effort, remembering how men in his
position generally behave, he put his arm round her waist.

She stood still and looked into his eyes.

"Don't, Dmitri Ivanovitch, you must not," she said, blushing to tears
and pushing away his arm with her strong hard hand. Nekhludoff let her
go, and for a moment he felt not only confused and ashamed but disgusted
with himself. He should now have believed himself, and then he would
have known that this confusion and shame were caused by the best
feelings of his soul demanding to be set free; but he thought it was
only his stupidity and that he ought to behave as every one else did. He
caught her up and kissed her on the neck.

This kiss was very different from that first thoughtless kiss behind
the lilac bush, and very different to the kiss this morning in the
churchyard. This was a dreadful kiss, and she felt it.

"Oh, what are you doing?" she cried, in a tone as if he had irreparably
broken something of priceless value, and ran quickly away.

He came into the dining-room. His aunts, elegantly dressed, their family
doctor, and a neighbour were already there. Everything seemed so very
ordinary, but in Nekhludoff a storm was raging. He understood nothing
of what was being said and gave wrong answers, thinking only of Katusha.
The sound of her steps in the passage brought back the thrill of that
last kiss and he could think of nothing else. When she came into the
room he, without looking round, felt her presence with his whole being
and had to force himself not to look at her.

After dinner he at once went into his bedroom and for a long time walked
up and down in great excitement, listening to every sound in the house
and expecting to hear her steps. The animal man inside him had now not
only lifted its head, but had succeeded in trampling under foot the
spiritual man of the days of his first visit, and even of that every
morning. That dreadful animal man alone now ruled over him.

Though he was watching for her all day he could not manage to meet her
alone. She was probably trying to evade him. In the evening, however,
she was obliged to go into the room next to his. The doctor had been
asked to stay the night, and she had to make his bed. When he heard her
go in Nekhludoff followed her, treading softly and holding his breath as
if he were going to commit a crime.

She was putting a clean pillow-case on the pillow, holding it by two of
its corners with her arms inside the pillow-case. She turned round
and smiled, not a happy, joyful smile as before, but in a frightened,
piteous way. The smile seemed to tell him that what he was doing was
wrong. He stopped for a moment. There was still the possibility of a
struggle. The voice of his real love for her, though feebly, was still
speaking of her, her feelings, her life. Another voice was saying,
"Take care I don't let the opportunity for your own happiness, your own
enjoyment, slip by!" And this second voice completely stifled the first.
He went up to her with determination and a terrible, ungovernable animal
passion took possession of him.

With his arm round he made her sit down on the bed; and feeling that
there was something more to be done he sat down beside her.

"Dmitri Ivanovitch, dear! please let me go," she said, with a piteous
voice. "Matrona Pavlovna is coming," she cried, tearing herself away.
Some one was really coming to the door.

"Well, then, I'll come to you in the night," he whispered. "You'll be
alone?"

"What are you thinking of? On no account. No, no!" she said, but only
with her lips; the tremulous confusion of her whole being said something
very different.

It was Matrona Pavlovna who had come to the door. She came in with a
blanket over her arm, looked reproachfully at Nekhludoff, and began
scolding Katusha for having taken the wrong blanket.

Nekhludoff went out in silence, but he did not even feel ashamed. He
could see by Matrona Pavlovna's face that she was blaming him, he knew
that she was blaming him with reason and felt that he was doing wrong,
but this novel, low animal excitement, having freed itself of all the
old feelings of real love for Katusha, ruled supreme, leaving room for
nothing else. He went about as if demented all the evening, now into his
aunts', then back into his own room, then out into the porch, thinking
all the time how he could meet her alone; but she avoided him, and
Matrona Pavlovna watched her closely.



CHAPTER XVII.

NEKHLUDOFF AND KATUSHA.

And so the evening passed and night came. The doctor went to bed.
Nekhludoff's aunts had also retired, and he knew that Matrona Pavlovna
was now with them in their bedroom so that Katusha was sure to be alone
in the maids' sitting-room. He again went out into the porch. It was
dark, damp and warm out of doors, and that white spring mist which
drives away the last snow, or is diffused by the thawing of the last
snow, filled the air. From the river under the hill, about a hundred
steps from the front door, came a strange sound. It was the ice
breaking. Nekhludoff came down the steps and went up to the window of
the maids' room, stepping over the puddles on the bits of glazed snow.
His heart was beating so fiercely in his breast that he seemed to hear
it, his laboured breath came and went in a burst of long-drawn sighs. In
the maids' room a small lamp was burning, and Katusha sat alone by the
table, looking thoughtfully in front of her. Nekhludoff stood a long
time without moving and waited to see what she, not knowing that she
was observed, would do. For a minute or two she did not move; then she
lifted her eyes, smiled and shook her head as if chiding herself, then
changed her pose and dropped both her arms on the table and again began
gazing down in front of her. He stood and looked at her, involuntarily
listening to the beating of his own heart and the strange sounds from
the river. There on the river, beneath the white mist, the unceasing
labour went on, and sounds as of something sobbing, cracking, dropping,
being shattered to pieces mixed with the tinkling of the thin bits of
ice as they broke against each other like glass.

There he stood, looking at Katusha's serious, suffering face, which
betrayed the inner struggle of her soul, and he felt pity for her; but,
strange though it may seem, this pity only confirmed him in his evil
intention.

He knocked at the window. She started as if she had received an electric
shock, her whole body trembled, and a look of horror came into her face.
Then she jumped up, approached the window and brought her face up to the
pane. The look of terror did not leave her face even when, holding her
hands up to her eyes like blinkers and peering through the glass, she
recognised him. Her face was unusually grave; he had never seen it so
before. She returned his smile, but only in submission to him; there was
no smile in her soul, only fear. He beckoned her with his hand to come
out into the yard to him. But she shook her head and remained by the
window. He brought his face close to the pane and was going to call out
to her, but at that moment she turned to the door; evidently some one
inside had called her. Nekhludoff moved away from the window. The fog
was so dense that five steps from the house the windows could not be
seen, but the light from the lamp shone red and huge out of a shapeless
black mass. And on the river the same strange sounds went on, sobbing
and rustling and cracking and tinkling. Somewhere in the fog, not
far off, a cock crowed; another answered, and then others, far in the
village took up the cry till the sound of the crowing blended into one,
while all around was silent excepting the river. It was the second time
the cocks crowed that night.

Nekhludoff walked up and down behind the corner of the house, and once
or twice got into a puddle. Then again came up to the window. The lamp
was still burning, and she was again sitting alone by the table as
if uncertain what to do. He had hardly approached the window when she
looked up. He knocked. Without looking who it was she at once ran out of
the room, and he heard the outside door open with a snap. He waited
for her near the side porch and put his arms round her without saying a
word. She clung to him, put up her face, and met his kiss with her lips.
Then the door again gave the same sort of snap and opened, and the voice
of Matrona Pavlovna called out angrily, "Katusha!"

She tore herself away from him and returned into the maids' room. He
heard the latch click, and then all was quiet. The red light disappeared
and only the mist remained, and the bustle on the river went on.
Nekhludoff went up to the window, nobody was to be seen; he knocked, but
got no answer. He went back into the house by the front door, but could
not sleep. He got up and went with bare feet along the passage to her
door, next to Matrona Pavlovna's room. He heard Matrona Pavlovna snoring
quietly, and was about to go on when she coughed and turned on her
creaking bed, and his heart fell, and he stood immovable for about five
minutes. When all was quiet and she began to snore peacefully again, he
went on, trying to step on the boards that did not creak, and came to
Katusha's door. There was no sound to be heard. She was probably
awake, or else he would have heard her breathing. But as soon as he
had whispered "Katusha" she jumped up and began to persuade him, as if
angrily, to go away.

"Open! Let me in just for a moment! I implore you!" He hardly knew what
he was saying.

                   * * * * * * *

When she left him, trembling and silent, giving no answer to his words,
he again went out into the porch and stood trying to understand the
meaning of what had happened.

It was getting lighter. From the river below the creaking and tinkling
and sobbing of the breaking ice came still louder and a gurgling sound
could now also be heard. The mist had begun to sink, and from above it
the waning moon dimly lighted up something black and weird.

"What was the meaning of it all? Was it a great joy or a great
misfortune that had befallen him?" he asked himself.



CHAPTER XVIII.

AFTERWARDS.

The next day the gay, handsome, and brilliant Schonbock joined
Nekhludoff at his aunts' house, and quite won their hearts by his
refined and amiable manner, his high spirits, his generosity, and his
affection for Dmitri.

But though the old ladies admired his generosity it rather perplexed
them, for it seemed exaggerated. He gave a rouble to some blind beggars
who came to the gate, gave 15 roubles in tips to the servants, and
when Sophia Ivanovna's pet dog hurt his paw and it bled, he tore his
hemstitched cambric handkerchief into strips (Sophia Ivanovna knew that
such handkerchiefs cost at least 15 roubles a dozen) and bandaged the
dog's foot. The old ladies had never met people of this kind, and did
not know that Schonbock owed 200,000 roubles which he was never going to
pay, and that therefore 25 roubles more or less did not matter a bit to
him. Schonbock stayed only one day, and he and Nekhludoff both, left
at night. They could not stay away from their regiment any longer, for
their leave was fully up.

At the stage which Nekhludoff's selfish mania had now reached he could
think of nothing but himself. He was wondering whether his conduct, if
found out, would be blamed much or at all, but he did not consider what
Katusha was now going through, and what was going to happen to her.

He saw that Schonbock guessed his relations to her and this flattered
his vanity.

"Ah, I see how it is you have taken such a sudden fancy to your aunts
that you have been living nearly a week with them," Schonbock remarked
when he had seen Katusha. "Well, I don't wonder--should have done the
same. She's charming." Nekhludoff was also thinking that though it was
a pity to go away before having fully gratified the cravings of his
love for her, yet the absolute necessity of parting had its advantages
because it put a sudden stop to relations it would have been very
difficult for him to continue. Then he thought that he ought to give her
some money, not for her, not because she might need it, but because it
was the thing to do.

So he gave her what seemed to him a liberal amount, considering his and
her station. On the day of his departure, after dinner, he went out and
waited for her at the side entrance. She flushed up when she saw him
and wished to pass by, directing his attention to the open door of the
maids' room by a look, but he stopped her.

"I have come to say good-bye," he said, crumbling in his hand an
envelope with a 100-rouble note inside. "There, I . . . "

She guessed what he meant, knit her brows, and shaking her head pushed
his hand away.

"Take it; oh, you must!" he stammered, and thrust the envelope into the
bib of her apron and ran back to his room, groaning and frowning as if
he had hurt himself. And for a long time he went up and down writhing as
in pain, and even stamping and groaning aloud as he thought of this last
scene. "But what else could I have done? Is it not what happens to every
one? And if every one does the same . . . well I suppose it can't be
helped." In this way he tried to get peace of mind, but in vain. The
recollection of what had passed burned his conscience. In his soul--in
the very depths of his soul--he knew that he had acted in a base, cruel,
cowardly manner, and that the knowledge of this act of his must prevent
him, not only from finding fault with any one else, but even from
looking straight into other people's eyes; not to mention the
impossibility of considering himself a splendid, noble, high-minded
fellow, as he did and had to do to go on living his life boldly and
merrily. There was only one solution of the problem--i.e., not to think
about it. He succeeded in doing so. The life he was now entering upon,
the new surroundings, new friends, the war, all helped him to forget.
And the longer he lived, the less he thought about it, until at last he
forgot it completely.

Once only, when, after the war, he went to see his aunts in hopes of
meeting Katusha, and heard that soon after his last visit she had left,
and that his aunts had heard she had been confined somewhere or other
and had gone quite to the bad, his heart ached. According to the time of
her confinement, the child might or might not have been his. His aunts
said she had gone wrong, that she had inherited her mother's depraved
nature, and he was pleased to hear this opinion of his aunts'. It seemed
to acquit him. At first he thought of trying to find her and her child,
but then, just because in the depths of his soul he felt so ashamed and
pained when thinking about her, he did not make the necessary effort to
find her, but tried to forget his sin again and ceased to think about
it. And now this strange coincidence brought it all back to his memory,
and demanded from him the acknowledgment of the heartless, cruel
cowardice which had made it possible for him to live these nine years
with such a sin on his conscience. But he was still far from such an
acknowledgment, and his only fear was that everything might now be found
out, and that she or her advocate might recount it all and put him to
shame before every one present.



CHAPTER XIX.

THE TRIAL--RESUMPTION.

In this state of mind Nekhludoff left the Court and went into the
jurymen's room. He sat by the window smoking all the while, and hearing
what was being said around him.

The merry merchant seemed with all his heart to sympathise with
Smelkoff's way of spending his time. "There, old fellow, that was
something like! Real Siberian fashion! He knew what he was about, no
fear! That's the sort of wench for me."

The foreman was stating his conviction, that in some way or other the
expert's conclusions were the important thing. Peter Gerasimovitch
was joking about something with the Jewish clerk, and they burst out
laughing. Nekhludoff answered all the questions addressed to him in
monosyllables and longed only to be left in peace.

When the usher, with his sideways gait, called the jury back to the
Court, Nekhludoff was seized with fear, as if he were not going to
judge, but to be judged. In the depth of his soul he felt that he was a
scoundrel, who ought to be ashamed to look people in the face, yet,
by sheer force of habit, he stepped on to the platform in his usual
self-possessed manner, and sat down, crossing his legs and playing with
his pince-nez.

The prisoners had also been led out, and were now brought in again.
There were some new faces in the Court witnesses, and Nekhludoff noticed
that Maslova could not take her eyes off a very fat woman who sat in the
row in front of the grating, very showily dressed in silk and velvet, a
high hat with a large bow on her head, and an elegant little reticule on
her arm, which was bare to the elbow. This was, as he subsequently found
out, one of the witnesses, the mistress of the establishment to which
Maslova had belonged.

The examination of the witnesses commenced: they were asked their names,
religion, etc. Then, after some consultation as to whether the witnesses
were to be sworn in or not, the old priest came in again, dragging
his legs with difficulty, and, again arranging the golden cross on his
breast, swore the witnesses and the expert in the same quiet manner,
and with the same assurance that he was doing something useful and
important.

The witnesses having been sworn, all but Kitaeva, the keeper of the
house, were led out again. She was asked what she knew about this
affair. Kitaeva nodded her head and the big hat at every sentence
and smiled affectedly. She gave a very full and intelligent account,
speaking with a strong German accent. First of all, the hotel servant
Simeon, whom she knew, came to her establishment on behalf of a rich
Siberian merchant, and she sent Lubov back with him. After a time
Lubov returned with the merchant. The merchant was already somewhat
intoxicated--she smiled as she said this--and went on drinking and
treating the girls. He was short of money. He sent this same Lubov to
his lodgings. He had taken a "predilection" to her. She looked at the
prisoner as she said this.

Nekhludoff thought he saw Maslova smile here, and this seemed disgusting
to him. A strange, indefinite feeling of loathing, mingled with
suffering, arose in him.

"And what was your opinion of Maslova?" asked the blushing and confused
applicant for a judicial post, appointed to act as Maslova's advocate.

"Zee ferry pesht," answered Kitaeva. "Zee yoong voman is etucated and
elecant. She was prought up in a coot family and can reat French. She
tid have a trop too moch sometimes, put nefer forcot herself. A ferry
coot girl."

Katusha looked at the woman, then suddenly turned her eyes on the jury
and fixed them on Nekhludoff, and her face grew serious and even severe.
One of her serious eyes squinted, and those two strange eyes for some
time gazed at Nekhludoff, who, in spite of the terrors that seized him,
could not take his look off these squinting eyes, with their bright,
clear whites.

He thought of that dreadful night, with its mist, the ice breaking on
the river below, and when the waning moon, with horns turned upwards,
that had risen towards morning, lit up something black and weird. These
two black eyes now looking at him reminded him of this weird, black
something. "She has recognised me," he thought, and Nekhludoff shrank as
if expecting a blow. But she had not recognised him. She sighed quietly
and again looked at the president. Nekhludoff also sighed. "Oh, if it
would only get on quicker," he thought.

He now felt the same loathing and pity and vexation as when, out
shooting, he was obliged to kill a wounded bird. The wounded bird
struggles in the game bag. One is disgusted and yet feels pity, and one
is in a hurry to kill the bird and forget it.

Such mixed feelings filled Nekhludoff's breast as he sat listening to
the examination of the witnesses.



CHAPTER XX.

THE TRIAL--THE MEDICAL REPORT.

But, as if to spite him, the case dragged out to a great length. After
each witness had been examined separately and the expert last of all,
and a great number of useless questions had been put, with the usual
air of importance, by the public prosecutor and by both advocates, the
president invited the jury to examine the objects offered as material
evidence. They consisted of an enormous diamond ring, which had
evidently been worn on the first finger, and a test tube in which the
poison had been analysed. These things had seals and labels attached to
them.

Just as the witnesses were about to look at these things, the public
prosecutor rose and demanded that before they did this the results of
the doctor's examination of the body should be read. The president, who
was hurrying the business through as fast as he could in order to visit
his Swiss friend, though he knew that the reading of this paper could
have no other effect than that of producing weariness and putting off
the dinner hour, and that the public prosecutor wanted it read simply
because he knew he had a right to demand it, had no option but to
express his consent.

The secretary got out the doctor's report and again began to read in his
weary lisping voice, making no distinction between the "r's" and "l's."

The external examination proved that:

"1. Theropont Smelkoff's height was six feet five inches.

"Not so bad, that. A very good size," whispered the merchant, with
interest, into Nekhludoff's ear.

"2. He looked about 40 years of age.

"3. The body was of a swollen appearance.

"4. The flesh was of a greenish colour, with dark spots in several
places.

"5. The skin was raised in blisters of different sizes and in places had
come off in large pieces.

"6. The hair was chestnut; it was thick, and separated easily from the
skin when touched.

"7. The eye-balls protruded from their sockets and the cornea had grown
dim.

"8. Out of the nostrils, both ears, and the mouth oozed serous liquid;
the mouth was half open.

"9. The neck had almost disappeared, owing to the swelling of the face
and chest."

And so on and so on.

Four pages were covered with the 27 paragraphs describing all the
details of the external examination of the enormous, fat, swollen, and
decomposing body of the merchant who had been making merry in the
town. The indefinite loathing that Nekhludoff felt was increased by the
description of the corpse. Katusha's life, and the scrum oozing from
the nostrils of the corpse, and the eyes that protruded out of their
sockets, and his own treatment of her--all seemed to belong to the same
order of things, and he felt surrounded and wholly absorbed by things of
the same nature.

When the reading of the report of the external examination was ended,
the president heaved a sigh and raised his hand, hoping it was finished;
but the secretary at once went on to the description of the internal
examination. The president's head again dropped into his hand and he
shut his eyes. The merchant next to Nekhludoff could hardly keep awake,
and now and then his body swayed to and fro. The prisoners and the
gendarmes sat perfectly quiet.

The internal examination showed that:

"1. The skin was easily detachable from the bones of the skull, and
there was no coagulated blood.

"2. The bones of the skull were of average thickness and in sound
condition.

"3. On the membrane of the brain there were two discoloured spots about
four inches long, the membrane itself being of a dull white." And so on
for 13 paragraphs more. Then followed the names and signatures of
the assistants, and the doctor's conclusion showing that the changes
observed in the stomach, and to a lesser degree in the bowels and
kidneys, at the postmortem examination, and described in the official
report, gave great probability to the conclusion that Smelkoff's death
was caused by poison which had entered his stomach mixed with alcohol.
To decide from the state of the stomach what poison had been introduced
was difficult; but it was necessary to suppose that the poison entered
the stomach mixed with alcohol, since a great quantity of the latter was
found in Smelkoff's stomach.

"He could drink, and no mistake," again whispered the merchant, who had
just waked up.

The reading of this report had taken a full hour, but it had not
satisfied the public prosecutor, for, when it had been read through and
the president turned to him, saying, "I suppose it is superfluous to
read the report of the examination of the internal organs?" he answered
in a severe tone, without looking at the president, "I shall ask to have
it read."

He raised himself a little, and showed by his manner that he had a right
to have this report read, and would claim this right, and that if that
were not granted it would serve as a cause of appeal.

The member of the Court with the big beard, who suffered from catarrh of
the stomach, feeling quite done up, turned to the president:

"What is the use of reading all this? It is only dragging it out. These
new brooms do not sweep clean; they only take a long while doing it."

The member with the gold spectacles said nothing, but only looked
gloomily in front of him, expecting nothing good, either from his wife
or life in general. The reading of the report commenced.

"In the year 188-, on February 15th, I, the undersigned, commissioned
by the medical department, made an examination, No. 638," the secretary
began again with firmness and raising the pitch of his voice as if to
dispel the sleepiness that had overtaken all present, "in the presence
of the assistant medical inspector, of the internal organs:

"1. The right lung and the heart (contained in a 6-lb. glass jar).

"2. The contents of the stomach (in a 6-lb. glass jar).

"3. The stomach itself (in a 6-lb. glass jar).

"4. The liver, the spleen and the kidneys (in a 9-lb. glass jar).

"5. The intestines (in a 9-lb. earthenware jar)."

The president here whispered to one of the members, then stooped to the
other, and having received their consent, he said: "The Court considers
the reading of this report superfluous." The secretary stopped reading
and folded the paper, and the public prosecutor angrily began to write
down something. "The gentlemen of the jury may now examine the articles
of material evidence," said the president. The foreman and several of
the others rose and went to the table, not quite knowing what to do with
their hands. They looked in turn at the glass, the test tube, and the
ring. The merchant even tried on the ring.

"Ah! that was a finger," he said, returning to his place; "like a
cucumber," he added. Evidently the image he had formed in his mind of
the gigantic merchant amused him.



CHAPTER XXI.

THE TRIAL--THE PROSECUTOR AND THE ADVOCATES.

When the examination of the articles of material evidence was finished,
the president announced that the investigation was now concluded and
immediately called on the prosecutor to proceed, hoping that as the
latter was also a man, he, too, might feel inclined to smoke or dine,
and show some mercy on the rest. But the public prosecutor showed mercy
neither to himself nor to any one else. He was very stupid by nature,
but, besides this, he had had the misfortune of finishing school with a
gold medal and of receiving a reward for his essay on "Servitude" when
studying Roman Law at the University, and was therefore self-confident
and self-satisfied in the highest degree (his success with the ladies
also conducing to this) and his stupidity had become extraordinary.

When the word was given to him, he got up slowly, showing the whole of
his graceful figure in his embroidered uniform. Putting his hand on the
desk he looked round the room, slightly bowing his head, and, avoiding
the eyes of the prisoners, began to read the speech he had prepared
while the reports were being read.

"Gentlemen of the jury! The business that now lies before you is, if I
may so express myself, very characteristic."

The speech of a public prosecutor, according to his views, should always
have a social importance, like the celebrated speeches made by the
advocates who have become distinguished. True, the audience consisted of
three women--a semptress, a cook, and Simeon's sister--and a coachman;
but this did not matter. The celebrities had begun in the same way. To
be always at the height of his position, i.e., to penetrate into the
depths of the psychological significance of crime and to discover the
wounds of society, was one of the prosecutor's principles.

"You see before you, gentlemen of the jury, a crime characteristic, if
I may so express myself, of the end of our century; bearing, so to say,
the specific features of that very painful phenomenon, the corruption to
which those elements of our present-day society, which are, so to say,
particularly exposed to the burning rays of this process, are subject."

The public prosecutor spoke at great length, trying not to forget any of
the notions he had formed in his mind, and, on the other hand, never to
hesitate, and let his speech flow on for an hour and a quarter without a
break.

Only once he stopped and for some time stood swallowing his saliva, but
he soon mastered himself and made up for the interruption by heightened
eloquence. He spoke, now with a tender, insinuating accent, stepping
from foot to foot and looking at the jury, now in quiet, business-like
tones, glancing into his notebook, then with a loud, accusing voice,
looking from the audience to the advocates. But he avoided looking at
the prisoners, who were all three fixedly gazing at him. Every new craze
then in vogue among his set was alluded to in his speech; everything
that then was, and some things that still are, considered to be the last
words of scientific wisdom: the laws of heredity and inborn criminality,
evolution and the struggle for existence, hypnotism and hypnotic
influence.

According to his definition, the merchant Smelkoff was of the genuine
Russian type, and had perished in consequence of his generous, trusting
nature, having fallen into the hands of deeply degraded individuals.

Simeon Kartinkin was the atavistic production of serfdom, a stupefied,
ignorant, unprincipled man, who had not even any religion. Euphemia was
his mistress, and a victim of heredity; all the signs of degeneration
were noticeable in her. The chief wire-puller in this affair was
Maslova, presenting the phenomenon of decadence in its lowest form.
"This woman," he said, looking at her, "has, as we have to-day heard
from her mistress in this court, received an education; she cannot only
read and write, but she knows French; she is illegitimate, and probably
carries in her the germs of criminality. She was educated in an
enlightened, noble family and might have lived by honest work, but she
deserts her benefactress, gives herself up to a life of shame in which
she is distinguished from her companions by her education, and chiefly,
gentlemen of the jury, as you have heard from her mistress, by her power
of acting on the visitors by means of that mysterious capacity lately
investigated by science, especially by the school of Charcot, known by
the name of hypnotic influence. By these means she gets hold of this
Russian, this kind-hearted Sadko, [Sadko, the hero of a legend] the rich
guest, and uses his trust in order first to rob and then pitilessly to
murder him."

"Well, he is piling it on now, isn't he?" said the president with a
smile, bending towards the serious member.

"A fearful blockhead!" said the serious member.

Meanwhile the public prosecutor went on with his speech. "Gentlemen of
the jury," gracefully swaying his body, "the fate of society is to a
certain extent in your power. Your verdict will influence it. Grasp the
full meaning of this crime, the danger that awaits society from those
whom I may perhaps be permitted to call pathological individuals, such
as Maslova. Guard it from infection; guard the innocent and strong
elements of society from contagion or even destruction."

And as if himself overcome by the significance of the expected verdict,
the public prosecutor sank into his chair, highly delighted with his
speech.

The sense of the speech, when divested of all its flowers of rhetoric,
was that Maslova, having gained the merchant's confidence, hypnotised
him and went to his lodgings with his key meaning to take all the money
herself, but having been caught in the act by Simeon and Euphemia had to
share it with them. Then, in order to hide the traces of the crime, she
had returned to the lodgings with the merchant and there poisoned him.

After the prosecutor had spoken, a middle-aged man in swallow-tail coat
and low-cut waistcoat showing a large half-circle of starched white
shirt, rose from the advocates' bench and made a speech in defence of
Kartinkin and Botchkova; this was an advocate engaged by them for 300
roubles. He acquitted them both and put all the blame on Maslova. He
denied the truth of Maslova's statements that Botchkova and Kartinkin
were with her when she took the money, laying great stress on the
point that her evidence could not be accepted, she being charged with
poisoning. "The 2,500 roubles," the advocate said, "could have been
easily earned by two honest people getting from three to five roubles
per day in tips from the lodgers. The merchant's money was stolen by
Maslova and given away, or even lost, as she was not in a normal state."

The poisoning was committed by Maslova alone; therefore he begged the
jury to acquit Kartinkin and Botchkova of stealing the money; or if they
could not acquit them of the theft, at least to admit that it was done
without any participation in the poisoning.

In conclusion the advocate remarked, with a thrust at the public
prosecutor, that "the brilliant observations of that gentleman on
heredity, while explaining scientific facts concerning heredity, were
inapplicable in this case, as Botchkova was of unknown parentage." The
public prosecutor put something down on paper with an angry look, and
shrugged his shoulders in contemptuous surprise.

Then Maslova's advocate rose, and timidly and hesitatingly began his
speech in her defence.

Without denying that she had taken part in the stealing of the money,
he insisted on the fact that she had no intention of poisoning Smelkoff,
but had given him the powder only to make him fall asleep. He tried to
go in for a little eloquence in giving a description of how Maslova was
led into a life of debauchery by a man who had remained unpunished while
she had to bear all the weight of her fall; but this excursion into the
domain of psychology was so unsuccessful that it made everybody feel
uncomfortable. When he muttered something about men's cruelty and
women's helplessness, the president tried to help him by asking him to
keep closer to the facts of the case. When he had finished the public
prosecutor got up to reply. He defended his position against the first
advocate, saying that even if Botchkova was of unknown parentage the
truth of the doctrine of heredity was thereby in no way invalidated,
since the laws of heredity were so far proved by science that we can not
only deduce the crime from heredity, but heredity from the crime. As to
the statement made in defence of Maslova, that she was the victim of an
imaginary (he laid a particularly venomous stress on the word imaginary)
betrayer, he could only say that from the evidence before them it was
much more likely that she had played the part of temptress to many and
many a victim who had fallen into her hands. Having said this he sat
down in triumph. Then the prisoners were offered permission to speak in
their own defence.

Euphemia Botchkova repeated once more that she knew nothing about it and
had taken part in nothing, and firmly laid the whole blame on Maslova.
Simeon Kartinkin only repeated several times: "It is your business, but
I am innocent; it's unjust." Maslova said nothing in her defence. Told
she might do so by the president, she only lifted her eyes to him, cast
a look round the room like a hunted animal, and, dropping her head,
began to cry, sobbing aloud.

"What is the matter?" the merchant asked Nekhludoff, hearing him utter
a strange sound. This was the sound of weeping fiercely kept back.
Nekhludoff had not yet understood the significance of his present
position, and attributed the sobs he could hardly keep back and the
tears that filled his eyes to the weakness of his nerves. He put on his
pince-nez in order to hide the tears, then got out his handkerchief and
began blowing his nose.

Fear of the disgrace that would befall him if every one in the court
knew of his conduct stifled the inner working of his soul. This fear
was, during this first period, stronger than all else.



CHAPTER XXII.

THE TRIAL--THE SUMMING UP.

After the last words of the prisoners had been heard, the form in which
the questions were to be put to the jury was settled, which also took
some time. At last the questions were formulated, and the president
began the summing up.

Before putting the case to the jury, he spoke to them for some time in a
pleasant, homely manner, explaining that burglary was burglary and theft
was theft, and that stealing from a place which was under lock and key
was stealing from a place under lock and key. While he was explaining
this, he looked several times at Nekhludoff as if wishing to impress
upon him these important facts, in hopes that, having understood it,
Nekhludoff would make his fellow-jurymen also understand it. When he
considered that the jury were sufficiently imbued with these facts, he
proceeded to enunciate another truth--namely, that a murder is an
action which has the death of a human being as its consequence, and that
poisoning could therefore also be termed murder. When, according to his
opinion, this truth had also been received by the jury, he went on to
explain that if theft and murder had been committed at the same time,
the combination of the crimes was theft with murder.

Although he was himself anxious to finish as soon as possible, although
he knew that his Swiss friend would be waiting for him, he had grown so
used to his occupation that, having begun to speak, he could not stop
himself, and therefore he went on to impress on the jury with much
detail that if they found the prisoners guilty, they would have the
right to give a verdict of guilty; and if they found them not guilty,
to give a verdict of not guilty; and if they found them guilty of one of
the crimes and not of the other, they might give a verdict of guilty
on the one count and of not guilty on the other. Then he explained that
though this right was given them they should use it with reason.

He was going to add that if they gave an affirmative answer to any
question that was put to them they would thereby affirm everything
included in the question, so that if they did not wish to affirm the
whole of the question they should mention the part of the question they
wished to be excepted. But, glancing at the clock, and seeing it was
already five minutes to three, he resolved to trust to their being
intelligent enough to understand this without further comment.

"The facts of this case are the following," began the president, and
repeated all that had already been said several times by the advocates,
the public prosecutor and the witnesses.

The president spoke, and the members on each side of him listened with
deeply-attentive expressions, but looked from time to time at the clock,
for they considered the speech too long though very good--i.e., such
as it ought to be. The public prosecutor, the lawyers, and, in fact,
everyone in the court, shared the same impression. The president
finished the summing up. Then he found it necessary to tell the jury
what they all knew, or might have found out by reading it up--i.e., how
they were to consider the case, count the votes, in case of a tie to
acquit the prisoners, and so on.

Everything seemed to have been told; but no, the president could not
forego his right of speaking as yet. It was so pleasant to hear the
impressive tones of his own voice, and therefore he found it necessary
to say a few words more about the importance of the rights given to the
jury, how carefully they should use the rights and how they ought not
to abuse them, about their being on their oath, that they were the
conscience of society, that the secrecy of the debating-room should be
considered sacred, etc.

From the time the president commenced his speech, Maslova watched him
without moving her eyes as if afraid of losing a single word; so that
Nekhludoff was not afraid of meeting her eyes and kept looking at her
all the time. And his mind passed through those phases in which a face
which we have not seen for many years first strikes us with the outward
changes brought about during the time of separation, and then gradually
becomes more and more like its old self, when the changes made by
time seem to disappear, and before our spiritual eyes rises only the
principal expression of one exceptional, unique individuality. Yes,
though dressed in a prison cloak, and in spite of the developed figure,
the fulness of the bosom and lower part of the face, in spite of a few
wrinkles on the forehead and temples and the swollen eyes, this was
certainly the same Katusha who, on that Easter eve, had so innocently
looked up to him whom she loved, with her fond, laughing eyes full of
joy and life.

"What a strange coincidence that after ten years, during which I never
saw her, this case should have come up today when I am on the jury, and
that it is in the prisoners' dock that I see her again! And how will it
end? Oh, dear, if they would only get on quicker."

Still he would not give in to the feelings of repentance which began to
arise within him. He tried to consider it all as a coincidence, which
would pass without infringing his manner of life. He felt himself in
the position of a puppy, when its master, taking it by the scruff of
its neck, rubs its nose in the mess it has made. The puppy whines, draws
back and wants to get away as far as possible from the effects of its
misdeed, but the pitiless master does not let go.

And so, Nekhludoff, feeling all the repulsiveness of what he had done,
felt also the powerful hand of the Master, but he did not feel the whole
significance of his action yet and would not recognise the Master's
hand. He did not wish to believe that it was the effect of his deed that
lay before him, but the pitiless hand of the Master held him and he felt
he could not get away. He was still keeping up his courage and sat on
his chair in the first row in his usual self-possessed pose, one leg
carelessly thrown over the other, and playing with his pince-nez. Yet
all the while, in the depths of his soul, he felt the cruelty, cowardice
and baseness, not only of this particular action of his but of his whole
self-willed, depraved, cruel, idle life; and that dreadful veil which
had in some unaccountable manner hidden from him this sin of his and
the whole of his subsequent life was beginning to shake, and he caught
glimpses of what was covered by that veil.



CHAPTER XXIII.

THE TRIAL--THE VERDICT.

At last the president finished his speech, and lifting the list of
questions with a graceful movement of his arm he handed it to the
foreman, who came up to take it. The jury, glad to be able to get
into the debating-court, got up one after the other and left the room,
looking as if a bit ashamed of themselves and again not knowing what
to do with their hands. As soon as the door was closed behind them
a gendarme came up to it, pulled his sword out of the scabbard, and,
holding it up against his shoulder, stood at the door. The judges got up
and went away. The prisoners were also led out. When the jury came
into the debating-room the first thing they did was to take out their
cigarettes, as before, and begin smoking. The sense of the unnaturalness
and falseness of their position, which all of them had experienced
while sitting in their places in the court, passed when they entered the
debating-room and started smoking, and they settled down with a feeling
of relief and at once began an animated conversation.

"'Tisn't the girl's fault. She's got mixed up in it," said the kindly
merchant. "We must recommend her to mercy."

"That's just what we are going to consider," said the foreman. "We must
not give way to our personal impressions."

"The president's summing up was good," remarked the colonel.

"Good? Why, it nearly sent me to sleep!"

"The chief point is that the servants could have known nothing about the
money if Maslova had not been in accord with them," said the clerk of
Jewish extraction.

"Well, do you think that it was she who stole the money?" asked one of
the jury.

"I will never believe it," cried the kindly merchant; "it was all that
red-eyed hag's doing."

"They are a nice lot, all of them," said the colonel.

"But she says she never went into the room."

"Oh, believe her by all means."

"I should not believe that jade, not for the world."

"Whether you believe her or not does not settle the question," said the
clerk.

"The girl had the key," said the colonel.

"What if she had?" retorted the merchant.

"And the ring?"

"But didn't she say all about it?" again cried the merchant. "The fellow
had a temper of his own, and had had a drop too much besides, and gave
the girl a licking; what could be simpler? Well, then he's sorry--quite
naturally. 'There, never mind,' says he; 'take this.' Why, I heard them
say he was six foot five high; I should think he must have weighed about
20 stones."

"That's not the point," said Peter Gerasimovitch. "The question is,
whether she was the instigator and inciter in this affair, or the
servants?"

"It was not possible for the servants to do it alone; she had the key."

This kind of random talk went on for a considerable time. At last the
foreman said: "I beg your pardon, gentlemen, but had we not better take
our places at the table and discuss the matter? Come, please." And he
took the chair.

The questions were expressed in the following manner.

1. Is the peasant of the village Borki, Krapivinskia district, Simeon
Petrov Kartinkin, 33 years of age, guilty of having, in agreement with
other persons, given the merchant Smelkoff, on the 17th January, 188-,
in the town of N-----, with intent to deprive him of life, for the
purpose of robbing him, poisoned brandy, which caused Smelkoff's death,
and of having stolen from him about 2,500 roubles in money and a diamond
ring?

2. Is the meschanka Euphemia Ivanovna Botchkova, 43 years of age, guilty
of the crimes described above?

3. Is the meschanka Katerina Michaelovna Maslova, 27 years of age,
guilty of the crimes described in the first question?

4. If the prisoner Euphemia Botchkova is not guilty according to the
first question, is she not guilty of having, on the 17th January, in the
town of N----, while in service at the hotel Mauritania, stolen from a
locked portmanteau, belonging to the merchant Smelkoff, a lodger in that
hotel, and which was in the room occupied by him, 2,500 roubles, for
which object she unlocked the portmanteau with a key she brought and
fitted to the lock?

The foreman read the first question.

"Well, gentlemen, what do you think?" This question was quickly
answered. All agreed to say "Guilty," as if convinced that Kartinkin
had taken part both in the poisoning and the robbery. An old artelshik,
[member of an artel, an association of workmen, in which the members
share profits and liabilities] whose answers were all in favour of
acquittal, was the only exception.

The foreman thought he did not understand, and began to point out to him
that everything tended to prove Kartinkin's guilt. The old man answered
that he did understand, but still thought it better to have pity on him.
"We are not saints ourselves," and he kept to his opinion.

The answer to the second question concerning Botchkova was, after much
dispute and many exclamations, answered by the words, "Not guilty,"
there being no clear proofs of her having taken part in the poisoning--a
fact her advocate had strongly insisted on. The merchant, anxious to
acquit Maslova, insisted that Botchkova was the chief instigator of it
all. Many of the jury shared this view, but the foreman, wishing to be
in strict accord with the law, declared they had no grounds to consider
her as an accomplice in the poisoning. After much disputing the
foreman's opinion triumphed.

To the fourth question concerning Botchkova the answer was "Guilty." But
on the artelshik's insistence she was recommended to mercy.

The third question, concerning Maslova, raised a fierce dispute. The
foreman maintained she was guilty both of the poisoning and the theft,
to which the merchant would not agree. The colonel, the clerk and the
old artelshik sided with the merchant, the rest seemed shaky, and the
opinion of the foreman began to gain ground, chiefly because all the
jurymen were getting tired, and preferred to take up the view that would
bring them sooner to a decision and thus liberate them.

From all that had passed, and from his former knowledge of Maslova,
Nekhludoff was certain that she was innocent of both the theft and the
poisoning. And he felt sure that all the others would come to the same
conclusion. When he saw that the merchant's awkward defence (evidently
based on his physical admiration for her, which he did not even try
to hide) and the foreman's insistence, and especially everybody's
weariness, were all tending to her condemnation, he longed to state his
objections, yet dared not, lest his relations with Maslova should be
discovered. He felt he could not allow things to go on without stating
his objection; and, blushing and growing pale again, was about to speak
when Peter Gerasimovitch, irritated by the authoritative manner of
the foreman, began to raise his objections and said the very things
Nekhludoff was about to say.

"Allow me one moment," he said. "You seem to think that her having the
key proves she is guilty of the theft; but what could be easier than
for the servants to open the portmanteau with a false key after she was
gone?"

"Of course, of course," said the merchant.

"She could not have taken the money, because in her position she would
hardly know what to do with it."

"That's just what I say," remarked the merchant.

"But it is very likely that her coming put the idea into the servants'
heads and that they grasped the opportunity and shoved all the blame
on her." Peter Gerasimovitch spoke so irritably that the foreman became
irritated too, and went on obstinately defending the opposite views; but
Peter Gerasimovitch spoke so convincingly that the majority agreed with
him, and decided that Maslova was not guilty of stealing the money and
that the ring was given her.

But when the question of her having taken part in the poisoning was
raised, her zealous defender, the merchant, declared that she must
be acquitted, because she could have no reason for the poisoning. The
foreman, however, said that it was impossible to acquit her, because she
herself had pleaded guilty to having given the powder.

"Yes, but thinking it was opium," said the merchant.

"Opium can also deprive one of life," said the colonel, who was fond
of wandering from the subject, and he began telling how his
brother-in-law's wife would have died of an overdose of opium if there
had not been a doctor near at hand to take the necessary measures. The
colonel told his story so impressively, with such self-possession and
dignity, that no one had the courage to interrupt him. Only the clerk,
infected by his example, decided to break in with a story of his own:
"There are some who get so used to it that they can take 40 drops. I
have a relative--," but the colonel would not stand the interruption,
and went on to relate what effects the opium had on his brother-in-law's
wife.

"But, gentlemen, do you know it is getting on towards five o'clock?"
said one of the jury.

"Well, gentlemen, what are we to say, then?" inquired the foreman.
"Shall we say she is guilty, but without intent to rob? And without
stealing any property? Will that do?" Peter Gerasimovitch, pleased with
his victory, agreed.

"But she must be recommended to mercy," said the merchant.

All agreed; only the old artelshik insisted that they should say "Not
guilty."

"It comes to the same thing," explained the foreman; "without intent to
rob, and without stealing any property. Therefore, 'Not guilty,' that's
evident."

"All right; that'll do. And we recommend her to mercy," said the
merchant, gaily.

They were all so tired, so confused by the discussions, that nobody
thought of saying that she was guilty of giving the powder but without
the intent of taking life. Nekhludoff was so excited that he did not
notice this omission, and so the answers were written down in the form
agreed upon and taken to the court.

Rabelais says that a lawyer who was trying a case quoted all sorts of
laws, read 20 pages of judicial senseless Latin, and then proposed to
the judges to throw dice, and if the numbers proved odd the defendant
would be right, if not, the plaintiff.

It was much the same in this case. The resolution was taken, not because
everybody agreed upon it, but because the president, who had been
summing up at such length, omitted to say what he always said on such
occasions, that the answer might be, "Yes, guilty, but without the
intent of taking life;" because the colonel had related the story of his
brother-in-law's wife at such great length; because Nekhludoff was too
excited to notice that the proviso "without intent to take life" had
been omitted, and thought that the words "without intent" nullified the
conviction; because Peter Gerasimovitch had retired from the room while
the questions and answers were being read, and chiefly because, being
tired, and wishing to get away as soon as possible, all were ready to
agree with the decision which would bring matters to an end soonest.

The jurymen rang the bell. The gendarme who had stood outside the door
with his sword drawn put the sword back into the scabbard and stepped
aside. The judges took their seats and the jury came out one by one.

The foreman brought in the paper with an air of solemnity and handed
it to the president, who looked at it, and, spreading out his hands
in astonishment, turned to consult his companions. The president was
surprised that the jury, having put in a proviso--without intent to
rob--did not put in a second proviso--without intent to take life. From
the decision of the jury it followed that Maslova had not stolen, nor
robbed, and yet poisoned a man without any apparent reason.

"Just see what an absurd decision they have come to," he whispered to
the member on his left. "This means penal servitude in Siberia, and she
is innocent."

"Surely you do not mean to say she is innocent?" answered the serious
member.

"Yes, she is positively innocent. I think this is a case for putting
Article 817 into practice (Article 817 states that if the Court
considers the decision of the jury unjust it may set it aside)."

"What do you think?" said the president, turning to the other member.
The kindly member did not answer at once. He looked at the number on a
paper before him and added up the figures; the sum would not divide
by three. He had settled in his mind that if it did divide by three he
would agree to the president's proposal, but though the sum would not so
divide his kindness made him agree all the same.

"I, too, think it should be done," he said.

"And you?" asked the president, turning to the serious member.

"On no account," he answered, firmly. "As it is, the papers accuse the
jury of acquitting prisoners. What will they say if the Court does it?
I, shall not agree to that on any account."

The president looked at his watch. "It is a pity, but what's to be
done?" and handed the questions to the foreman to read out. All got
up, and the foreman, stepping from foot to foot, coughed, and read the
questions and the answers. All the Court, secretary, advocates, and even
the public prosecutor, expressed surprise. The prisoners sat impassive,
evidently not understanding the meaning of the answers. Everybody sat
down again, and the president asked the prosecutor what punishments the
prisoners were to be subjected to.

The prosecutor, glad of his unexpected success in getting Maslova
convicted, and attributing the success entirely to his own eloquence,
looked up the necessary information, rose and said: "With Simeon
Kartinkin I should deal according to Statute 1,452 paragraph 93.
Euphemia Botchkova according to Statute . . ., etc. Katerina Maslova
according to Statute . . ., etc."

All three punishments were the heaviest that could be inflicted.

"The Court will adjourn to consider the sentence," said the president,
rising. Everybody rose after him, and with the pleasant feeling of a
task well done began to leave the room or move about in it.

"D'you know, sirs, we have made a shameful hash of it?" said Peter
Gerasimovitch, approaching Nekhludoff, to whom the foreman was relating
something. "Why, we've got her to Siberia."

"What are you saying?" exclaimed Nekhludoff. This time he did not notice
the teacher's familiarity.

"Why, we did not put in our answer 'Guilty, but without intent of
causing death.' The secretary just told me the public prosecutor is for
condemning her to 15 years' penal servitude."

"Well, but it was decided so," said the foreman.

Peter Gerasimovitch began to dispute this, saying that since she did
not take the money it followed naturally that she could not have had any
intention of committing murder.

"But I read the answer before going out," said the foreman, defending
himself, "and nobody objected."

"I had just then gone out of the room," said Peter Gerasimovitch,
turning to Nekhludoff, "and your thoughts must have been wool-gathering
to let the thing pass."

"I never imagined this," Nekhludoff replied.

"Oh, you didn't?"

"Oh, well, we can get it put right," said Nekhludoff.

"Oh, dear no; it's finished."

Nekhludoff looked at the prisoners. They whose fate was being decided
still sat motionless behind the grating in front of the soldiers.
Maslova was smiling. Another feeling stirred in Nekhludoff's soul. Up to
now, expecting her acquittal and thinking she would remain in the town,
he was uncertain how to act towards her. Any kind of relations with her
would be so very difficult. But Siberia and penal servitude at once cut
off every possibility of any kind of relations with her. The wounded
bird would stop struggling in the game-bag, and no longer remind him of
its existence.



CHAPTER XXIV.

THE TRIAL--THE SENTENCE.

Peter Gerasimovitch's assumption was correct. The president came back
from the debating room with a paper, and read as follows:--"April 28th,
188-. By His Imperial Majesty's ukase No. ----- The Criminal Court, on
the strength of the decision of the jury, in accordance with Section
3 of Statute 771, Section 3 of Statutes 770 and 777, decrees that the
peasant, Simeon Kartinkin, 33 years of age, and the meschanka Katerina
Maslova, 27 years of age, are to be deprived of all property rights and
to be sent to penal servitude in Siberia, Kartinkin for eight, Maslova
for four years, with the consequences stated in Statute 25 of the code.
The meschanka Botchkova, 43 years of age, to be deprived of all special
personal and acquired rights, and to be imprisoned for three years with
consequences in accord with Statute 48 of the code. The costs of the
case to be borne equally by the prisoners; and, in the case of their
being without sufficient property, the costs to be transferred to the
Treasury. Articles of material evidence to be sold, the ring to be
returned, the phials destroyed." Botchkova was condemned to prison,
Simeon Kartinken and Katerina Maslova to the loss of all special rights
and privileges and to penal servitude in Siberia, he for eight and she
for four years.

Kartinkin stood holding his arms close to his sides and moving his lips.
Botchkova seemed perfectly calm. Maslova, when she heard the sentence,
blushed scarlet. "I'm not guilty, not guilty!" she suddenly cried, so
that it resounded through the room. "It is a sin! I am not guilty! I
never wished--I never thought! It is the truth I am saying--the truth!"
and sinking on the bench she burst into tears and sobbed aloud. When
Kartinkin and Botchkova went out she still sat crying, so that a
gendarme had to touch the sleeve of her cloak.

"No; it is impossible to leave it as it is," said Nekhludoff to himself,
utterly forgetting his bad thoughts. He did not know why he wished to
look at her once more, but hurried out into the corridor. There was
quite a crowd at the door. The advocates and jury were going out,
pleased to have finished the business, and he was obliged to wait a few
seconds, and when he at last got out into the corridor she was far
in front. He hurried along the corridor after her, regardless of the
attention he was arousing, caught her up, passed her, and stopped. She
had ceased crying and only sobbed, wiping her red, discoloured face with
the end of the kerchief on her head. She passed without noticing him.
Then he hurried back to see the president. The latter had already left
the court, and Nekhludoff followed him into the lobby and went up to
him just as he had put on his light grey overcoat and was taking the
silver-mounted walking-stick which an attendant was handing him.

"Sir, may I have a few words with you concerning some business I have
just decided upon?" said Nekhludoff. "I am one of the jury."

"Oh, certainly, Prince Nekhludoff. I shall be delighted. I think we
have met before," said the president, pressing Nekhludoff's hand and
recalling with pleasure the evening when he first met Nekhludoff, and
when he had danced so gaily, better than all the young people. "What can
I do for you?"

"There is a mistake in the answer concerning Maslova. She is not guilty
of the poisoning and yet she is condemned to penal servitude," said
Nekhludoff, with a preoccupied and gloomy air.

"The Court passed the sentence in accordance with the answers you
yourselves gave," said the president, moving towards the front door;
"though they did not seem to be quite in accord." And he remembered
that he had been going to explain to the jury that a verdict of "guilty"
meant guilty of intentional murder unless the words "without intent to
take life" were added, but had, in his hurry to get the business over,
omitted to do so.

"Yes, but could not the mistake be rectified?"

"A reason for an appeal can always be found. You will have to speak to
an advocate," said the president, putting on his hat a little to one
side and continuing to move towards the door.

"But this is terrible."

"Well, you see, there were two possibilities before Maslova," said the
president, evidently wishing to be as polite and pleasant to Nekhludoff
as he could. Then, having arranged his whiskers over his coat collar, he
put his hand lightly under Nekhludoff's elbow, and, still directing his
steps towards the front door, he said, "You are going, too?"

"Yes," said Nekhludoff, quickly getting his coat, and following him.

They went out into the bright, merry sunlight, and had to raise their
voices because of the rattling of the wheels on the pavement.

"The situation is a curious one, you see," said the president; "what lay
before this Maslova was one of two things: either to be almost acquitted
and only imprisoned for a short time, or, taking the preliminary
confinement into consideration, perhaps not at all--or Siberia. There is
nothing between. Had you but added the words, 'without intent to cause
death,' she would have been acquitted."

"Yes, it was inexcusable of me to omit that," said Nekhludoff.

"That's where the whole matter lies," said the president, with a smile,
and looked at his watch. He had only three-quarters of an hour left
before the time appointed by his Clara would elapse.

"Now, if you like to speak to the advocates you'll have to find a reason
for an appeal; that can be easily done." Then, turning to an isvostchik,
he called out, "To the Dvoryanskaya 30 copecks; I never give more."

"All right, your honour; here you are."

"Good-afternoon. If I can be of any use, my address is House Dvornikoff,
on the Dvoryanskaya; it's easy to remember." And he bowed in a friendly
manner as he got into the trap and drove off.



CHAPTER XXV.

NEKHLUDOFF CONSULTS AN ADVOCATE.

His conversation with the president and the fresh air quieted Nekhludoff
a little. He now thought that the feelings experienced by him had been
exaggerated by the unusual surroundings in which he had spent the whole
of the morning, and by that wonderful and startling coincidence. Still,
it was absolutely necessary to take some steps to lighten Maslova's
fate, and to take them quickly. "Yes, at once! It will be best to find
out here in the court where the advocate Fanarin or Mikishin lives."
These were two well-known advocates whom Nekhludoff called to mind. He
returned to the court, took off his overcoat, and went upstairs. In the
first corridor he met Fanarin himself. He stopped him, and told him that
he was just going to look him up on a matter of business.

Fanarin knew Nekhludoff by sight and name, and said he would be very
glad to be of service to him.

"Though I am rather tired, still, if your business will not take very
long, perhaps you might tell me what it is now. Will you step in here?"
And he led Nekhludoff into a room, probably some judge's cabinet. They
sat down by the table.

"Well, and what is your business?"

"First of all, I must ask you to keep the business private. I do not
want it known that I take an interest in the affair."

"Oh, that of course. Well?"

"I was on the jury to-day, and we have condemned a woman to Siberia,
an innocent woman. This bothers me very much." Nekhludoff, to his own
surprise, blushed and became confused. Fanarin glanced at him rapidly,
and looked down again, listening.

"Well?"

"We have condemned a woman, and I should like to appeal to a higher
court."

"To the Senate, you mean," said Fanarin, correcting him.

"Yes, and I should like to ask you to take the case in hand." Nekhludoff
wanted to get the most difficult part over, and added, "I shall take the
costs of the case on myself, whatever they may be."

"Oh, we shall settle all that," said the advocate, smiling with
condescension at Nekhludoff's inexperience in these matters. "What is
the case?"

Nekhludoff stated what had happened.

"All right. I shall look the case through to-morrow or the day
after--no--better on Thursday. If you will come to me at six o'clock I
will give you an answer. Well, and now let us go; I have to make a few
inquiries here."

Nekhludoff took leave of him and went out. This talk with the advocate,
and the fact that he had taken measures for Maslova's defence, quieted
him still further. He went out into the street. The weather was
beautiful, and he joyfully drew in a long breath of spring air. He was
at once surrounded by isvostchiks offering their services, but he went
on foot. A whole swarm of pictures and memories of Katusha and his
conduct to her began whirling in his brain, and he felt depressed and
everything appeared gloomy. "No, I shall consider all this later on; I
must now get rid of all these disagreeable impressions," he thought to
himself.

He remembered the Korchagin's dinner and looked at his watch. It was
not yet too late to get there in time. He heard the ring of a passing
tramcar, ran to catch it, and jumped on. He jumped off again when they
got to the market-place, took a good isvostchik, and ten minutes later
was at the entrance of the Korchagins' big house.



CHAPTER XXVI.

THE HOUSE OF KORCHAGIN.

"Please to walk in, your excellency," said the friendly, fat doorkeeper
of the Korchagins' big house, opening the door, which moved noiselessly
on its patent English hinges; "you are expected. They are at dinner.
My orders were to admit only you." The doorkeeper went as far as the
staircase and rang.

"Are there any strangers?" asked Nekhludoff, taking off his overcoat.

"Mr. Kolosoff and Michael Sergeivitch only, besides the family."

A very handsome footman with whiskers, in a swallow-tail coat and white
gloves, looked down from the landing.

"Please to walk up, your excellency," he said. "You are expected."

Nekhludoff went up and passed through the splendid large dancing-room,
which he knew so well, into the dining-room. There the whole Korchagin
family--except the mother, Sophia Vasilievna, who never left her
cabinet--were sitting round the table. At the head of the table sat old
Korchagin; on his left the doctor, and on his right, a visitor, Ivan
Ivanovitch Kolosoff, a former Marechal de Noblesse, now a bank director,
Korchagin's friend and a Liberal. Next on the left side sat Miss Rayner,
the governess of Missy's little sister, and the four-year-old girl
herself. Opposite them, Missy's brother, Petia, the only son of the
Korchagins, a public-school boy of the Sixth Class. It was because of
his examinations that the whole family were still in town. Next to
him sat a University student who was coaching him, and Missy's cousin,
Michael Sergeivitch Telegin, generally called Misha; opposite him,
Katerina Alexeevna, a 40-year-old maiden lady, a Slavophil; and at the
foot of the table sat Missy herself, with an empty place by her side.

"Ah! that's right! Sit down. We are still at the fish," said old
Korchagin with difficulty, chewing carefully with his false teeth,
and lifting his bloodshot eyes (which had no visible lids to them) to
Nekhludoff.

"Stephen!" he said, with his mouth full, addressing the stout, dignified
butler, and pointing with his eyes to the empty place. Though Nekhludoff
knew Korchagin very well, and had often seen him at dinner, to-day this
red face with the sensual smacking lips, the fat neck above the napkin
stuck into his waistcoat, and the whole over-fed military figure, struck
him very disagreeably. Then Nekhludoff remembered, without wishing to,
what he knew of the cruelty of this man, who, when in command, used
to have men flogged, and even hanged, without rhyme or reason, simply
because he was rich and had no need to curry favour.

"Immediately, your excellency," said Stephen, getting a large soup ladle
out of the sideboard, which was decorated with a number of silver vases.
He made a sign with his head to the handsome footman, who began at once
to arrange the untouched knives and forks and the napkin, elaborately
folded with the embroidered family crest uppermost, in front of the
empty place next to Missy. Nekhludoff went round shaking hands with
every one, and all, except old Korchagin and the ladies, rose when he
approached. And this walk round the table, this shaking the hands of
people, with many of whom he never talked, seemed unpleasant and odd. He
excused himself for being late, and was about to sit down between Missy
and Katerina Alexeevna, but old Korchagin insisted that if he would not
take a glass of vodka he should at least take a bit of something to whet
his appetite, at the side table, on which stood small dishes of lobster,
caviare, cheese, and salt herrings. Nekhludoff did not know how hungry
he was until he began to eat, and then, having taken some bread and
cheese, he went on eating eagerly.

"Well, have you succeeded in undermining the basis of society?"
asked Kolosoff, ironically quoting an expression used by a retrograde
newspaper in attacking trial by jury. "Acquitted the culprits and
condemned the innocent, have you?"

"Undermining the basis--undermining the basis," repeated Prince
Korchagin, laughing. He had a firm faith in the wisdom and learning of
his chosen friend and companion.

At the risk of seeming rude, Nekhludoff left Kolosoff's question
unanswered, and sitting down to his steaming soup, went on eating.

"Do let him eat," said Missy, with a smile. The pronoun him she used as
a reminder of her intimacy with Nekhludoff. Kolosoff went on in a loud
voice and lively manner to give the contents of the article against
trial by jury which had aroused his indignation. Missy's cousin, Michael
Sergeivitch, endorsed all his statements, and related the contents of
another article in the same paper. Missy was, as usual, very distinguee,
and well, unobtrusively well, dressed.

"You must be terribly tired," she said, after waiting until Nekhludoff
had swallowed what was in his mouth.

"Not particularly. And you? Have you been to look at the pictures?" he
asked.

"No, we put that off. We have been playing tennis at the Salamatoffs'.
It is quite true, Mr. Crooks plays remarkably well."

Nekhludoff had come here in order to distract his thoughts, for he
used to like being in this house, both because its refined luxury had a
pleasant effect on him and because of the atmosphere of tender flattery
that unobtrusively surrounded him. But to-day everything in the house
was repulsive to him--everything: beginning with the doorkeeper, the
broad staircase, the flowers, the footman, the table decorations, up to
Missy herself, who to-day seemed unattractive and affected. Kolosoff's
self-assured, trivial tone of liberalism was unpleasant, as was also the
sensual, self-satisfied, bull-like appearance of old Korchagin, and the
French phrases of Katerina Alexeevna, the Slavophil. The constrained
looks of the governess and the student were unpleasant, too, but most
unpleasant of all was the pronoun _him_ that Missy had used. Nekhludoff
had long been wavering between two ways of regarding Missy; sometimes he
looked at her as if by moonlight, and could see in her nothing but what
was beautiful, fresh, pretty, clever and natural; then suddenly, as
if the bright sun shone on her, he saw her defects and could not help
seeing them. This was such a day for him. To-day he saw all the wrinkles
of her face, knew which of her teeth were false, saw the way her hair
was crimped, the sharpness of her elbows, and, above all, how large her
thumb-nail was and how like her father's.

"Tennis is a dull game," said Kolosoff; "we used to play lapta when we
were children. That was much more amusing."

"Oh, no, you never tried it; it's awfully interesting," said Missy,
laying, it seemed to Nekhludoff, a very affected stress on the word
"awfully." Then a dispute arose in which Michael Sergeivitch, Katerina
Alexeevna and all the others took part, except the governess, the
student and the children, who sat silent and wearied.

"Oh, these everlasting disputes!" said old Korchagin, laughing, and he
pulled the napkin out of his waistcoat, noisily pushed back his chair,
which the footman instantly caught hold of, and left the table.

Everybody rose after him, and went up to another table on which stood
glasses of scented water. They rinsed their mouths, then resumed the
conversation, interesting to no one.

"Don't you think so?" said Missy to Nekhludoff, calling for a
confirmation of the statement that nothing shows up a man's character
like a game. She noticed that preoccupied and, as it seemed to her,
dissatisfied look which she feared, and she wanted to find out what had
caused it.

"Really, I can't tell; I have never thought about it," Nekhludoff
answered.

"Will you come to mamma?" asked Missy.

"Yes, yes," he said, in a tone which plainly proved that he did not want
to go, and took out a cigarette.

She looked at him in silence, with a questioning look, and he felt
ashamed. "To come into a house and give the people the dumps," he
thought about himself; then, trying to be amiable, said that he would go
with pleasure if the princess would admit him.

"Oh, yes! Mamma will be pleased. You may smoke there; and Ivan
Ivanovitch is also there."

The mistress of the house, Princess Sophia Vasilievna, was a recumbent
lady. It was the eighth year that, when visitors were present, she lay
in lace and ribbons, surrounded with velvet, gilding, ivory, bronze,
lacquer and flowers, never going out, and only, as she put it, receiving
intimate friends, i.e., those who according to her idea stood out from
the common herd.

Nekhludoff was admitted into the number of these friends because he was
considered clever, because his mother had been an intimate friend of the
family, and because it was desirable that Missy should marry him.

Sophia Vasilievna's room lay beyond the large and the small
drawing-rooms. In the large drawing-room, Missy, who was in front of
Nekhludoff, stopped resolutely, and taking hold of the back of a small
green chair, faced him.

Missy was very anxious to get married, and as he was a suitable match
and she also liked him, she had accustomed herself to the thought that
he should be hers (not she his). To lose him would be very mortifying.
She now began talking to him in order to get him to explain his
intentions.

"I see something has happened," she said. "Tell me, what is the matter
with you?"

He remembered the meeting in the law court, and frowned and blushed.

"Yes, something has happened," he said, wishing to be truthful; "a very
unusual and serious event."

"What is it, then? Can you not tell me what it is?" She was pursuing her
aim with that unconscious yet obstinate cunning often observable in the
mentally diseased.

"Not now. Please do not ask me to tell you. I have not yet had time
fully to consider it," and he blushed still more.

"And so you will not tell me?" A muscle twitched in her face and she
pushed back the chair she was holding. "Well then, come!" She shook her
head as if to expel useless thoughts, and, faster than usual, went on in
front of him.

He fancied that her mouth was unnaturally compressed in order to keep
back the tears. He was ashamed of having hurt her, and yet he knew that
the least weakness on his part would mean disaster, i.e., would bind
him to her. And to-day he feared this more than anything, and silently
followed her to the princess's cabinet.



CHAPTER XXVII.

MISSY'S MOTHER.

Princess Sophia Vasilievna, Missy's mother, had finished her very
elaborate and nourishing dinner. (She had it always alone, that no one
should see her performing this unpoetical function.) By her couch stood
a small table with her coffee, and she was smoking a pachitos. Princess
Sophia Vasilievna was a long, thin woman, with dark hair, large black
eyes and long teeth, and still pretended to be young.

Her intimacy with the doctor was being talked about. Nekhludoff had
known that for some time; but when he saw the doctor sitting by her
couch, his oily, glistening beard parted in the middle, he not only
remembered the rumours about them, but felt greatly disgusted. By
the table, on a low, soft, easy chair, next to Sophia Vasilievna, sat
Kolosoff, stirring his coffee. A glass of liqueur stood on the table.
Missy came in with Nekhludoff, but did not remain in the room.

"When mamma gets tired of you and drives you away, then come to me,"
she said, turning to Kolosoff and Nekhludoff, speaking as if nothing had
occurred; then she went away, smiling merrily and stepping noiselessly
on the thick carpet.

"How do you do, dear friend? Sit down and talk," said Princess Sophia
Vasilievna, with her affected but very naturally-acted smile, showing
her fine, long teeth--a splendid imitation of what her own had
once been. "I hear that you have come from the Law Courts very much
depressed. I think it must be very trying to a person with a heart," she
added in French.

"Yes, that is so," said Nekhludoff. "One often feels one's own de--one
feels one has no right to judge."

"Comme, c'est vrai," she cried, as if struck by the truth of this
remark. She was in the habit of artfully flattering all those with whom
she conversed. "Well, and what of your picture? It does interest me so.
If I were not such a sad invalid I should have been to see it long ago,"
she said.

"I have quite given it up," Nekhludoff replied drily. The falseness of
her flattery seemed as evident to him to-day as her age, which she was
trying to conceal, and he could not put himself into the right state to
behave politely.

"Oh, that _is_ a pity! Why, he has a real talent for art; I have it from
Repin's own lips," she added, turning to Kolosoff.

"Why is it she is not ashamed of lying so?" Nekhludoff thought, and
frowned.

When she had convinced herself that Nekhludoff was in a bad temper and
that one could not get him into an agreeable and clever conversation,
Sophia Vasilievna turned to Kolosoff, asking his opinion of a new play.
She asked it in a tone as if Kolosoff's opinion would decide all doubts,
and each word of this opinion be worthy of being immortalised. Kolosoff
found fault both with the play and its author, and that led him to
express his views on art. Princess Sophia Vasilievna, while trying at
the same time to defend the play, seemed impressed by the truth of his
arguments, either giving in at once, or at least modifying her opinion.
Nekhludoff looked and listened, but neither saw nor heard what was going
on before him.

Listening now to Sophia Vasilievna, now to Kolosoff, Nekhludoff noticed
that neither he nor she cared anything about the play or each other, and
that if they talked it was only to gratify the physical desire to
move the muscles of the throat and tongue after having eaten; and that
Kolosoff, having drunk vodka, wine and liqueur, was a little tipsy.
Not tipsy like the peasants who drink seldom, but like people to
whom drinking wine has become a habit. He did not reel about or talk
nonsense, but he was in a state that was not normal; excited and
self-satisfied. Nekhludoff also noticed that during the conversation
Princess Sophia Vasilievna kept glancing uneasily at the window, through
which a slanting ray of sunshine, which might vividly light up her aged
face, was beginning to creep up.

"How true," she said in reference to some remark of Kolosoff's, touching
the button of an electric bell by the side of her couch. The doctor
rose, and, like one who is at home, left the room without saying
anything. Sophia Vasilievna followed him with her eyes and continued the
conversation.

"Please, Philip, draw these curtains," she said, pointing to the window,
when the handsome footman came in answer to the bell. "No; whatever you
may say, there is some mysticism in him; without mysticism there can be
no poetry," she said, with one of her black eyes angrily following the
footman's movements as he was drawing the curtains. "Without poetry,
mysticism is superstition; without mysticism, poetry is--prose," she
continued, with a sorrowful smile, still not losing sight of the footman
and the curtains. "Philip, not that curtain; the one on the large
window," she exclaimed, in a suffering tone. Sophia Vasilievna was
evidently pitying herself for having to make the effort of saying these
words; and, to soothe her feelings, she raised to her lips a scented,
smoking cigarette with her jewel-bedecked fingers.

The broad-chested, muscular, handsome Philip bowed slightly, as
if begging pardon; and stepping lightly across the carpet with his
broad-calved, strong, legs, obediently and silently went to the other
window, and, looking at the princess, carefully began to arrange the
curtain so that not a single ray dared fall on her. But again he did
not satisfy her, and again she had to interrupt the conversation about
mysticism, and correct in a martyred tone the unintelligent Philip,
who was tormenting her so pitilessly. For a moment a light flashed in
Philip's eyes.

"'The devil take you! What do you want?' was probably what he said to
himself," thought Nekhludoff, who had been observing all this scene. But
the strong, handsome Philip at once managed to conceal the signs of his
impatience, and went on quietly carrying out the orders of the worn,
weak, false Sophia Vasilievna.

"Of course, there is a good deal of truth in Lombroso's teaching," said
Kolosoff, lolling back in the low chair and looking at Sophia Vasilievna
with sleepy eyes; "but he over-stepped the mark. Oh, yes."

"And you? Do you believe in heredity?" asked Sophia Vasilievna, turning
to Nekhludoff, whose silence annoyed her. "In heredity?" he asked. "No,
I don't." At this moment his whole mind was taken up by strange images
that in some unaccountable way rose up in his imagination. By the side
of this strong and handsome Philip he seemed at this minute to see the
nude figure of Kolosoff as an artist's model; with his stomach like a
melon, his bald head, and his arms without muscle, like pestles. In the
same dim way the limbs of Sophia Vasilievna, now covered with silks and
velvets, rose up in his mind as they must be in reality; but this mental
picture was too horrid and he tried to drive it away.

"Well, you know Missy is waiting for you," she said. "Go and find her.
She wants to play a new piece by Grieg to you; it is most interesting."

"She did not mean to play anything; the woman is simply lying, for
some reason or other," thought Nekhludoff, rising and pressing Sophia
Vasilievna's transparent and bony, ringed hand.

Katerina Alexeevna met him in the drawing-room, and at once began, in
French, as usual:

"I see the duties of a juryman act depressingly upon you."

"Yes; pardon me, I am in low spirits to-day, and have no right to weary
others by my presence," said Nekhludoff.

"Why are you in low spirits?"

"Allow me not to speak about that," he said, looking round for his hat.

"Don't you remember how you used to say that we must always tell the
truth? And what cruel truths you used to tell us all! Why do you not
wish to speak out now? Don't you remember, Missy?" she said, turning to
Missy, who had just come in.

"We were playing a game then," said Nekhludoff, seriously; "one may
tell the truth in a game, but in reality we are so bad--I mean I am so
bad--that I, at least, cannot tell the truth."

"Oh, do not correct yourself, but rather tell us why _we_ are so bad,"
said Katerina Alexeevna, playing with her words and pretending not to
notice how serious Nekhludoff was.

"Nothing is worse than to confess to being in low spirits," said Missy.
"I never do it, and therefore am always in good spirits."

Nekhludoff felt as a horse must feel when it is being caressed to make
it submit to having the bit put in its mouth and be harnessed, and
to-day he felt less than ever inclined to draw.

"Well, are you coming into my room? We will try to cheer you up."

He excused himself, saying he had to be at home, and began taking leave.
Missy kept his hand longer than usual.

"Remember that what is important to you is important to your friends,"
she said. "Are you coming tomorrow?"

"I hardly expect to," said Nekhludoff; and feeling ashamed, without
knowing whether for her or for himself, he blushed and went away.

"What is it? _Comme cela m'intrigue_," said Katerina Alexeevna. "I must
find it out. I suppose it is some _affaire d'amour propre; il est tres
susceptible, notre cher Mitia_."

"_Plutot une affaire d'amour sale_," Missy was going to say, but stopped
and looked down with a face from which all the light had gone--a very
different face from the one with which she had looked at him. She would
not mention to Katerina Alexeevna even, so vulgar a pun, but only said,
"We all have our good and our bad days."

"Is it possible that he, too, will deceive?" she thought; "after all
that has happened it would be very bad of him."

If Missy had had to explain what she meant by "after all that has
happened," she could have said nothing definite, and yet she knew that
he had not only excited her hopes but had almost given her a promise. No
definite words had passed between them--only looks and smiles and hints;
and yet she considered him as her own, and to lose him would be very
hard.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE AWAKENING.

"Shameful and stupid, horrid and shameful!" Nekhludoff kept saying to
himself, as he walked home along the familiar streets. The depression
he had felt whilst speaking to Missy would not leave him. He felt that,
looking at it externally, as it were, he was in the right, for he had
never said anything to her that could be considered binding, never made
her an offer; but he knew that in reality he had bound himself to her,
had promised to be hers. And yet to-day he felt with his whole being
that he could not marry her.

"Shameful and horrid, horrid and shameful!" he repeated to himself, with
reference not only to his relations with Missy but also to the rest.
"Everything is horrid and shameful," he muttered, as he stepped into the
porch of his house. "I am not going to have any supper," he said to
his manservant Corney, who followed him into the dining-room, where the
cloth was laid for supper and tea. "You may go."

"Yes, sir," said Corney, yet he did not go, but began clearing the
supper off the table. Nekhludoff looked at Corney with a feeling
of ill-will. He wished to be left alone, and it seemed to him that
everybody was bothering him in order to spite him. When Corney had gone
away with the supper things, Nekhludoff moved to the tea urn and
was about to make himself some tea, but hearing Agraphena Petrovna's
footsteps, he went hurriedly into the drawing-room, to avoid being seen
by her, and shut the door after him. In this drawing-room his mother had
died three months before. On entering the room, in which two lamps with
reflectors were burning, one lighting up his father's and the other his
mother's portrait, he remembered what his last relations with his mother
had been. And they also seemed shameful and horrid. He remembered how,
during the latter period of her illness, he had simply wished her to
die. He had said to himself that he wished it for her sake, that she
might be released from her suffering, but in reality he wished to be
released from the sight of her sufferings for his own sake.

Trying to recall a pleasant image of her, he went up to look at her
portrait, painted by a celebrated artist for 800 roubles. She was
depicted in a very low-necked black velvet dress. There was something
very revolting and blasphemous in this representation of his mother as
a half-nude beauty. It was all the more disgusting because three months
ago, in this very room, lay this same woman, dried up to a mummy. And he
remembered how a few days before her death she clasped his hand with her
bony, discoloured fingers, looked into his eyes, and said: "Do not judge
me, Mitia, if I have not done what I should," and how the tears came
into her eyes, grown pale with suffering.

"Ah, how horrid!" he said to himself, looking up once more at the
half-naked woman, with the splendid marble shoulders and arms, and the
triumphant smile on her lips. "Oh, how horrid!" The bared shoulders of
the portrait reminded him of another, a young woman, whom he had seen
exposed in the same way a few days before. It was Missy, who had devised
an excuse for calling him into her room just as she was ready to go to
a ball, so that he should see her in her ball dress. It was with disgust
that he remembered her fine shoulders and arms. "And that father of
hers, with his doubtful past and his cruelties, and the bel-esprit her
mother, with her doubtful reputation." All this disgusted him, and also
made him feel ashamed. "Shameful and horrid; horrid and shameful!"

"No, no," he thought; "freedom from all these false relations with the
Korchagins and Mary Vasilievna and the inheritance and from all the rest
must be got. Oh, to breathe freely, to go abroad, to Rome and work at
my picture!" He remembered the doubts he had about his talent for art.
"Well, never mind; only just to breathe freely. First Constantinople,
then Rome. Only just to get through with this jury business, and arrange
with the advocate first."

Then suddenly there arose in his mind an extremely vivid picture of a
prisoner with black, slightly-squinting eyes, and how she began to cry
when the last words of the prisoners had been heard; and he hurriedly
put out his cigarette, pressing it into the ash-pan, lit another, and
began pacing up and down the room. One after another the scenes he had
lived through with her rose in his mind. He recalled that last interview
with her. He remembered the white dress and blue sash, the early mass.
"Why, I loved her, really loved her with a good, pure love, that night;
I loved her even before: yes, I loved her when I lived with my aunts the
first time and was writing my composition." And he remembered himself as
he had been then. A breath of that freshness, youth and fulness of life
seemed to touch him, and he grew painfully sad. The difference between
what he had been then and what he was now, was enormous--just as great,
if not greater than the difference between Katusha in church that night,
and the prostitute who had been carousing with the merchant and whom
they judged this morning. Then he was free and fearless, and innumerable
possibilities lay ready to open before him; now he felt himself caught
in the meshes of a stupid, empty, valueless, frivolous life, out of
which he saw no means of extricating himself even if he wished to,
which he hardly did. He remembered how proud he was at one time of
his straightforwardness, how he had made a rule of always speaking the
truth, and really had been truthful; and how he was now sunk deep in
lies: in the most dreadful of lies--lies considered as the truth by all
who surrounded him. And, as far as he could see, there was no way out of
these lies. He had sunk in the mire, got used to it, indulged himself in
it.

How was he to break off his relations with Mary Vasilievna and her
husband in such a way as to be able to look him and his children in the
eyes? How disentangle himself from Missy? How choose between the two
opposites--the recognition that holding land was unjust and the heritage
from his mother? How atone for his sin against Katusha? This last, at
any rate, could not be left as it was. He could not abandon a woman he
had loved, and satisfy himself by paying money to an advocate to save
her from hard labour in Siberia. She had not even deserved hard labour.
Atone for a fault by paying money? Had he not then, when he gave her the
money, thought he was atoning for his fault?

And he clearly recalled to mind that moment when, having caught her up
in the passage, he thrust the money into her bib and ran away. "Oh, that
money!" he thought with the same horror and disgust he had then felt.
"Oh, dear! oh, dear! how disgusting," he cried aloud as he had done
then. "Only a scoundrel, a knave, could do such a thing. And I am that
knave, that scoundrel!" He went on aloud: "But is it possible?"--he
stopped and stood still--"is it possible that I am really a scoundrel?
. . . Well, who but I?" he answered himself. "And then, is this the only
thing?" he went on, convicting himself. "Was not my conduct towards Mary
Vasilievna and her husband base and disgusting? And my position with
regard to money? To use riches considered by me unlawful on the plea
that they are inherited from my mother? And the whole of my idle,
detestable life? And my conduct towards Katusha to crown all? Knave and
scoundrel! Let men judge me as they like, I can deceive them; but myself
I cannot deceive."

And, suddenly, he understood that the aversion he had lately, and
particularly to-day, felt for everybody--the Prince and Sophia
Vasilievna and Corney and Missy--was an aversion for himself. And,
strange to say, in this acknowledgement of his baseness there was
something painful yet joyful and quieting.

More than once in Nekhludoff's life there had been what he called a
"cleansing of the soul." By "cleansing of the soul" he meant a state
of mind in which, after a long period of sluggish inner life, a total
cessation of its activity, he began to clear out all the rubbish that
had accumulated in his soul, and was the cause of the cessation of the
true life. His soul needed cleansing as a watch does. After such an
awakening Nekhludoff always made some rules for himself which he meant
to follow forever after, wrote his diary, and began afresh a life which
he hoped never to change again. "Turning over a new leaf," he called
it to himself in English. But each time the temptations of the world
entrapped him, and without noticing it he fell again, often lower than
before.

Thus he had several times in his life raised and cleansed himself. The
first time this happened was during the summer he spent with his aunts;
that was his most vital and rapturous awakening, and its effects had
lasted some time. Another awakening was when he gave up civil service
and joined the army at war time, ready to sacrifice his life. But here
the choking-up process was soon accomplished. Then an awakening came
when he left the army and went abroad, devoting himself to art.

From that time until this day a long period had elapsed without
any cleansing, and therefore the discord between the demands of his
conscience and the life he was leading was greater than it had ever been
before. He was horror-struck when he saw how great the divergence was.
It was so great and the defilement so complete that he despaired of the
possibility of getting cleansed. "Have you not tried before to perfect
yourself and become better, and nothing has come of it?" whispered the
voice of the tempter within. "What is the use of trying any more? Are
you the only one?--All are alike, such is life," whispered the voice.
But the free spiritual being, which alone is true, alone powerful,
alone eternal, had already awakened in Nekhludoff, and he could not but
believe it. Enormous though the distance was between what he wished
to be and what he was, nothing appeared insurmountable to the
newly-awakened spiritual being.

"At any cost I will break this lie which binds me and confess
everything, and will tell everybody the truth, and act the truth," he
said resolutely, aloud. "I shall tell Missy the truth, tell her I am a
profligate and cannot marry her, and have only uselessly upset her.
I shall tell Mary Vasilievna. . . Oh, there is nothing to tell her. I
shall tell her husband that I, scoundrel that I am, have been deceiving
him. I shall dispose of the inheritance in such a way as to acknowledge
the truth. I shall tell her, Katusha, that I am a scoundrel and have
sinned towards her, and will do all I can to ease her lot. Yes, I will
see her, and will ask her to forgive me.

"Yes, I will beg her pardon, as children do." . . . He stopped---"will
marry her if necessary." He stopped again, folded his hands in front of
his breast as he used to do when a little child, lifted his eyes, and
said, addressing some one: "Lord, help me, teach me, come enter within
me and purify me of all this abomination."

He prayed, asking God to help him, to enter into him and cleanse him;
and what he was praying for had happened already: the God within him had
awakened his consciousness. He felt himself one with Him, and therefore
felt not only the freedom, fulness and joy of life, but all the power of
righteousness. All, all the best that a man could do he felt capable of
doing.

His eyes filled with tears as he was saying all this to himself, good
and bad tears: good because they were tears of joy at the awakening
of the spiritual being within him, the being which had been asleep all
these years; and bad tears because they were tears of tenderness to
himself at his own goodness.

He felt hot, and went to the window and opened it. The window opened
into a garden. It was a moonlit, quiet, fresh night; a vehicle rattled
past, and then all was still. The shadow of a tall poplar fell on the
ground just opposite the window, and all the intricate pattern of its
bare branches was clearly defined on the clean swept gravel. To the left
the roof of a coach-house shone white in the moonlight, in front the
black shadow of the garden wall was visible through the tangled branches
of the trees.

Nekhludoff gazed at the roof, the moonlit garden, and the shadows of the
poplar, and drank in the fresh, invigorating air.

"How delightful, how delightful; oh, God, how delightful," he said,
meaning that which was going on in his soul.



CHAPTER XXIX.

MASLOVA IN PRISON.

Maslova reached her cell only at six in the evening, tired and footsore,
having, unaccustomed as she was to walking, gone 10 miles on the stony
road that day. She was crushed by the unexpectedly severe sentence and
tormented by hunger. During the first interval of her trial, when the
soldiers were eating bread and hard-boiled eggs in her presence, her
mouth watered and she realised she was hungry, but considered it beneath
her dignity to beg of them. Three hours later the desire to eat had
passed, and she felt only weak. It was then she received the unexpected
sentence. At first she thought she had made a mistake; she could not
imagine herself as a convict in Siberia, and could not believe what she
heard. But seeing the quiet, business-like faces of judges and jury, who
heard this news as if it were perfectly natural and expected, she grew
indignant, and proclaimed loudly to the whole Court that she was not
guilty. Finding that her cry was also taken as something natural
and expected, and feeling incapable of altering matters, she was
horror-struck and began to weep in despair, knowing that she must submit
to the cruel and surprising injustice that had been done her. What
astonished her most was that young men--or, at any rate, not old
men--the same men who always looked so approvingly at her (one of them,
the public prosecutor, she had seen in quite a different humour) had
condemned her. While she was sitting in the prisoners' room before the
trial and during the intervals, she saw these men looking in at the open
door pretending they had to pass there on some business, or enter the
room and gaze on her with approval. And then, for some unknown reason,
these same men had condemned her to hard labour, though she was innocent
of the charge laid against her. At first she cried, but then quieted
down and sat perfectly stunned in the prisoners' room, waiting to be led
back. She wanted only two things now--tobacco and strong drink. In this
state Botchkova and Kartinkin found her when they were led into the same
room after being sentenced. Botchkova began at once to scold her, and
call her a "convict."

"Well! What have you gained? justified yourself, have you? What you have
deserved, that you've got. Out in Siberia you'll give up your finery, no
fear!"

Maslova sat with her hands inside her sleeves, hanging her head and
looking in front of her at the dirty floor without moving, only saying:
"I don't bother you, so don't you bother me. I don't bother you, do I?"
she repeated this several times, and was silent again. She did brighten
up a little when Botchkova and Kartinkin were led away and an attendant
brought her three roubles.

"Are you Maslova?" he asked. "Here you are; a lady sent it you," he
said, giving her the money.

"A lady--what lady?"

"You just take it. I'm not going to talk to you."

This money was sent by Kitaeva, the keeper of the house in which she
used to live. As she was leaving the court she turned to the usher with
the question whether she might give Maslova a little money. The usher
said she might. Having got permission, she removed the three-buttoned
Swedish kid glove from her plump, white hand, and from an elegant purse
brought from the back folds of her silk skirt took a pile of coupons,
[in Russia coupons cut off interest-bearing papers are often used as
money] just cut off from the interest-bearing papers which she had
earned in her establishment, chose one worth 2 roubles and 50 copecks,
added two 20 and one 10-copeck coins, and gave all this to the usher.
The usher called an attendant, and in his presence gave the money.

"Belease to giff it accurately," said Carolina Albertovna Kitaeva.

The attendant was hurt by her want of confidence, and that was why he
treated Maslova so brusquely. Maslova was glad of the money, because
it could give her the only thing she now desired. "If I could but get
cigarettes and take a whiff!" she said to herself, and all her thoughts
centred on the one desire to smoke and drink. She longed for spirits so
that she tasted them and felt the strength they would give her; and she
greedily breathed in the air when the fumes of tobacco reached her from
the door of a room that opened into the corridor. But she had to wait
long, for the secretary, who should have given the order for her to go,
forgot about the prisoners while talking and even disputing with one of
the advocates about the article forbidden by the censor.

At last, about five o'clock, she was allowed to go, and was led away
through the back door by her escort, the Nijni man and the Tchoovash.
Then, still within the entrance to the Law Courts, she gave them 50
copecks, asking them to get her two rolls and some cigarettes. The
Tchoovash laughed, took the money, and said, "All right; I'll get 'em,"
and really got her the rolls and the cigarettes and honestly returned
the change. She was not allowed to smoke on the way, and, with her
craving unsatisfied, she continued her way to the prison. When she was
brought to the gate of the prison, a hundred convicts who had arrived by
rail were being led in. The convicts, bearded, clean-shaven, old, young,
Russians, foreigners, some with their heads shaved and rattling with the
chains on their feet, filled the anteroom with dust, noise and an acid
smell of perspiration. Passing Maslova, all the convicts looked at her,
and some came up to her and brushed her as they passed.

"Ay, here's a wench--a fine one," said one.

"My respects to you, miss," said another, winking at her. One dark man
with a moustache, the rest of his face and the back of his head clean
shaved, rattling with his chains and catching her feet in them, sprang
near and embraced her.

"What! don't you know your chum? Come, come; don't give yourself airs,"
showing his teeth and his eyes glittering when she pushed him away.

"You rascal! what are you up to?" shouted the inspector's assistant,
coming in from behind. The convict shrank back and jumped away. The
assistant assailed Maslova.

"What are you here for?"

Maslova was going to say she had been brought back from the Law Courts,
but she was so tired that she did not care to speak.

"She has returned from the Law Courts, sir," said one of the soldiers,
coming forward with his fingers lifted to his cap.

"Well, hand her over to the chief warder. I won't have this sort of
thing."

"Yes, sir."

"Sokoloff, take her in!" shouted the assistant inspector.

The chief warder came up, gave Maslova a slap on the shoulder, and
making a sign with his head for her to follow led her into the corridor
of the women's ward. There she was searched, and as nothing prohibited
was found on her (she had hidden her box of cigarettes inside a roll)
she was led to the cell she had left in the morning.



CHAPTER XXX.

THE CELL.

The cell in which Maslova was imprisoned was a large room 21 feet long
and 10 feet broad; it had two windows and a large stove. Two-thirds of
the space were taken up by shelves used as beds. The planks they were
made of had warped and shrunk. Opposite the door hung a dark-coloured
icon with a wax candle sticking to it and a bunch of everlastings
hanging down from it. By the door to the right there was a dark spot on
the floor on which stood a stinking tub. The inspection had taken place
and the women were locked up for the night.

The occupants of this room were 15 persons, including three children.
It was still quite light. Only two of the women were lying down: a
consumptive woman imprisoned for theft, and an idiot who spent most of
her time in sleep and who was arrested because she had no passport. The
consumptive woman was not asleep, but lay with wide open eyes, her cloak
folded under her head, trying to keep back the phlegm that irritated her
throat, and not to cough.

Some of the other women, most of whom had nothing on but coarse brown
holland chemises, stood looking out of the window at the convicts down
in the yard, and some sat sewing. Among the latter was the old woman,
Korableva, who had seen Maslova off in the morning. She was a tall,
strong, gloomy-looking woman; her fair hair, which had begun to turn
grey on the temples, hung down in a short plait. She was sentenced to
hard labour in Siberia because she had killed her husband with an axe
for making up to their daughter. She was at the head of the women in
the cell, and found means of carrying on a trade in spirits with them.
Beside her sat another woman sewing a coarse canvas sack. This was the
wife of a railway watchman, [There are small watchmen's cottages at
distances of about one mile from each other along the Russian railways,
and the watchmen or their wives have to meet every train.] imprisoned
for three months because she did not come out with the flags to meet a
train that was passing, and an accident had occurred. She was a short,
snub-nosed woman, with small, black eyes; kind and talkative. The third
of the women who were sewing was Theodosia, a quiet young girl, white
and rosy, very pretty, with bright child's eyes, and long fair plaits
which she wore twisted round her head. She was in prison for attempting
to poison her husband. She had done this immediately after her wedding
(she had been given in marriage without her consent at the age of 16)
because her husband would give her no peace. But in the eight months
during which she had been let out on bail, she had not only made it up
with her husband, but come to love him, so that when her trial came
they were heart and soul to one another. Although her husband, her
father-in-law, but especially her mother-in-law, who had grown very fond
of her, did all they could to get her acquitted, she was sentenced to
hard labour in Siberia. The kind, merry, ever-smiling Theodosia had a
place next Maslova's on the shelf bed, and had grown so fond of her that
she took it upon herself as a duty to attend and wait on her. Two
other women were sitting without any work at the other end of the shelf
bedstead. One was a woman of about 40, with a pale, thin face, who once
probably had been very handsome. She sat with her baby at her thin,
white breast. The crime she had committed was that when a recruit was,
according to the peasants' view, unlawfully taken from their village,
and the people stopped the police officer and took the recruit away from
him, she (an aunt of the lad unlawfully taken) was the first to catch
hold of the bridle of the horse on which he was being carried off.
The other, who sat doing nothing, was a kindly, grey-haired old woman,
hunchbacked and with a flat bosom. She sat behind the stove on the
bedshelf, and pretended to catch a fat four-year-old boy, who ran
backwards and forwards in front of her, laughing gaily. This boy had
only a little shirt on and his hair was cut short. As he ran past the
old woman he kept repeating, "There, haven't caught me!" This old woman
and her son were accused of incendiarism. She bore her imprisonment with
perfect cheerfulness, but was concerned about her son, and chiefly about
her "old man," who she feared would get into a terrible state with no
one to wash for him. Besides these seven women, there were four standing
at one of the open windows, holding on to the iron bars. They were
making signs and shouting to the convicts whom Maslova had met when
returning to prison, and who were now passing through the yard. One
of these women was big and heavy, with a flabby body, red hair, and
freckled on her pale yellow face, her hands, and her fat neck. She
shouted something in a loud, raucous voice, and laughed hoarsely. This
woman was serving her term for theft. Beside her stood an awkward, dark
little woman, no bigger than a child of ten, with a long waist and very
short legs, a red, blotchy face, thick lips which did not hide her
long teeth, and eyes too far apart. She broke by fits and starts into
screeching laughter at what was going on in the yard. She was to be
tried for stealing and incendiarism. They called her Khoroshavka. Behind
her, in a very dirty grey chemise, stood a thin, miserable-looking
pregnant woman, who was to be tried for concealment of theft. This woman
stood silent, but kept smiling with pleasure and approval at what was
going on below. With these stood a peasant woman of medium height,
the mother of the boy who was playing with the old woman and of a
seven-year-old girl. These were in prison with her because she had no
one to leave them with. She was serving her term of imprisonment for
illicit sale of spirits. She stood a little further from the window
knitting a stocking, and though she listened to the other prisoners'
words she shook her head disapprovingly, frowned, and closed her eyes.
But her seven-year-old daughter stood in her little chemise, her flaxen
hair done up in a little pigtail, her blue eyes fixed, and, holding
the red-haired woman by the skirt, attentively listened to the words of
abuse that the women and the convicts flung at each other, and repeated
them softly, as if learning them by heart. The twelfth prisoner, who
paid no attention to what was going on, was a very tall, stately girl,
the daughter of a deacon, who had drowned her baby in a well. She went
about with bare feet, wearing only a dirty chemise. The thick, short
plait of her fair hair had come undone and hung down dishevelled, and
she paced up and down the free space of the cell, not looking at any
one, turning abruptly every time she came up to the wall.



CHAPTER XXXI.

THE PRISONERS.

When the padlock rattled and the door opened to let Maslova into the
cell, all turned towards her. Even the deacon's daughter stopped for a
moment and looked at her with lifted brows before resuming her steady
striding up and down.

Korableva stuck her needle into the brown sacking and looked
questioningly at Maslova through her spectacles. "Eh, eh, deary me, so
you have come back. And I felt sure they'd acquit you. So you've got
it?" She took off her spectacles and put her work down beside her on the
shelf bed.

"And here have I and the old lady been saying, 'Why, it may well be
they'll let her go free at once.' Why, it happens, ducky, they'll even
give you a heap of money sometimes, that's sure," the watchman's wife
began, in her singing voice: "Yes, we were wondering, 'Why's she so
long?' And now just see what it is. Well, our guessing was no use. The
Lord willed otherwise," she went on in musical tones.

"Is it possible? Have they sentenced you?" asked Theodosia, with
concern, looking at Maslova with her bright blue, child-like eyes; and
her merry young face changed as if she were going to cry.

Maslova did not answer, but went on to her place, the second from the
end, and sat down beside Korableva.

"Have you eaten anything?" said Theodosia, rising and coming up to
Maslova.

Maslova gave no reply, but putting the rolls on the bedstead, took
off her dusty cloak, the kerchief off her curly black head, and began
pulling off her shoes. The old woman who had been playing with the boy
came up and stood in front of Maslova. "Tz, tz, tz," she clicked with
her tongue, shaking her head pityingly. The boy also came up with her,
and, putting out his upper lip, stared with wide open eyes at the roll
Maslova had brought. When Maslova saw the sympathetic faces of her
fellow-prisoners, her lips trembled and she felt inclined to cry, but
she succeeded in restraining herself until the old woman and the boy
came up. When she heard the kind, pitying clicking of the old woman's
tongue, and met the boy's serious eyes turned from the roll to her face,
she could bear it no longer; her face quivered and she burst into sobs.

"Didn't I tell you to insist on having a proper advocate?" said
Norableva. "Well, what is it? Exile?"

Maslova could not answer, but took from inside the roll a box of
cigarettes, on which was a picture of a lady with hair done up very high
and dress cut low in front, and passed the box to Korableva. Korableva
looked at it and shook her head, chiefly because see did not approve of
Maslova's putting her money to such bad use; but still she took out a
cigarette, lit it at the lamp, took a puff, and almost forced it into
Maslova's hand. Maslova, still crying, began greedily to inhale the
tobacco smoke. "Penal servitude," she muttered, blowing out the smoke
and sobbing.

"Don't they fear the Lord, the cursed soul-slayers?" muttered Korableva,
"sentencing the lass for nothing." At this moment the sound of loud,
coarse laughter came from the women who were still at the window. The
little girl also laughed, and her childish treble mixed with the hoarse
and screeching laughter of the others. One of the convicts outside had
done something that produced this effect on the onlookers.

"Lawks! see the shaved hound, what he's doing," said the red-haired
woman, her whole fat body shaking with laughter; and leaning against the
grating she shouted meaning less obscene words.

"Ugh, the fat fright's cackling," said Korableva, who disliked the
red-haired woman. Then, turning to Maslova again, she asked: "How many
years?"

"Four," said Maslova, and the tears ran down her cheeks in such
profusion that one fell on the cigarette. Maslova crumpled it up angrily
and took another.

Though the watchman's wife did not smoke she picked up the cigarette
Maslova had thrown away and began straightening it out, talking
unceasingly.

"There, now, ducky, so it's true," she said. "Truth's gone to the dogs
and they do what they please, and here we were guessing that you'd go
free. Norableva says, 'She'll go free.' I say, 'No,' say I. 'No, dear,
my heart tells me they'll give it her.' And so it's turned out," she
went on, evidently listening with pleasure to her own voice.

The women who had been standing by the window now also came up to
Maslova, the convicts who had amused them having gone away. The first to
come up were the woman imprisoned for illicit trade in spirits, and her
little girl. "Why such a hard sentence?" asked the woman, sitting down
by Maslova and knitting fast.

"Why so hard? Because there's no money. That's why! Had there been
money, and had a good lawyer that's up to their tricks been hired,
they'd have acquitted her, no fear," said Korableva. "There's
what's-his-name--that hairy one with the long nose. He'd bring you out
clean from pitch, mum, he would. Ah, if we'd only had him!"

"Him, indeed," said Khoroshavka. "Why, he won't spit at you for less
than a thousand roubles."

"Seems you've been born under an unlucky star," interrupted the old
woman who was imprisoned for incendiarism. "Only think, to entice the
lad's wife and lock him himself up to feed vermin, and me, too, in my
old days--" she began to retell her story for the hundredth time. "If
it isn't the beggar's staff it's the prison. Yes, the beggar's staff and
the prison don't wait for an invitation."

"Ah, it seems that's the way with all of them," said the spirit trader;
and after looking at her little girl she put down her knitting, and,
drawing the child between her knees, began to search her head with deft
fingers. "Why do you sell spirits?" she went on. "Why? but what's one to
feed the children on?"

These words brought back to Maslova's mind her craving for drink.

"A little vodka," she said to Korableva, wiping the tears with her
sleeve and sobbing less frequently.

"All right, fork out," said Korableva.



CHAPTER XXXII.

A PRISON QUARREL.

Maslova got the money, which she had also hidden in a roll, and passed
the coupon to Korableva. Korableva accepted it, though she could not
read, trusting to Khoroshavka, who knew everything, and who said that
the slip of paper was worth 2 roubles 50 copecks, then climbed up to the
ventilator, where she had hidden a small flask of vodka. Seeing this,
the women whose places were further off went away. Meanwhile Maslova
shook the dust out of her cloak and kerchief, got up on the bedstead,
and began eating a roll.

"I kept your tea for you," said Theodosia, getting down from the shelf
a mug and a tin teapot wrapped in a rag, "but I'm afraid it is quite
cold." The liquid was quite cold and tasted more of tin than of tea, yet
Maslova filled the mug and began drinking it with her roll. "Finashka,
here you are," she said, breaking off a bit of the roll and giving it to
the boy, who stood looking at her mouth.

Meanwhile Korableva handed the flask of vodka and a mug to Maslova, who
offered some to her and to Khoroshavka. These prisoners were considered
the aristocracy of the cell because they had some money, and shared what
they possessed with the others.

In a few moments Maslova brightened up and related merrily what had
happened at the court, and what had struck her most, i.e., how all the
men had followed her wherever she went. In the court they all looked at
her, she said, and kept coming into the prisoners' room while she was
there.

"One of the soldiers even says, 'It's all to look at you that they
come.' One would come in, 'Where is such a paper?' or something, but I
see it is not the paper he wants; he just devours me with his eyes," she
said, shaking her head. "Regular artists."

"Yes, that's so," said the watchman's wife, and ran on in her musical
strain, "they're like flies after sugar."

"And here, too," Maslova interrupted her, "the same thing. They can
do without anything else. But the likes of them will go without bread
sooner than miss that! Hardly had they brought me back when in comes a
gang from the railway. They pestered me so, I did not know how to
rid myself of them. Thanks to the assistant, he turned them off. One
bothered so, I hardly got away."

"What's he like?" asked Khoroshevka.

"Dark, with moustaches."

"It must be him."

"Him--who?"

"Why, Schegloff; him as has just gone by."

"What's he, this Schegloff?"

"What, she don't know Schegloff? Why, he ran twice from Siberia. Now
they've got him, but he'll run away. The warders themselves are afraid
of him," said Khoroshavka, who managed to exchange notes with the male
prisoners and knew all that went on in the prison. "He'll run away,
that's flat."

"If he does go away you and I'll have to stay," said Korableva, turning
to Maslova, "but you'd better tell us now what the advocate says about
petitioning. Now's the time to hand it in."

Maslova answered that she knew nothing about it.

At that moment the red-haired woman came up to the "aristocracy" with
both freckled hands in her thick hair, scratching her head with her
nails.

"I'll tell you all about it, Katerina," she began. "First and foremost,
you'll have to write down you're dissatisfied with the sentence, then
give notice to the Procureur."

"What do you want here?" said Korableva angrily; "smell the vodka, do
you? Your chatter's not wanted. We know what to do without your advice."

"No one's speaking to you; what do you stick your nose in for?"

"It's vodka you want; that's why you come wriggling yourself in here."

"Well, offer her some," said Maslova, always ready to share anything she
possessed with anybody.

"I'll offer her something."

"Come on then," said the red-haired one, advancing towards Korableva.
"Ah! think I'm afraid of such as you?"

"Convict fright!"

"That's her as says it."

"Slut!"

"I? A slut? Convict! Murderess!" screamed the red-haired one.

"Go away, I tell you," said Korableva gloomily, but the red-haired one
came nearer and Korableva struck her in the chest. The red-haired woman
seemed only to have waited for this, and with a sudden movement caught
hold of Korableva's hair with one hand and with the other struck her in
the face. Korableva seized this hand, and Maslova and Khoroshavka caught
the red-haired woman by her arms, trying to pull her away, but she let
go the old woman's hair with her hand only to twist it round her fist.
Korableva, with her head bent to one side, was dealing out blows with
one arm and trying to catch the red-haired woman's hand with her teeth,
while the rest of the women crowded round, screaming and trying to
separate the fighters; even the consumptive one came up and stood
coughing and watching the fight. The children cried and huddled
together. The noise brought the woman warder and a jailer. The fighting
women were separated; and Korableva, taking out the bits of torn hair
from her head, and the red-haired one, holding her torn chemise together
over her yellow breast, began loudly to complain.

"I know, it's all the vodka. Wait a bit; I'll tell the inspector
tomorrow. He'll give it you. Can't I smell it? Mind, get it all out of
the way, or it will be the worse for you," said the warder. "We've no
time to settle your disputes. Get to your places and be quiet."

But quiet was not soon re-established. For a long time the women went on
disputing and explaining to one another whose fault it all was. At last
the warder and the jailer left the cell, the women grew quieter and
began going to bed, and the old woman went to the icon and commenced
praying.

"The two jailbirds have met," the red-haired woman suddenly called out
in a hoarse voice from the other end of the shelf beds, accompanying
every word with frightfully vile abuse.

"Mind you don't get it again," Korableva replied, also adding words of
abuse, and both were quiet again.

"Had I not been stopped I'd have pulled your damned eyes out," again
began the red-haired one, and an answer of the same kind followed from
Korableva. Then again a short interval and more abuse. But the intervals
became longer and longer, as when a thunder-cloud is passing, and at
last all was quiet.

All were in bed, some began to snore; and only the old woman, who always
prayed a long time, went on bowing before the icon and the deacon's
daughter, who had got up after the warder left, was pacing up and
down the room again. Maslova kept thinking that she was now a convict
condemned to hard labour, and had twice been reminded of this--once by
Botchkova and once by the red-haired woman--and she could not reconcile
herself to the thought. Korableva, who lay next to her, turned over in
her bed.

"There now," said Maslova in a low voice; "who would have thought it?
See what others do and get nothing for it."

"Never mind, girl. People manage to live in Siberia. As for you, you'll
not be lost there either," Korableva said, trying to comfort her.

"I know I'll not be lost; still it is hard. It's not such a fate I
want--I, who am used to a comfortable life."

"Ah, one can't go against God," said Korableva, with a sigh. "One can't,
my dear."

"I know, granny. Still, it's hard."

They were silent for a while.

"Do you hear that baggage?" whispered Korableva, drawing Maslova's
attention to a strange sound proceeding from the other end of the room.

This sound was the smothered sobbing of the red-haired woman. The
red-haired woman was crying because she had been abused and had not got
any of the vodka she wanted so badly; also because she remembered
how all her life she had been abused, mocked at, offended, beaten.
Remembering this, she pitied herself, and, thinking no one heard her,
began crying as children cry, sniffing with her nose and swallowing the
salt tears.

"I'm sorry for her," said Maslova.

"Of course one is sorry," said Korableva, "but she shouldn't come
bothering."



CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE LEAVEN AT WORK--NEKHLUDOFF'S DOMESTIC CHANGES.

The next morning Nekhludoff awoke, conscious that something had happened
to him, and even before he had remembered what it was he knew it to be
something important and good.

"Katusha--the trial!" Yes, he must stop lying and tell the whole truth.

By a strange coincidence on that very morning he received the
long-expected letter from Mary Vasilievna, the wife of the Marechal
de Noblesse, the very letter he particularly needed. She gave him full
freedom, and wished him happiness in his intended marriage.

"Marriage!" he repeated with irony. "How far I am from all that at
present."

And he remembered the plans he had formed the day before, to tell
the husband everything, to make a clean breast of it, and express his
readiness to give him any kind of satisfaction. But this morning this
did not seem so easy as the day before. And, then, also, why make a man
unhappy by telling him what he does not know? Yes, if he came and
asked, he would tell him all, but to go purposely and tell--no! that was
unnecessary.

And telling the whole truth to Missy seemed just as difficult this
morning. Again, he could not begin to speak without offence. As in many
worldly affairs, something had to remain unexpressed. Only one thing he
decided on, i.e., not to visit there, and to tell the truth if asked.

But in connection with Katusha, nothing was to remain unspoken. "I shall
go to the prison and shall tell her every thing, and ask her to forgive
me. And if need be--yes, if need be, I shall marry her," he thought.

This idea, that he was ready to sacrifice all on moral grounds, and
marry her, again made him feel very tender towards himself. Concerning
money matters he resolved this morning to arrange them in accord with
his conviction, that the holding of landed property was unlawful. Even
if he should not be strong enough to give up everything, he would still
do what he could, not deceiving himself or others.

It was long since he had met the coming day with so much energy. When
Agraphena Petrovna came in, he told her, with more firmness than he
thought himself capable of, that he no longer needed this lodging nor
her services. There had been a tacit understanding that he was keeping
up so large and expensive an establishment because he was thinking of
getting married. The giving up of the house had, therefore, a special
meaning. Agraphena Petrovna looked at him in surprise.

"I thank you very much, Agraphena Petrovna, for all your care for me,
but I no longer require so large a house nor so many servants. If you
wish to help me, be so good as to settle about the things, put them away
as it used to be done during mamma's life, and when Natasha comes she
will see to everything." Natasha was Nekhludoff's sister.

Agraphena Petrovna shook her head. "See about the things? Why, they'll
be required again," she said.

"No, they won't, Agraphena Petrovna; I assure you they won't be
required," said Nekhludoff, in answer to what the shaking of her head
had expressed. "Please tell Corney also that I shall pay him two months'
wages, but shall have no further need of him."

"It is a pity, Dmitri Ivanovitch, that you should think of doing this,"
she said. "Well, supposing you go abroad, still you'll require a place
of residence again."

"You are mistaken in your thoughts, Agraphena Petrovna; I am not going
abroad. If I go on a journey, it will be to quite a different place."
He suddenly blushed very red. "Yes, I must tell her," he thought; "no
hiding; everybody must be told."

"A very strange and important thing happened to me yesterday. Do you
remember my Aunt Mary Ivanovna's Katusha?"

"Oh, yes. Why, I taught her how to sew."

"Well, this Katusha was tried in the Court and I was on the jury."

"Oh, Lord! What a pity!" cried Agraphena Petrovna. "What was she being
tried for?"

"Murder; and it is I have done it all."

"Well, now this is very strange; how could you do it all?"

"Yes, I am the cause of it all; and it is this that has altered all my
plans."

"What difference can it make to you?"

"This difference: that I, being the cause of her getting on to that
path, must do all I can to help her."

"That is just according to your own good pleasure; you are not
particularly in fault there. It happens to every one, and if one's
reasonable, it all gets smoothed over and forgotten," she said,
seriously and severely. "Why should you place it to your account?
There's no need. I had already heard before that she had strayed from
the right path. Well, whose fault is it?"

"Mine! that's why I want to put it right."

"It is hard to put right."

"That is my business. But if you are thinking about yourself, then I
will tell you that, as mamma expressed the wish--"

"I am not thinking about myself. I have been so bountifully treated by
the dear defunct, that I desire nothing. Lisenka" (her married niece)
"has been inviting me, and I shall go to her when I am not wanted any
longer. Only it is a pity you should take this so to heart; it happens
to everybody."

"Well, I do not think so. And I still beg that you will help me let this
lodging and put away the things. And please do not be angry with me. I
am very, very grateful to you for all you have done."

And, strangely, from the moment Nekhludoff realised that it was he who
was so bad and disgusting to himself, others were no longer disgusting
to him; on the contrary, he felt a kindly respect for Agraphena
Petrovna, and for Corney.

He would have liked to go and confess to Corney also, but Corney's
manner was so insinuatingly deferential that he had not the resolution
to do it.

On the way to the Law Courts, passing along the same streets with the
same isvostchik as the day before, he was surprised what a different
being he felt himself to be. The marriage with Missy, which only
yesterday seemed so probable, appeared quite impossible now. The day
before he felt it was for him to choose, and had no doubts that she
would be happy to marry him; to-day he felt himself unworthy not only of
marrying, but even of being intimate with her. "If she only knew what
I am, nothing would induce her to receive me. And only yesterday I was
finding fault with her because she flirted with N---. Anyhow, even if
she consented to marry me, could I be, I won't say happy, but at peace,
knowing that the other was here in prison, and would to-day or to-morrow
he taken to Siberia with a gang of other prisoners, while I accepted
congratulations and made calls with my young wife; or while I count the
votes at the meetings, for and against the motion brought forward by the
rural inspection, etc., together with the Marechal de Noblesse, whom I
abominably deceive, and afterwards make appointments with his wife
(how abominable!) or while I continue to work at my picture, which will
certainly never get finished? Besides, I have no business to waste
time on such things. I can do nothing of the kind now," he continued
to himself, rejoicing at the change he felt within himself. "The first
thing now is to see the advocate and find out his decision, and then
. . . then go and see her and tell her everything."

And when he pictured to himself how he would see her, and tell her all,
confess his sin to her, and tell her that he would do all in his power
to atone for his sin, he was touched at his own goodness, and the tears
came to his eyes.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE ABSURDITY OF LAW--REFLECTIONS OF A JURYMAN.

On coming into the Law Courts Nekhludoff met the usher of yesterday, who
to-day seemed to him much to be pitied, in the corridor, and asked him
where those prisoners who had been sentenced were kept, and to whom one
had to apply for permission to visit them. The usher told him that the
condemned prisoners were kept in different places, and that, until they
received their sentence in its final form, the permission to visit them
depended on the president. "I'll come and call you myself, and take you
to the president after the session. The president is not even here at
present. After the session! And now please come in; we are going to
commence."

Nekhludoff thanked the usher for his kindness, and went into the
jurymen's room. As he was approaching the room, the other jurymen were
just leaving it to go into the court. The merchant had again partaken
of a little refreshment, and was as merry as the day before, and greeted
Nekhludoff like an old friend. And to-day Peter Gerasimovitch did not
arouse any unpleasant feelings in Nekhludoff by his familiarity and his
loud laughter. Nekhludoff would have liked to tell all the jurymen about
his relations to yesterday's prisoner. "By rights," he thought, "I ought
to have got up yesterday during the trial and disclosed my guilt."

He entered the court with the other jurymen, and witnessed the same
procedure as the day before.

"The judges are coming," was again proclaimed, and again three men,
with embroidered collars, ascended the platform, and there was the same
settling of the jury on the high-backed chairs, the same gendarmes, the
same portraits, the same priest, and Nekhludoff felt that, though he
knew what he ought to do, he could not interrupt all this solemnity.
The preparations for the trials were just the same as the day before,
excepting that the swearing in of the jury and the president's address
to them were omitted.

The case before the Court this day was one of burglary. The prisoner,
guarded by two gendarmes with naked swords, was a thin, narrow-chested
lad of 20, with a bloodless, sallow face, dressed in a grey cloak.
He sat alone in the prisoner's dock. This boy was accused of having,
together with a companion, broken the lock of a shed and stolen several
old mats valued at 3 roubles [the rouble is worth a little over two
shillings, and contains 100 copecks] and 67 copecks. According to the
indictment, a policeman had stopped this boy as he was passing with his
companion, who was carrying the mats on his shoulder. The boy and
his companion confessed at once, and were both imprisoned. The boy's
companion, a locksmith, died in prison, and so the boy was being tried
alone. The old mats were lying on the table as the objects of material
evidence. The business was conducted just in the same manner as the day
before, with the whole armoury of evidence, proofs, witnesses, swearing
in, questions, experts, and cross-examinations. In answer to every
question put to him by the president, the prosecutor, or the advocate,
the policeman (one of the witnesses) in variably ejected the words:
"just so," or "Can't tell." Yet, in spite of his being stupefied, and
rendered a mere machine by military discipline, his reluctance to speak
about the arrest of this prisoner was evident. Another witness, an old
house proprietor, and owner of the mats, evidently a rich old man, when
asked whether the mats were his, reluctantly identified them as such.
When the public prosecutor asked him what he meant to do with these
mats, what use they were to him, he got angry, and answered: "The devil
take those mats; I don't want them at all. Had I known there would be
all this bother about them I should not have gone looking for them, but
would rather have added a ten-rouble note or two to them, only not to
be dragged here and pestered with questions. I have spent a lot
on isvostchiks. Besides, I am not well. I have been suffering from
rheumatism for the last seven years." It was thus the witness spoke.

The accused himself confessed everything, and looking round stupidly,
like an animal that is caught, related how it had all happened. Still
the public prosecutor, drawing up his shoulders as he had done the day
before, asked subtle questions calculated to catch a cunning criminal.

In his speech he proved that the theft had been committed from a
dwelling-place, and a lock had been broken; and that the boy, therefore,
deserved a heavy punishment. The advocate appointed by the Court proved
that the theft was not committed from a dwelling-place, and that, though
the crime was a serious one, the prisoner was not so very dangerous
to society as the prosecutor stated. The president assumed the role of
absolute neutrality in the same way as he had done on the previous day,
and impressed on the jury facts which they all knew and could not help
knowing. Then came an interval, just as the day before, and they smoked;
and again the usher called out "The judges are coming," and in the
same way the two gendarmes sat trying to keep awake and threatening the
prisoner with their naked weapons.

The proceedings showed that this boy was apprenticed by his father at
a tobacco factory, where he remained five years. This year he had been
discharged by the owner after a strike, and, having lost his place, he
wandered about the town without any work, drinking all he possessed. In
a traktir [cheap restaurant] he met another like himself, who had lost
his place before the prisoner had, a locksmith by trade and a drunkard.
One night, those two, both drunk, broke the lock of a shed and took the
first thing they happened to lay hands on. They confessed all and were
put in prison, where the locksmith died while awaiting the trial. The
boy was now being tried as a dangerous creature, from whom society must
be protected.

"Just as dangerous a creature as yesterday's culprit," thought
Nekhludoff, listening to all that was going on before him. "They are
dangerous, and we who judge them? I, a rake, an adulterer, a deceiver.
We are not dangerous. But, even supposing that this boy is the most
dangerous of all that are here in the court, what should be done from a
common-sense point of view when he has been caught? It is clear that he
is not an exceptional evil-doer, but a most ordinary boy; every one
sees it--and that he has become what he is simply because he got into
circumstances that create such characters, and, therefore, to prevent
such a boy from going wrong the circumstances that create these
unfortunate beings must be done away with.

"But what do we do? We seize one such lad who happens to get caught,
knowing well that there are thousands like him whom we have not caught,
and send him to prison, where idleness, or most unwholesome, useless
labour is forced on him, in company of others weakened and ensnared by
the lives they have led. And then we send him, at the public expense,
from the Moscow to the Irkoutsk Government, in company with the most
depraved of men.

"But we do nothing to destroy the conditions in which people like these
are produced; on the contrary, we support the establishments where
they are formed. These establishments are well known: factories, mills,
workshops, public-houses, gin-shops, brothels. And we do not destroy
these places, but, looking at them as necessary, we support and regulate
them. We educate in this way not one, but millions of people, and then
catch one of them and imagine that we have done something, that we have
guarded ourselves, and nothing more can be expected of us. Have we
not sent him from the Moscow to the Irkoutsk Government?" Thus thought
Nekhludoff with unusual clearness and vividness, sitting in his
high-backed chair next to the colonel, and listening to the different
intonations of the advocates', prosecutor's, and president's voices, and
looking at their self-confident gestures. "And how much and what hard
effort this pretence requires," continued Nekhludoff in his mind,
glancing round the enormous room, the portraits, lamps, armchairs,
uniforms, the thick walls and large windows; and picturing to himself
the tremendous size of the building, and the still more ponderous
dimensions of the whole of this organisation, with its army of
officials, scribes, watchmen, messengers, not only in this place, but
all over Russia, who receive wages for carrying on this comedy which no
one needs. "Supposing we spent one-hundredth of these efforts helping
these castaways, whom we now only regard as hands and bodies, required
by us for our own peace and comfort. Had some one chanced to take pity
on him and given some help at the time when poverty made them send him
to town, it might have been sufficient," Nekhludoff thought, looking at
the boy's piteous face. "Or even later, when, after 12 hours' work
at the factory, he was going to the public-house, led away by his
companions, had some one then come and said, 'Don't go, Vania; it is
not right,' he would not have gone, nor got into bad ways, and would not
have done any wrong.

"But no; no one who would have taken pity on him came across this
apprentice in the years he lived like a poor little animal in the town,
and with his hair cut close so as not to breed vermin, and ran errands
for the workmen. No, all he heard and saw, from the older workmen and
his companions, since he came to live in town, was that he who cheats,
drinks, swears, who gives another a thrashing, who goes on the loose,
is a fine fellow. Ill, his constitution undermined by unhealthy labour,
drink, and debauchery--bewildered as in a dream, knocking aimlessly
about town, he gets into some sort of a shed, and takes from there some
old mats, which nobody needs--and here we, all of us educated people,
rich or comfortably off, meet together, dressed in good clothes and fine
uniforms, in a splendid apartment, to mock this unfortunate brother of
ours whom we ourselves have ruined.

"Terrible! It is difficult to say whether the cruelty or the absurdity
is greater, but the one and the other seem to reach their climax."

Nekhludoff thought all this, no longer listening to what was going on,
and he was horror-struck by that which was being revealed to him. He
could not understand why he had not been able to see all this before,
and why others were unable to see it.



CHAPTER XXXV.

THE PROCUREUR--NEKHLUDOFF REFUSES TO SERVE.

During an interval Nekhludoff got up and went out into the corridor,
with the intention of not returning to the court. Let them do what they
liked with him, he could take no more part in this awful and horrid
tomfoolery.

Having inquired where the Procureur's cabinet was he went straight to
him. The attendant did not wish to let him in, saying that the Procureur
was busy, but Nekhludoff paid no heed and went to the door, where he was
met by an official. He asked to be announced to the Procureur, saying he
was on the jury and had a very important communication to make.

His title and good clothes were of assistance to him. The official
announced him to the Procureur, and Nekhludoff was let in. The Procureur
met him standing, evidently annoyed at the persistence with which
Nekhludoff demanded admittance.

"What is it you want?" the Procureur asked, severely.

"I am on the jury; my name is Nekhludoff, and it is absolutely necessary
for me to see the prisoner Maslova," Nekhludoff said, quickly and
resolutely, blushing, and feeling that he was taking a step which would
have a decisive influence on his life.

The Procureur was a short, dark man, with short, grizzly hair, quick,
sparkling eyes, and a thick beard cut close on his projecting lower jaw.

"Maslova? Yes, of course, I know. She was accused of poisoning," the
Procureur said, quietly. "But why do you want to see her?" And then, as
if wishing to tone down his question, he added, "I cannot give you the
permission without knowing why you require it."

"I require it for a particularly important reason."

"Yes?" said the Procureur, and, lifting his eyes, looked attentively at
Nekhludoff. "Has her case been heard or not?"

"She was tried yesterday, and unjustly sentenced; she is innocent."

"Yes? If she was sentenced only yesterday," went on the Procureur,
paying no attention to Nekhludoff's statement concerning Maslova's
innocence, "she must still be in the preliminary detention prison until
the sentence is delivered in its final form. Visiting is allowed there
only on certain days; I should advise you to inquire there."

"But I must see her as soon as possible," Nekhludoff said, his jaw
trembling as he felt the decisive moment approaching.

"Why must you?" said the Procureur, lifting his brows with some
agitation.

"Because I betrayed her and brought her to the condition which exposed
her to this accusation."

"All the same, I cannot see what it has to do with visiting her."

"This: that whether I succeed or not in getting the sentence changed I
want to follow her, and--marry her," said Nekhludoff, touched to tears
by his own conduct, and at the same time pleased to see the effect he
produced on the Procureur.

"Really! Dear me!" said the Procureur. "This is certainly a very
exceptional case. I believe you are a member of the Krasnoporsk rural
administration?" he asked, as if he remembered having heard before of
this Nekhludoff, who was now making so strange a declaration.

"I beg your pardon, but I do not think that has anything to do with my
request," answered Nekhludoff, flushing angrily.

"Certainly not," said the Procureur, with a scarcely perceptible smile
and not in the least abashed; "only your wish is so extraordinary and so
out of the common."

"Well; but can I get the permission?"

"The permission? Yes, I will give you an order of admittance directly.
Take a seat."

He went up to the table, sat down, and began to write. "Please sit
down."

Nekhludoff continued to stand.

Having written an order of admittance, and handed it to Nekhludoff, the
Procureur looked curiously at him.

"I must also state that I can no longer take part in the sessions."

"Then you will have to lay valid reasons before the Court, as you, of
course, know."

"My reasons are that I consider all judging not only useless, but
immoral."

"Yes," said the Procureur, with the same scarcely perceptible smile,
as if to show that this kind of declaration was well known to him and
belonged to the amusing sort. "Yes, but you will certainly understand
that I as Procureur, can not agree with you on this point. Therefore,
I should advise you to apply to the Court, which will consider your
declaration, and find it valid or not valid, and in the latter case will
impose a fine. Apply, then, to the Court."

"I have made my declaration, and shall apply nowhere else," Nekhludoff
said, angrily.

"Well, then, good-afternoon," said the Procureur, bowing his head,
evidently anxious to be rid of this strange visitor.

"Who was that you had here?" asked one of the members of the Court, as
he entered, just after Nekhludoff left the room.

"Nekhludoff, you know; the same that used to make all sorts of strange
statements at the Krasnoporsk rural meetings. Just fancy! He is on the
jury, and among the prisoners there is a woman or girl sentenced to
penal servitude, whom he says he betrayed, and now he wants to marry
her."

"You don't mean to say so."

"That's what he told me. And in such a strange state of excitement!"

"There is something abnormal in the young men of to-day."

"Oh, but he is not so very young."

"Yes. But how tiresome your famous Ivoshenka was. He carries the day by
wearying one out. He talked and talked without end."

"Oh, that kind of people should be simply stopped, or they will become
real obstructionists."



CHAPTER XXXVI.

NEKHLUDOFF ENDEAVOURS TO VISIT MASLOVA.

From the Procureur Nekhludoff went straight to the preliminary detention
prison. However, no Maslova was to be found there, and the inspector
explained to Nekhludoff that she would probably be in the old temporary
prison. Nekhludoff went there.

Yes, Katerina Maslova was there.

The distance between the two prisons was enormous, and Nekhludoff only
reached the old prison towards evening. He was going up to the door of
the large, gloomy building, but the sentinel stopped him and rang. A
warder came in answer to the bell. Nekhludoff showed him his order of
admittance, but the warder said he could not let him in without the
inspector's permission. Nekhludoff went to see the inspector. As he was
going up the stairs he heard distant sounds of some complicated bravura,
played on the piano. When a cross servant girl, with a bandaged eye,
opened the door to him, those sounds seemed to escape from the room
and to strike his car. It was a rhapsody of Liszt's, that everybody was
tired of, splendidly played but only to one point. When that point was
reached the same thing was repeated. Nekhludoff asked the bandaged maid
whether the inspector was in. She answered that he was not in.

"Will he return soon?"

The rhapsody again stopped and recommenced loudly and brilliantly again
up to the same charmed point.

"I will go and ask," and the servant went away.

"Tell him he is not in and won't be to-day; he is out visiting. What do
they come bothering for?" came the sound of a woman's voice from behind
the door, and again the rhapsody rattled on and stopped, and the sound
of a chair pushed back was heard. It was plain the irritated pianist
meant to rebuke the tiresome visitor, who had come at an untimely hour.
"Papa is not in," a pale girl with crimped hair said, crossly, coming
out into the ante-room, but, seeing a young man in a good coat, she
softened.

"Come in, please. . . . What is it you want?"

"I want to see a prisoner in this prison."

"A political one, I suppose?"

"No, not a political one. I have a permission from the Procureur."

"Well, I don't know, and papa is out; but come in, please," she said,
again, "or else speak to the assistant. He is in the office at present;
apply there. What is your name?"

"I thank you," said Nekhludoff, without answering her question, and went
out.

The door was not yet closed after him when the same lively tones
recommenced. In the courtyard Nekhludoff met an officer with bristly
moustaches, and asked for the assistant-inspector. It was the assistant
himself. He looked at the order of admittance, but said that he could
not decide to let him in with a pass for the preliminary prison.
Besides, it was too late. "Please to come again to-morrow. To morrow, at
10, everybody is allowed to go in. Come then, and the inspector himself
will be at home. Then you can have the interview either in the common
room or, if the inspector allows it, in the office."

And so Nekhludoff did not succeed in getting an interview that day,
and returned home. As he went along the streets, excited at the idea of
meeting her, he no longer thought about the Law Courts, but recalled his
conversations with the Procureur and the inspector's assistant. The
fact that he had been seeking an interview with her, and had told the
Procureur, and had been in two prisons, so excited him that it was long
before he could calm down. When he got home he at once fetched out his
diary, that had long remained untouched, read a few sentences out of it,
and then wrote as follows:

"For two years I have not written anything in my diary, and thought I
never should return to this childishness. Yet it is not childishness,
but converse with my own self, with this real divine self which lives
in every man. All this time that I slept there was no one for me to
converse with. I was awakened by an extraordinary event on the 28th
of April, in the Law Court, when I was on the jury. I saw her in the
prisoners' dock, the Katusha betrayed by me, in a prisoner's cloak,
condemned to penal servitude through a strange mistake, and my own
fault. I have just been to the Procureur's and to the prison, but I was
not admitted. I have resolved to do all I can to see her, to confess to
her, and to atone for my sin, even by a marriage. God help me. My soul
is at peace and I am full of joy."



CHAPTER XXXVII.

MASLOVA RECALLS THE PAST.

That night Maslova lay awake a long time with her eyes open looking at
the door, in front of which the deacon's daughter kept passing. She was
thinking that nothing would induce her to go to the island of Sakhalin
and marry a convict, but would arrange matters somehow with one of the
prison officials, the secretary, a warder, or even a warder's assistant.
"Aren't they all given that way? Only I must not get thin, or else I am
lost."

She thought of how the advocate had looked at her, and also the
president, and of the men she met, and those who came in on purpose at
the court. She recollected how her companion, Bertha, who came to see
her in prison, had told her about the student whom she had "loved" while
she was with Kitaeva, and who had inquired about her, and pitied her
very much. She recalled many to mind, only not Nekhludoff. She never
brought back to mind the days of her childhood and youth, and her love
to Nekhludoff. That would have been too painful. These memories lay
untouched somewhere deep in her soul; she had forgotten him, and never
recalled and never even dreamt of him. To-day, in the court, she did not
recognise him, not only because when she last saw him he was in uniform,
without a beard, and had only a small moustache and thick, curly, though
short hair, and now was bald and bearded, but because she never thought
about him. She had buried his memory on that terrible dark night when
he, returning from the army, had passed by on the railway without
stopping to call on his aunts. Katusha then knew her condition. Up to
that night she did not consider the child that lay beneath her heart
a burden. But on that night everything changed, and the child became
nothing but a weight.

His aunts had expected Nekhludoff, had asked him to come and see them in
passing, but he had telegraphed that he could not come, as he had to be
in Petersburg at an appointed time. When Katusha heard this she made up
her mind to go to the station and see him. The train was to pass by at
two o'clock in the night. Katusha having helped the old ladies to bed,
and persuaded a little girl, the cook's daughter, Mashka, to come with
her, put on a pair of old boots, threw a shawl over her head, gathered
up her dress, and ran to the station.

It was a warm, rainy, and windy autumn night. The rain now pelted down
in warm, heavy drops, now stopped again. It was too dark to see the path
across the field, and in the wood it was pitch black, so that although
Katusha knew the way well, she got off the path, and got to the little
station where the train stopped for three minutes, not before, as she
had hoped, but after the second bell had been rung. Hurrying up the
platform, Katusha saw him at once at the windows of a first-class
carriage. Two officers sat opposite each other on the velvet-covered
seats, playing cards. This carriage was very brightly lit up; on the
little table between the seats stood two thick, dripping candles. He sat
in his closefitting breeches on the arm of the seat, leaning against
the back, and laughed. As soon as she recognised him she knocked at the
carriage window with her benumbed hand, but at that moment the last bell
rang, and the train first gave a backward jerk, and then gradually the
carriages began to move forward. One of the players rose with the cards
in his hand, and looked out. She knocked again, and pressed her face to
the window, but the carriage moved on, and she went alongside looking
in. The officer tried to lower the window, but could not. Nekhludoff
pushed him aside and began lowering it himself. The train went faster,
so that she had to walk quickly. The train went on still faster and the
window opened. The guard pushed her aside, and jumped in. Katusha ran
on, along the wet boards of the platform, and when she came to the end
she could hardly stop herself from falling as she ran down the steps
of the platform. She was running by the side of the railway, though the
first-class carriage had long passed her, and the second-class carriages
were gliding by faster, and at last the third-class carriages still
faster. But she ran on, and when the last carriage with the lamps at
the back had gone by, she had already reached the tank which fed the
engines, and was unsheltered from the wind, which was blowing her shawl
about and making her skirt cling round her legs. The shawl flew off her
head, but still she ran on.

"Katerina Michaelovna, you've lost your shawl!" screamed the little
girl, who was trying to keep up with her.

Katusha stopped, threw back her head, and catching hold of it with both
hands sobbed aloud. "Gone!" she screamed.

"He is sitting in a velvet arm-chair and joking and drinking, in a
brightly lit carriage, and I, out here in the mud, in the darkness, in
the wind and the rain, am standing and weeping," she thought to herself;
and sat down on the ground, sobbing so loud that the little girl got
frightened, and put her arms round her, wet as she was.

"Come home, dear," she said.

"When a train passes--then under a carriage, and there will be an end,"
Katusha was thinking, without heeding the girl.

And she made up her mind to do it, when, as it always happens, when a
moment of quiet follows great excitement, he, the child--his child--made
himself known within her. Suddenly all that a moment before had been
tormenting her, so that it had seemed impossible to live, all her
bitterness towards him, and the wish to revenge herself, even by dying,
passed away; she grew quieter, got up, put the shawl on her head, and
went home.

Wet, muddy, and quite exhausted, she returned, and from that day the
change which brought her where she now was began to operate in her soul.
Beginning from that dreadful night, she ceased believing in God and
in goodness. She had herself believed in God, and believed that other
people also believed in Him; but after that night she became convinced
that no one believed, and that all that was said about God and His
laws was deception and untruth. He whom she loved, and who had loved
her--yes, she knew that--had thrown her away; had abused her love. Yet
he was the best of all the people she knew. All the rest were still
worse. All that afterwards happened to her strengthened her in this
belief at every step. His aunts, the pious old ladies, turned her out
when she could no longer serve them as she used to. And of all those she
met, the women used her as a means of getting money, the men, from the
old police officer down to the warders of the prison, looked at her as
on an object for pleasure. And no one in the world cared for aught but
pleasure. In this belief the old author with whom she had come together
in the second year of her life of independence had strengthened her. He
had told her outright that it was this that constituted the happiness of
life, and he called it poetical and aesthetic.

Everybody lived for himself only, for his pleasure, and all the talk
concerning God and righteousness was deception. And if sometimes doubts
arose in her mind and she wondered why everything was so ill-arranged
in the world that all hurt each other, and made each other suffer, she
thought it best not to dwell on it, and if she felt melancholy she could
smoke, or, better still, drink, and it would pass.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

SUNDAY IN PRISON--PREPARING FOR MASS.

On Sunday morning at five o'clock, when a whistle sounded in the
corridor of the women's ward of the prison, Korableva, who was already
awake, called Maslova.

"Oh, dear! life again," thought Maslova, with horror, involuntarily
breathing in the air that had become terribly noisome towards the
morning. She wished to fall asleep again, to enter into the region of
oblivion, but the habit of fear overcame sleepiness, and she sat up and
looked round, drawing her feet under her. The women had all got up; only
the elder children were still asleep. The spirit-trader was carefully
drawing a cloak from under the children, so as not to wake them. The
watchman's wife was hanging up the rags to dry that served the baby
as swaddling clothes, while the baby was screaming desperately in
Theodosia's arms, who was trying to quiet it. The consumptive woman was
coughing with her hands pressed to her chest, while the blood rushed to
her face, and she sighed loudly, almost screaming, in the intervals of
coughing. The fat, red-haired woman was lying on her back, with
knees drawn up, and loudly relating a dream. The old woman accused of
incendiarism was standing in front of the image, crossing herself and
bowing, and repeating the same words over and over again. The deacon's
daughter sat on the bedstead, looking before her, with a dull, sleepy
face. Khoroshavka was twisting her black, oily, coarse hair round her
fingers. The sound of slipshod feet was heard in the passage, and the
door opened to let in two convicts, dressed in jackets and grey trousers
that did not reach to their ankles. With serious, cross faces they
lifted the stinking tub and carried it out of the cell. The women went
out to the taps in the corridor to wash. There the red-haired woman
again began a quarrel with a woman from another cell.

"Is it the solitary cell you want?" shouted an old jailer, slapping the
red-haired woman on her bare, fat back, so that it sounded through the
corridor. "You be quiet."

"Lawks! the old one's playful," said the woman, taking his action for a
caress.

"Now, then, be quick; get ready for the mass." Maslova had hardly time
to do her hair and dress when the inspector came with his assistants.

"Come out for inspection," cried a jailer.

Some more prisoners came out of other cells and stood in two rows along
the corridor; each woman had to place her hand on the shoulder of the
woman in front of her. They were all counted.

After the inspection the woman warder led the prisoners to church.
Maslova and Theodosia were in the middle of a column of over a hundred
women, who had come out of different cells. All were dressed in white
skirts, white jackets, and wore white kerchiefs on their heads, except
a few who had their own coloured clothes on. These were wives who, with
their children, were following their convict husbands to Siberia. The
whole flight of stairs was filled by the procession. The patter of
softly-shod feet mingled with the voices and now and then a laugh. When
turning, on the landing, Maslova saw her enemy, Botchkova, in front, and
pointed out her angry face to Theodosia. At the bottom of the stairs the
women stopped talking. Bowing and crossing themselves, they entered the
empty church, which glistened with gilding. Crowding and pushing one
another, they took their places on the right.

After the women came the men condemned to banishment, those serving
their term in the prison, and those exiled by their Communes; and,
coughing loudly, they took their stand, crowding the left side and the
middle of the church.

On one side of the gallery above stood the men sentenced to penal
servitude in Siberia, who had been let into the church before the
others. Each of them had half his head shaved, and their presence was
indicated by the clanking of the chains on their feet. On the other side
of the gallery stood those in preliminary confinement, without chains,
their heads not shaved.

The prison church had been rebuilt and ornamented by a rich merchant,
who spent several tens of thousands of roubles on it, and it glittered
with gay colours and gold. For a time there was silence in the church,
and only coughing, blowing of noses, the crying of babies, and now and
then the rattling of chains, was heard. But at last the convicts that
stood in the middle moved, pressed against each other, leaving a passage
in the centre of the church, down which the prison inspector passed to
take his place in front of every one in the nave.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE PRISON CHURCH--BLIND LEADERS OF THE BLIND.

The service began.

It consisted of the following. The priest, having dressed in a strange
and very inconvenient garb, made of gold cloth, cut and arranged little
bits of bread on a saucer, and then put them into a cup with wine,
repeating at the same time different names and prayers. Meanwhile
the deacon first read Slavonic prayers, difficult to understand in
themselves, and rendered still more incomprehensible by being read very
fast, and then sang them turn and turn about with the convicts. The
contents of the prayers were chiefly the desire for the welfare of
the Emperor and his family. These petitions were repeated many times,
separately and together with other prayers, the people kneeling. Besides
this, several verses from the Acts of the Apostles were read by the
deacon in a peculiarly strained voice, which made it impossible to
understand what he read, and then the priest read very distinctly a
part of the Gospel according to St. Mark, in which it said that Christ,
having risen from the dead before flying up to heaven to sit down at His
Father's right hand, first showed Himself to Mary Magdalene, out of whom
He had driven seven devils, and then to eleven of His disciples, and
ordered them to preach the Gospel to the whole creation, and the priest
added that if any one did not believe this he would perish, but he that
believed it and was baptised should be saved, and should besides drive
out devils and cure people by laying his hands on them, should talk in
strange tongues, should take up serpents, and if he drank poison should
not die, but remain well.

The essence of the service consisted in the supposition that the bits
cut up by the priest and put by him into the wine, when manipulated and
prayed over in a certain way, turned into the flesh and blood of God.

These manipulations consisted in the priest's regularly lifting and
holding up his arms, though hampered by the gold cloth sack he had on,
then, sinking on to his knees and kissing the table and all that was on
it, but chiefly in his taking a cloth by two of its corners and waving
it regularly and softly over the silver saucer and golden cup. It was
supposed that, at this point, the bread and the wine turned into flesh
and blood; therefore, this part of the service was performed with the
greatest solemnity.

"Now, to the blessed, most pure, and most holy Mother of God," the
priest cried from the golden partition which divided part of the church
from the rest, and the choir began solemnly to sing that it was very
right to glorify the Virgin Mary, who had borne Christ without losing
her virginity, and was therefore worthy of greater honour than some kind
of cherubim, and greater glory than some kind of seraphim. After this
the transformation was considered accomplished, and the priest having
taken the napkin off the saucer, cut the middle bit of bread in four,
and put it into the wine, and then into his mouth. He was supposed to
have eaten a bit of God's flesh and swallowed a little of His blood.
Then the priest drew a curtain, opened the middle door in the partition,
and, taking the gold cup in his hands, came out of the door, inviting
those who wished to do so also to come and eat some of God's flesh and
blood that was contained in the cup. A few children appeared to wish to
do so.

After having asked the children their names, the priest carefully took
out of the cup, with a spoon, and shoved a bit of bread soaked in wine
deep into the mouth of each child in turn, and the deacon, while wiping
the children's mouths, sang, in a merry voice, that the children were
eating the flesh and drinking the blood of God. After this the priest
carried the cup back behind the partition, and there drank all the
remaining blood and ate up all the bits of flesh, and after having
carefully sucked his moustaches and wiped his mouth, he stepped briskly
from behind the partition, the soles of his calfskin boots creaking.
The principal part of this Christian service was now finished, but
the priest, wishing to comfort the unfortunate prisoners, added to the
ordinary service another. This consisted of his going up to the gilt
hammered-out image (with black face and hands) supposed to represent
the very God he had been eating, illuminated by a dozen wax candles, and
proceeding, in a strange, discordant voice, to hum or sing the following
words:

"Jesu sweetest, glorified of the Apostles, Jesu lauded by the martyrs,
almighty Monarch, save me, Jesu my Saviour. Jesu, most beautiful, have
mercy on him who cries to Thee, Saviour Jesu. Born of prayer Jesu, all
thy saints, all thy prophets, save and find them worthy of the joys of
heaven. Jesu, lover of men."

Then he stopped, drew breath, crossed himself, bowed to the ground, and
every one did the same--the inspector, the warders, the prisoners; and
from above the clinking of the chains sounded more unintermittently.
Then he continued: "Of angels the Creator and Lord of powers, Jesu most
wonderful, the angels' amazement, Jesu most powerful, of our forefathers
the Redeemer. Jesu sweetest, of patriarchs the praise. Jesu most
glorious, of kings the strength. Jesu most good, of prophets the
fulfilment. Jesu most amazing, of martyrs the strength. Jesu most
humble, of monks the joy. Jesu most merciful, of priests the sweetness.
Jesu most charitable, of the fasting the continence. Jesu most sweet,
of the just the joy. Jesu most pure, of the celibates the chastity. Jesu
before all ages of sinners the salvation. Jesu, son of God, have mercy
on me."

Every time he repeated the word "Jesu" his voice became more and
more wheezy. At last he came to a stop, and holding up his silk-lined
cassock, and kneeling down on one knee, he stooped down to the ground
and the choir began to sing, repeating the words, "Jesu, Son of God,
have mercy on me," and the convicts fell down and rose again, shaking
back the hair that was left on their heads, and rattling with the chains
that were bruising their thin ankles.

This continued for a long time. First came the glorification, which
ended with the words, "Have mercy on me." Then more glorifications,
ending with "Alleluia!" And the convicts made the sign of the cross,
and bowed, first at each sentence, then after every two and then after
three, and all were very glad when the glorification ended, and the
priest shut the book with a sigh of relief and retired behind the
partition. One last act remained. The priest took a large, gilt cross,
with enamel medallions at the ends, from a table, and came out into the
centre of the church with it. First the inspector came up and kissed
the cross, then the jailers, then the convicts, pushing and abusing
each other in whispers. The priest, talking to the inspector, pushed the
cross and his hand now against the mouths and now against the noses of
the convicts, who were trying to kiss both the cross and the hand of the
priest. And thus ended the Christian service, intended for the comfort
and the teaching of these strayed brothers.



CHAPTER XL.

THE HUSKS OF RELIGION.

And none of those present, from the inspector down to Maslova, seemed
conscious of the fact that this Jesus, whose name the priest repeated
such a great number of times, and whom he praised with all these curious
expressions, had forbidden the very things that were being done there;
that He had prohibited not only this meaningless much-speaking and the
blasphemous incantation over the bread and wine, but had also, in the
clearest words, forbidden men to call other men their master, and to
pray in temples; and had ordered that every one should pray in solitude,
had forbidden to erect temples, saying that He had come to destroy
them, and that one should worship, not in a temple, but in spirit and
in truth; and, above all, that He had forbidden not only to judge, to
imprison, to torment, to execute men, as was being done here, but had
prohibited any kind of violence, saying that He had come to give freedom
to the captives.

No one present seemed conscious that all that was going on here was the
greatest blasphemy and a supreme mockery of that same Christ in whose
name it was being done. No one seemed to realise that the gilt cross
with the enamel medallions at the ends, which the priest held out to the
people to be kissed, was nothing but the emblem of that gallows on which
Christ had been executed for denouncing just what was going on here.
That these priests, who imagined they were eating and drinking the body
and blood of Christ in the form of bread and wine, did in reality eat
and drink His flesh and His blood, but not as wine and bits of bread,
but by ensnaring "these little ones" with whom He identified Himself,
by depriving them of the greatest blessings and submitting them to most
cruel torments, and by hiding from men the tidings of great joy which
He had brought. That thought did not enter into the mind of any one
present.

The priest did his part with a quiet conscience, because he was brought
up from childhood to consider that the only true faith was the faith
which had been held by all the holy men of olden times and was still
held by the Church, and demanded by the State authorities. He did not
believe that the bread turned into flesh, that it was useful for the
soul to repeat so many words, or that he had actually swallowed a bit of
God. No one could believe this, but he believed that one ought to hold
this faith. What strengthened him most in this faith was the fact that,
for fulfilling the demands of this faith, he had for the last 15 years
been able to draw an income, which enabled him to keep his family, send
his son to a gymnasium and his daughter to a school for the daughters of
the clergy. The deacon believed in the same manner, and even more firmly
than the priest, for he had forgotten the substance of the dogmas of
this faith, and knew only that the prayers for the dead, the masses,
with and without the acathistus, all had a definite price, which real
Christians readily paid, and, therefore, he called out his "have mercy,
have mercy," very willingly, and read and said what was appointed, with
the same quiet certainty of its being necessary to do so with which
other men sell faggots, flour, or potatoes. The prison inspector and the
warders, though they had never understood or gone into the meaning of
these dogmas and of all that went on in church, believed that they must
believe, because the higher authorities and the Tsar himself believed in
it. Besides, though faintly (and themselves unable to explain why), they
felt that this faith defended their cruel occupations. If this faith
did not exist it would have been more difficult, perhaps impossible, for
them to use all their powers to torment people, as they were now doing,
with a quiet conscience. The inspector was such a kind-hearted man that
he could not have lived as he was now living unsupported by his faith.
Therefore, he stood motionless, bowed and crossed himself zealously,
tried to feel touched when the song about the cherubims was being sung,
and when the children received communion he lifted one of them, and held
him up to the priest with his own hands.

The great majority of the prisoners believed that there lay a mystic
power in these gilt images, these vestments, candles, cups, crosses,
and this repetition of incomprehensible words, "Jesu sweetest" and "have
mercy"--a power through which might be obtained much convenience in this
and in the future life. Only a few clearly saw the deception that was
practised on the people who adhered to this faith, and laughed at it in
their hearts; but the majority, having made several attempts to get the
conveniences they desired, by means of prayers, masses, and candles, and
not having got them (their prayers remaining unanswered), were each of
them convinced that their want of success was accidental, and that
this organisation, approved by the educated and by archbishops, is very
important and necessary, if not for this, at any rate for the next life.

Maslova also believed in this way. She felt, like the rest, a mixed
sensation of piety and dulness. She stood at first in a crowd behind a
railing, so that she could see no one but her companions; but when those
to receive communion moved on, she and Theodosia stepped to the front,
and they saw the inspector, and, behind him, standing among the warders,
a little peasant, with a very light beard and fair hair. This was
Theodosia's husband, and he was gazing with fixed eyes at his wife.
During the acathistus Maslova occupied herself in scrutinising him and
talking to Theodosia in whispers, and bowed and made the sign of the
cross only when every one else did.



CHAPTER XLI.

VISITING DAY--THE MEN'S WARD.

Nekhludoff left home early. A peasant from the country was still driving
along the side street and calling out in a voice peculiar to his trade,
"Milk! milk! milk!"

The first warm spring rain had fallen the day before, and now wherever
the ground was not paved the grass shone green. The birch trees in the
gardens looked as if they were strewn with green fluff, the wild cherry
and the poplars unrolled their long, balmy buds, and in shops and
dwelling-houses the double window-frames were being removed and the
windows cleaned.

In the Tolkoochi [literally, jostling market, where second-hand clothes
and all sorts of cheap goods are sold] market, which Nekhludoff had to
pass on his way, a dense crowd was surging along the row of booths, and
tattered men walked about selling top-boots, which they carried under
their arms, and renovated trousers and waistcoats, which hung over their
shoulders.

Men in clean coats and shining boots, liberated from the factories, it
being Sunday, and women with bright silk kerchiefs on their heads and
cloth jackets trimmed with jet, were already thronging at the door of
the traktir. Policemen, with yellow cords to their uniforms and carrying
pistols, were on duty, looking out for some disorder which might
distract the ennui that oppressed them. On the paths of the boulevards
and on the newly-revived grass, children and dogs ran about, playing,
and the nurses sat merrily chattering on the benches. Along the streets,
still fresh and damp on the shady side, but dry in the middle, heavy
carts rumbled unceasingly, cabs rattled and tramcars passed ringing by.
The air vibrated with the pealing and clanging of church bells, that
were calling the people to attend to a service like that which was now
being conducted in the prison. And the people, dressed in their Sunday
best, were passing on their way to their different parish churches.

The isvostchik did not drive Nekhludoff up to the prison itself, but to
the last turning that led to the prison.

Several persons--men and women--most of them carrying small bundles,
stood at this turning, about 100 steps from the prison. To the right
there were several low wooden buildings; to the left, a two-storeyed
house with a signboard. The huge brick building, the prison proper, was
just in front, and the visitors were not allowed to come up to it. A
sentinel was pacing up and down in front of it, and shouted at any one
who tried to pass him.

At the gate of the wooden buildings, to the right, opposite the
sentinel, sat a warder on a bench, dressed in uniform, with gold cords,
a notebook in his hands. The visitors came up to him, and named the
persons they wanted to see, and he put the names down. Nekhludoff also
went up, and named Katerina Maslova. The warder wrote down the name.

"Why--don't they admit us yet?" asked Nekhludoff.

"The service is going on. When the mass is over, you'll be admitted."

Nekhludoff stepped aside from the waiting crowd. A man in tattered
clothes, crumpled hat, with bare feet and red stripes all over his face,
detached himself from the crowd, and turned towards the prison.

"Now, then, where are you going?" shouted the sentinel with the gun.

"And you hold your row," answered the tramp, not in the least abashed by
the sentinel's words, and turned back. "Well, if you'll not let me in,
I'll wait. But, no! Must needs shout, as if he were a general."

The crowd laughed approvingly. The visitors were, for the greater
part, badly-dressed people; some were ragged, but there were also
some respectable-looking men and women. Next to Nekhludoff stood a
clean-shaven, stout, and red-cheeked man, holding a bundle, apparently
containing under-garments. This was the doorkeeper of a bank; he had
come to see his brother, who was arrested for forgery. The good-natured
fellow told Nekhludoff the whole story of his life, and was going to
question him in turn, when their attention was aroused by a student and
a veiled lady, who drove up in a trap, with rubber tyres, drawn by a
large thoroughbred horse. The student was holding a large bundle. He
came up to Nekhludoff, and asked if and how he could give the rolls he
had brought in alms to the prisoners. His fiancee wished it (this lady
was his fiancee), and her parents had advised them to take some rolls to
the prisoners.

"I myself am here for the first time," said Nekhludoff, "and don't know;
but I think you had better ask this man," and he pointed to the warder
with the gold cords and the book, sitting on the right.

As they were speaking, the large iron door with a window in it opened,
and an officer in uniform, followed by another warder, stepped out.
The warder with the notebook proclaimed that the admittance of visitors
would now commence. The sentinel stepped aside, and all the visitors
rushed to the door as if afraid of being too late; some even ran. At
the door there stood a warder who counted the visitors as they came
in, saying aloud, 16, 17, and so on. Another warder stood inside the
building and also counted the visitors as they entered a second door,
touching each one with his hand, so that when they went away again
not one visitor should be able to remain inside the prison and not
one prisoner might get out. The warder, without looking at whom he was
touching, slapped Nekhludoff on the back, and Nekhludoff felt hurt by
the touch of the warder's hand; but, remembering what he had come about,
he felt ashamed of feeling dissatisfied and taking offence.

The first apartment behind the entrance doors was a large vaulted room
with iron bars to the small windows. In this room, which was called the
meeting-room, Nekhludoff was startled by the sight of a large picture of
the Crucifixion.

"What's that for?" he thought, his mind involuntarily connecting the
subject of the picture with liberation and not with imprisonment.

He went on, slowly letting the hurrying visitors pass before, and
experiencing a mingled feeling of horror at the evil-doers locked up in
this building, compassion for those who, like Katusha and the boy they
tried the day before, must be here though guiltless, and shyness and
tender emotion at the thought of the interview before him. The warder
at the other end of the meeting-room said something as they passed, but
Nekhludoff, absorbed by his own thoughts, paid no attention to him, and
continued to follow the majority of the visitors, and so got into the
men's part of the prison instead of the women's.

Letting the hurrying visitors pass before him, he was the last to get
into the interviewing-room. As soon as Nekhludoff opened the door of
this room, he was struck by the deafening roar of a hundred voices
shouting at once, the reason of which he did not at once understand. But
when he came nearer to the people, he saw that they were all pressing
against a net that divided the room in two, like flies settling on
sugar, and he understood what it meant. The two halves of the room,
the windows of which were opposite the door he had come in by, were
separated, not by one, but by two nets reaching from the floor to the
ceiling. The wire nets were stretched 7 feet apart, and soldiers were
walking up and down the space between them. On the further side of the
nets were the prisoners, on the nearer, the visitors. Between them was
a double row of nets and a space of 7 feet wide, so that they could not
hand anything to one another, and any one whose sight was not very
good could not even distinguish the face on the other side. It was also
difficult to talk; one had to scream in order to be heard.

On both sides were faces pressed close to the nets, faces of wives,
husbands, fathers, mothers, children, trying to see each other's
features and to say what was necessary in such a way as to be
understood.

But as each one tried to be heard by the one he was talking to, and
his neighbour tried to do the same, they did their best to drown each
other's voices' and that was the cause of the din and shouting which
struck Nekhludoff when he first came in. It was impossible to understand
what was being said and what were the relations between the different
people. Next Nekhludoff an old woman with a kerchief on her head stood
trembling, her chin pressed close to the net, and shouting something to
a young fellow, half of whose head was shaved, who listened attentively
with raised brows. By the side of the old woman was a young man in
a peasant's coat, who listened, shaking his head, to a boy very like
himself. Next stood a man in rags, who shouted, waving his arm and
laughing. Next to him a woman, with a good woollen shawl on her
shoulders, sat on the floor holding a baby in her lap and crying
bitterly. This was apparently the first time she saw the greyheaded man
on the other side in prison clothes, and with his head shaved. Beyond
her was the doorkeeper, who had spoken to Nekhludoff outside; he was
shouting with all his might to a greyhaired convict on the other side.

When Nekhludoff found that he would have to speak in similar conditions,
a feeling of indignation against those who were able to make and enforce
these conditions arose in him; he was surprised that, placed in such
a dreadful position, no one seemed offended at this outrage on human
feelings. The soldiers, the inspector, the prisoners themselves, acted
as if acknowledging all this to be necessary.

Nekhludoff remained in this room for about five minutes, feeling
strangely depressed, conscious of how powerless he was, and at variance
with all the world. He was seized with a curious moral sensation like
seasickness.



CHAPTER XLII.

VISITING DAY--THE WOMEN'S WARD.

"Well, but I must do what I came here for," he said, trying to pick up
courage. "What is to be done now?" He looked round for an official, and
seeing a thin little man in the uniform of an officer going up and down
behind the people, he approached him.

"Can you tell me, sir," he said, with exceedingly strained politeness of
manner, "where the women are kept, and where one is allowed to interview
them?"

"Is it the women's ward you want to go to?"

"Yes, I should like to see one of the women prisoners," Nekhludoff said,
with the same strained politeness.

"You should have said so when you were in the hall. Who is it, then,
that you want to see?"

"I want to see a prisoner called Katerina Maslova."

"Is she a political one?"

"No, she is simply . . ."

"What! Is she sentenced?"

"Yes; the day before yesterday she was sentenced," meekly answered
Nekhludoff, fearing to spoil the inspector's good humour, which seemed
to incline in his favour.

"If you want to go to the women's ward please to step this way," said
the officer, having decided from Nekhludoff's appearance that he was
worthy of attention. "Sideroff, conduct the gentleman to the women's
ward," he said, turning to a moustached corporal with medals on his
breast.

"Yes, sir."

At this moment heart-rending sobs were heard coming from some one near
the net.

Everything here seemed strange to Nekhludoff; but strangest of all was
that he should have to thank and feel obligation towards the inspector
and the chief warders, the very men who were performing the cruel deeds
that were done in this house.

The corporal showed Nekhludoff through the corridor, out of the men's
into the women's interviewing-room.

This room, like that of the men, was divided by two wire nets; but it
was much smaller, and there were fewer visitors and fewer prisoners, so
that there was less shouting than in the men's room. Yet the same thing
was going on here, only, between the nets instead of soldiers there was
a woman warder, dressed in a blue-edged uniform jacket, with gold cords
on the sleeves, and a blue belt. Here also, as in the men's room, the
people were pressing close to the wire netting on both sides; on the
nearer side, the townspeople in varied attire; on the further side, the
prisoners, some in white prison clothes, others in their own coloured
dresses. The whole length of the net was taken up by the people standing
close to it. Some rose on tiptoe to be heard across the heads of others;
some sat talking on the floor.

The most remarkable of the prisoners, both by her piercing screams and
her appearance, was a thin, dishevelled gipsy. Her kerchief had slipped
off her curly hair, and she stood near a post in the middle of the
prisoner's division, shouting something, accompanied by quick gestures,
to a gipsy man in a blue coat, girdled tightly below the waist. Next
the gipsy man, a soldier sat on the ground talking to prisoner; next the
soldier, leaning close to the net, stood a young peasant, with a fair
beard and a flushed face, keeping back his tears with difficulty. A
pretty, fair-haired prisoner, with bright blue eyes, was speaking to
him. These two were Theodosia and her husband. Next to them was a tramp,
talking to a broad-faced woman; then two women, then a man, then again a
woman, and in front of each a prisoner. Maslova was not among them. But
some one stood by the window behind the prisoners, and Nekhludoff knew
it was she. His heart began to beat faster, and his breath stopped. The
decisive moment was approaching. He went up to the part of the net where
he could see the prisoner, and recognised her at once. She stood behind
the blue-eyed Theodosia, and smiled, listening to what Theodosia was
saying. She did not wear the prison cloak now, but a white dress,
tightly drawn in at the waist by a belt, and very full in the bosom.
From under her kerchief appeared the black ringlets of her fringe, just
the same as in the court.

"Now, in a moment it will be decided," he thought.

"How shall I call her? Or will she come herself?"

She was expecting Bertha; that this man had come to see her never
entered her head.

"Whom do you want?" said the warder who was walking between the nets,
coming up to Nekhludoff.

"Katerina Maslova," Nekhludoff uttered, with difficulty.

"Katerina Maslova, some one to see you," cried the warder.



CHAPTER XLIII.

NEKHLUDOFF VISITS MASLOVA.

Maslova looked round, and with head thrown back and expanded chest,
came up to the net with that expression of readiness which he well
knew, pushed in between two prisoners, and gazed at Nekhludoff with a
surprised and questioning look. But, concluding from his clothing he was
a rich man, she smiled.

"Is it me you want?" she asked, bringing her smiling face, with the
slightly squinting eyes, nearer the net.

"I, I--I wished to see--" Nekhludoff did not know how to address her. "I
wished to see you--I--" He was not speaking louder than usual.

"No; nonsense, I tell you!" shouted the tramp who stood next to him.
"Have you taken it or not?"

"Dying, I tell you; what more do you want?" some one else was screaming
at his other side. Maslova could not hear what Nekhludoff was saying,
but the expression of his face as he was speaking reminded her of him.
She did not believe her own eyes; still the smile vanished from her face
and a deep line of suffering appeared on her brow.

"I cannot hear what you are saying," she called out, wrinkling her brow
and frowning more and more.

"I have come," said Nekhludoff. "Yes, I am doing my duty--I am
confessing," thought Nekhludoff; and at this thought the tears came in
his eyes, and he felt a choking sensation in his throat, and holding on
with both hands to the net, he made efforts to keep from bursting into
tears.

"I say, why do you shove yourself in where you're not wanted?" some one
shouted at one side of him.

"God is my witness; I know nothing," screamed a prisoner from the other
side.

Noticing his excitement, Maslova recognised him.

"You're like . . . but no; I don't know you," she shouted, without
looking at him, and blushing, while her face grew still more stern.

"I have come to ask you to forgive me," he said, in a loud but
monotonous voice, like a lesson learnt by heart. Having said these words
he became confused; but immediately came the thought that, if he felt
ashamed, it was all the better; he had to bear this shame, and he
continued in a loud voice:

"Forgive me; I have wronged you terribly."

She stood motionless and without taking her squinting eyes off him.

He could not continue to speak, and stepping away from the net he tried
to suppress the sobs that were choking him.

The inspector, the same officer who had directed Nekhludoff to the
women's ward, and whose interest he seemed to have aroused, came into
the room, and, seeing Nekhludoff not at the net, asked him why he was
not talking to her whom he wanted to see. Nekhludoff blew his nose, gave
himself a shake, and, trying to appear calm, said:

"It's so inconvenient through these nets; nothing can be heard."

Again the inspector considered for a moment.

"Ah, well, she can be brought out here for awhile. Mary Karlovna,"
turning to the warder, "lead Maslova out."

A minute later Maslova came out of the side door. Stepping softly, she
came up close to Nekhludoff, stopped, and looked up at him from under
her brows. Her black hair was arranged in ringlets over her forehead in
the same way as it had been two days ago; her face, though unhealthy and
puffy, was attractive, and looked perfectly calm, only the glittering
black eyes glanced strangely from under the swollen lids.

"You may talk here," said the inspector, and shrugging his shoulders he
stepped aside with a look of surprise. Nekhludoff moved towards a seat
by the wall.

Maslova cast a questioning look at the inspector, and then, shrugging
her shoulders in surprise, followed Nekhludoff to the bench, and having
arranged her skirt, sat down beside him.

"I know it is hard for you to forgive me," he began, but stopped. His
tears were choking him. "But though I can't undo the past, I shall now
do what is in my power. Tell me--"

"How have you managed to find me?" she said, without answering his
question, neither looking away from him nor quite at him, with her
squinting eyes.

"O God, help me! Teach me what to do," Nekhludoff thought, looking at
her changed face. "I was on the jury the day before yesterday," he said.
"You did not recognise me?"

"No, I did not; there was not time for recognitions. I did not even
look," she said.

"There was a child, was there not?" he asked.

"Thank God! he died at once," she answered, abruptly and viciously.

"What do you mean? Why?"

"I was so ill myself, I nearly died," she said, in the same quiet voice,
which Nekhludoff had not expected and could not understand.

"How could my aunts have let you go?"

"Who keeps a servant that has a baby? They sent me off as soon as
they noticed. But why speak of this? I remember nothing. That's all
finished."

"No, it is not finished; I wish to redeem my sin."

"There's nothing to redeem. What's been has been and is passed," she
said; and, what he never expected, she looked at him and smiled in an
unpleasantly luring, yet piteous, manner.

Maslova never expected to see him again, and certainly not here and not
now; therefore, when she first recognised him, she could not keep back
the memories which she never wished to revive. In the first moment she
remembered dimly that new, wonderful world of feeling and of thought
which had been opened to her by the charming young man who loved her
and whom she loved, and then his incomprehensible cruelty and the whole
string of humiliations and suffering which flowed from and followed that
magic joy. This gave her pain, and, unable to understand it, she did
what she was always in the habit of doing, she got rid of these memories
by enveloping them in the mist of a depraved life. In the first moment,
she associated the man now sitting beside her with the lad she had
loved; but feeling that this gave her pain, she dissociated them again.
Now, this well-dressed, carefully-got-up gentleman with perfumed beard
was no longer the Nekhludoff whom she had loved but only one of the
people who made use of creatures like herself when they needed them,
and whom creatures like herself had to make use of in their turn as
profitably as they could; and that is why she looked at him with a
luring smile and considered silently how she could best make use of him.

"That's all at an end," she said. "Now I'm condemned to Siberia," and
her lip trembled as she was saying this dreadful word.

"I knew; I was certain you were not guilty," said Nekhludoff.

"Guilty! of course not; as if I could be a thief or a robber." She
stopped, considering in what way she could best get something out of
him.

"They say here that all depends on the advocate," she began. "A petition
should be handed in, only they say it's expensive."

"Yes, most certainly," said Nekhludoff. "I have already spoken to an
advocate."

"No money ought to be spared; it should be a good one," she said.

"I shall do all that is possible."

They were silent, and then she smiled again in the same way.

"And I should like to ask you . . . a little money if you can . . . not
much; ten roubles, I do not want more," she said, suddenly.

"Yes, yes," Nekhludoff said, with a sense of confusion, and felt for his
purse.

She looked rapidly at the inspector, who was walking up and down the
room. "Don't give it in front of him; he'd take it away."

Nekhludoff took out his purse as soon as the inspector had turned his
back; but had no time to hand her the note before the inspector faced
them again, so he crushed it up in his hand.

"This woman is dead," Nekhludoff thought, looking at this once sweet,
and now defiled, puffy face, lit up by an evil glitter in the black,
squinting eyes which were now glancing at the hand in which he held
the note, then following the inspector's movements, and for a moment he
hesitated. The tempter that had been speaking to him in the night again
raised its voice, trying to lead him out of the realm of his inner into
the realm of his outer life, away from the question of what he should
do to the question of what the consequences would be, and what would be
practical.

"You can do nothing with this woman," said the voice; "you will only
tie a stone round your neck, which will help to drown you and hinder you
from being useful to others.

"Is it not better to give her all the money that is here, say good-bye,
and finish with her forever?" whispered the voice.

But here he felt that now, at this very moment, something most important
was taking place in his soul--that his inner life was, as it were,
wavering in the balance, so that the slightest effort would make it sink
to this side or the other. And he made this effort by calling to his
assistance that God whom he had felt in his soul the day before, and
that God instantly responded. He resolved to tell her everything now--at
once.

"Katusha, I have come to ask you to forgive me, and you have given me no
answer. Have you forgiven me? Will you ever forgive me?" he asked.

She did not listen to him, but looked at his hand and at the inspector,
and when the latter turned she hastily stretched out her hand, grasped
the note, and hid it under her belt.

"That's odd, what you are saying there," she said, with a smile of
contempt, as it seemed to him.

Nekhludoff felt that there was in her soul one who was his enemy and who
was protecting her, such as she was now, and preventing him from getting
at her heart. But, strange to say, this did not repel him, but drew him
nearer to her by some fresh, peculiar power. He knew that he must waken
her soul, that this was terribly difficult, but the very difficulty
attracted him. He now felt towards her as he had never felt towards her
or any one else before. There was nothing personal in this feeling: he
wanted nothing from her for himself, but only wished that she might not
remain as she now was, that she might awaken and become again what she
had been.

"Katusha, why do you speak like that? I know you; I remember you--and
the old days in Papovo."

"What's the use of recalling what's past?" she remarked, drily.

"I am recalling it in order to put it right, to atone for my sin,
Katusha," and he was going to say that he would marry her, but,
meeting her eyes, he read in them something so dreadful, so coarse, so
repellent, that he could not go on.

At this moment the visitors began to go. The inspector came up to
Nekhludoff and said that the time was up.

"Good-bye; I have still much to say to you, but you see it is impossible
to do so now," said Nekhludoff, and held out his hand. "I shall come
again."

"I think you have said all."

She took his hand but did not press it.

"No; I shall try to see you again, somewhere where we can talk, and then
I shall tell you what I have to say-something very important."

"Well, then, come; why not?" she answered, and smiled with that
habitual, inviting, and promising smile which she gave to the men whom
she wished to please.

"You are more than a sister to me," said Nekhludoff.

"That's odd," she said again, and went behind the grating.



CHAPTER XLIV.

MASLOVA'S VIEW OF LIFE.

Before the first interview, Nekhludoff thought that when she saw him
and knew of his intention to serve her, Katusha would be pleased and
touched, and would be Katusha again; but, to his horror, he found
that Katusha existed no more, and there was Maslova in her place. This
astonished and horrified him.

What astonished him most was that Katusha was not ashamed of her
position--not the position of a prisoner (she was ashamed of that), but
her position as a prostitute. She seemed satisfied, even proud of it.
And, yet, how could it be otherwise? Everybody, in order to be able to
act, has to consider his occupation important and good. Therefore, in
whatever position a person is, he is certain to form such a view of the
life of men in general which will make his occupation seem important and
good.

It is usually imagined that a thief, a murderer, a spy, a prostitute,
acknowledging his or her profession as evil, is ashamed of it. But the
contrary is true. People whom fate and their sin-mistakes have placed in
a certain position, however false that position may be, form a view of
life in general which makes their position seem good and admissible. In
order to keep up their view of life, these people instinctively keep to
the circle of those people who share their views of life and their own
place in it. This surprises us, where the persons concerned are thieves,
bragging about their dexterity, prostitutes vaunting their depravity, or
murderers boasting of their cruelty. This surprises us only because the
circle, the atmosphere in which these people live, is limited, and we
are outside it. But can we not observe the same phenomenon when the rich
boast of their wealth, i.e., robbery; the commanders in the army pride
themselves on victories, i.e., murder; and those in high places vaunt
their power, i.e., violence? We do not see the perversion in the views
of life held by these people, only because the circle formed by them is
more extensive, and we ourselves are moving inside of it.

And in this manner Maslova had formed her views of life and of her own
position. She was a prostitute condemned to Siberia, and yet she had a
conception of life which made it possible for her to be satisfied with
herself, and even to pride herself on her position before others.

According to this conception, the highest good for all men without
exception--old, young, schoolboys, generals, educated and uneducated,
was connected with the relation of the sexes; therefore, all men, even
when they pretended to be occupied with other things, in reality
took this view. She was an attractive woman, and therefore she was an
important and necessary person. The whole of her former and present life
was a confirmation of the correctness of this conception.

With such a view of life, she was by no means the lowest, but a very
important person. And Maslova prized this view of life more than
anything; she could not but prize it, for, if she lost the importance
that such a view of life gave her among men, she would lose the meaning
of her life. And, in order not to lose the meaning of her life, she
instinctively clung to the set that looked at life in the same way as
she did. Feeling that Nekhludoff wanted to lead her out into another
world, she resisted him, foreseeing that she would have to lose her
place in life, with the self-possession and self-respect it gave her.
For this reason she drove from her the recollections of her early youth
and her first relations with Nekhludoff. These recollections did not
correspond with her present conception of the world, and were therefore
quite rubbed out of her mind, or, rather, lay somewhere buried and
untouched, closed up and plastered over so that they should not escape,
as when bees, in order to protect the result of their labour, will
sometimes plaster a nest of worms. Therefore, the present Nekhludoff
was not the man she had once loved with a pure love, but only a rich
gentleman whom she could, and must, make use of, and with whom she could
only have the same relations as with men in general.

"No, I could not tell her the chief thing," thought Nekhludoff, moving
towards the front doors with the rest of the people. "I did not tell her
that I would marry her; I did not tell her so, but I will," he thought.

The two warders at the door let out the visitors, counting them again,
and touching each one with their hands, so that no extra person should
go out, and none remain within. The slap on his shoulder did not offend
Nekhludoff this time; he did not even notice it.



CHAPTER XLV.

FANARIN, THE ADVOCATE--THE PETITION.

Nekhludoff meant to rearrange the whole of his external life, to let
his large house and move to an hotel, but Agraphena Petrovna pointed out
that it was useless to change anything before the winter. No one would
rent a town house for the summer; anyhow, he would have to live and keep
his things somewhere. And so all his efforts to change his manner
of life (he meant to live more simply: as the students live) led to
nothing. Not only did everything remain as it was, but the house was
suddenly filled with new activity. All that was made of wool or fur was
taken out to be aired and beaten. The gate-keeper, the boy, the cook,
and Corney himself took part in this activity. All sorts of strange
furs, which no one ever used, and various uniforms were taken out and
hung on a line, then the carpets and furniture were brought out, and the
gate-keeper and the boy rolled their sleeves up their muscular arms and
stood beating these things, keeping strict time, while the rooms were
filled with the smell of naphthaline.

When Nekhludoff crossed the yard or looked out of the window and saw
all this going on, he was surprised at the great number of things there
were, all quite useless. Their only use, Nekhludoff thought, was the
providing of exercise for Agraphena Petrovna, Corney, the gate-keeper,
the boy, and the cook.

"But it's not worth while altering my manner of life now," he thought,
"while Maslova's case is not decided. Besides, it is too difficult. It
will alter of itself when she will be set free or exiled, and I follow
her."

On the appointed day Nekhludoff drove up to the advocate Fanarin's own
splendid house, which was decorated with huge palms and other plants,
and wonderful curtains, in fact, with all the expensive luxury
witnessing to the possession of much idle money, i.e., money acquired
without labour, which only those possess who grow rich suddenly. In
the waiting-room, just as in a doctor's waiting-room, he found many
dejected-looking people sitting round several tables, on which lay
illustrated papers meant to amuse them, awaiting their turns to be
admitted to the advocate. The advocate's assistant sat in the room at a
high desk, and having recognised Nekhludoff, he came up to him and said
he would go and announce him at once. But the assistant had not reached
the door before it opened and the sounds of loud, animated voices were
heard; the voice of a middle-aged, sturdy merchant, with a red face and
thick moustaches, and the voice of Fanarin himself. Fanarin was also
a middle-aged man of medium height, with a worn look on his face. Both
faces bore the expression which you see on the faces of those who have
just concluded a profitable but not quite honest transaction.

"Your own fault, you know, my dear sir," Fanarin said, smiling.

"We'd all be in 'eaven were it not for hour sins."

"Oh, yes, yes; we all know that," and both laughed un-naturally.

"Oh, Prince Nekhludoff! Please to step in," said Fanarin, seeing him,
and, nodding once more to the merchant, he led Nekhludoff into his
business cabinet, furnished in a severely correct style.

"Won't you smoke?" said the advocate, sitting down opposite Nekhludoff
and trying to conceal a smile, apparently still excited by the success
of the accomplished transaction.

"Thanks; I have come about Maslova's case."

"Yes, yes; directly! But oh, what rogues these fat money bags are!"
he said. "You saw this here fellow. Why, he has about twelve million
roubles, and he cannot speak correctly; and if he can get a twenty-five
rouble note out of you he'll have it, if he's to wrench it out with his
teeth."

"He says ''eaven' and 'hour,' and you say 'this here fellow,'"
Nekhludoff thought, with an insurmountable feeling of aversion towards
this man who wished to show by his free and easy manner that he and
Nekhludoff belonged to one and the same camp, while his other clients
belonged to another.

"He has worried me to death--a fearful scoundrel. I felt I must relieve
my feelings," said the advocate, as if to excuse his speaking about
things that had no reference to business. "Well, how about your case?
I have read it attentively, but do not approve of it. I mean that
greenhorn of an advocate has left no valid reason for an appeal."

"Well, then, what have you decided?"

"One moment. Tell him," he said to his assistant, who had just come in,
"that I keep to what I have said. If he can, it's all right; if not, no
matter."

"But he won't agree."

"Well, no matter," and the advocate frowned.

"There now, and it is said that we advocates get our money for nothing,"
he remarked, after a pause. "I have freed one insolvent debtor from a
totally false charge, and now they all flock to me. Yet every such case
costs enormous labour. Why, don't we, too, 'lose bits of flesh in the
inkstand?' as some writer or other has said. Well, as to your case, or,
rather, the case you are taking an interest in. It has been conducted
abominably. There is no good reason for appealing. Still," he continued,
"we can but try to get the sentence revoked. This is what I have noted
down." He took up several sheets of paper covered with writing, and
began to read rapidly, slurring over the uninteresting legal terms and
laying particular stress on some sentences. "To the Court of Appeal,
criminal department, etc., etc. According to the decisions, etc., the
verdict, etc., So-and-so Maslova pronounced guilty of having caused the
death through poison of the merchant Smelkoff, and has, according to
Statute 1454 of the penal code, been sentenced to Siberia," etc., etc.
He stopped. Evidently, in spite of his being so used to it, he still
felt pleasure in listening to his own productions. "This sentence is
the direct result of the most glaring judicial perversion and error,"
he continued, impressively, "and there are grounds for its revocation.
Firstly, the reading of the medical report of the examination of
Smelkoff's intestines was interrupted by the president at the very
beginning. This is point one."

"But it was the prosecuting side that demanded this reading," Nekhludoff
said, with surprise.

"That does not matter. There might have been reasons for the defence to
demand this reading, too."

"Oh, but there could have been no reason whatever for that."

"It is a ground for appeal, though. To continue: 'Secondly,' he went
on reading, 'when Maslova's advocate, in his speech for the defence,
wishing to characterise Maslova's personality, referred to the causes of
her fall, he was interrupted by the president calling him to order
for the alleged deviation from the direct subject. Yet, as has been
repeatedly pointed out by the Senate, the elucidation of the criminal's
characteristics and his or her moral standpoint in general has a
significance of the first importance in criminal cases, even if only
as a guide in the settling of the question of imputation.' That's point
two," he said, with a look at Nekhludoff.

"But he spoke so badly that no one could make anything of it,"
Nekhludoff said, still more astonished.

"The fellow's quite a fool, and of course could not be expected to say
anything sensible," Fanarin said, laughing; "but, all the same, it will
do as a reason for appeal. Thirdly: 'The president, in his summing up,
contrary to the direct decree of section 1, statute 801, of the criminal
code, omitted to inform the jury what the judicial points are that
constitute guilt; and did not mention that having admitted the fact of
Maslova having administered the poison to Smelkoff, the jury had a right
not to impute the guilt of murder to her, since the proofs of wilful
intent to deprive Smelkoff of life were absent, and only to pronounce
her guilty of carelessness resulting in the death of the merchant, which
she did not desire.' This is the chief point."

"Yes; but we ought to have known that ourselves. It was our mistake."

"And now the fourth point," the advocate continued. "The form of the
answer given by the jury contained an evident contradiction. Maslova
is accused of wilfully poisoning Smelkoff, her one object being that of
cupidity, the only motive to commit murder she could have had. The jury
in their verdict acquit her of the intent to rob, or participation in
the stealing of valuables, from which it follows that they intended
also to acquit her of the intent to murder, and only through a
misunderstanding, which arose from the incompleteness of the president's
summing up, omitted to express it in due form in their answer. Therefore
an answer of this kind by the jury absolutely demanded the application
of statutes 816 and 808 of the criminal code of procedure, i.e., an
explanation by the president to the jury of the mistake made by them,
and another debate on the question of the prisoner's guilt."

"Then why did the president not do it?"

"I, too, should like to know why," Fanarin said, laughing.

"Then the Senate will, of course, correct this error?"

"That will all depend on who will preside there at the time. Well, now,
there it is. I have further said," he continued, rapidly, "a verdict of
this kind gave the Court no right to condemn Maslova to be punished as
a criminal, and to apply section 3, statute 771 of the penal code to her
case. This is a decided and gross violation of the basic principles of
our criminal law. In view of the reasons stated, I have the honour of
appealing to you, etc., etc., the refutation, according to 909, 910, and
section 2, 912 and 928 statute of the criminal code, etc., etc. . . .
to carry this case before another department of the same Court for a
further examination. There; all that can be done is done, but, to be
frank, I have little hope of success, though, of course, it all depends
on what members will be present at the Senate. If you have any influence
there you can but try."

"I do know some."

"All right; only be quick about it. Else they'll all go off for a change
of air; then you may have to wait three months before they return. Then,
in case of failure, we have still the possibility of appealing to His
Majesty. This, too, depends on the private influence you can bring to
work. In this case, too, I am at your service; I mean as to the working
of the petition, not the influence."

"Thank you. Now as to your fees?"

"My assistant will hand you the petition and tell you."

"One thing more. The Procureur gave me a pass for visiting this person
in prison, but they tell me I must also get a permission from the
governor in order to get an interview at another time and in another
place than those appointed. Is this necessary?"

"Yes, I think so. But the governor is away at present; a vice-governor
is in his place. And he is such an impenetrable fool that you'll
scarcely be able to do anything with him."

"Is it Meslennikoff?"

"Yes."

"I know him," said Nekhludoff, and got up to go. At this moment a
horribly ugly, little, bony, snub-nosed, yellow-faced woman flew into
the room. It was the advocate's wife, who did not seem to be in the
least bit troubled by her ugliness. She was attired in the most original
manner; she seemed enveloped in something made of velvet and silk,
something yellow and green, and her thin hair was crimped.

She stepped out triumphantly into the ante-room, followed by a tall,
smiling man, with a greenish complexion, dressed in a coat with silk
facings, and a white tie. This was an author. Nekhludoff knew him by
sight.

She opened the cabinet door and said, "Anatole, you must come to
me. Here is Simeon Ivanovitch, who will read his poems, and you must
absolutely come and read about Garshin."

Nekhludoff noticed that she whispered something to her husband, and,
thinking it was something concerning him, wished to go away, but she
caught him up and said: "I beg your pardon, Prince, I know you, and,
thinking an introduction superfluous, I beg you to stay and take part
in our literary matinee. It will be most interesting. M. Fanarin will
read."

"You see what a lot I have to do," said Fanarin, spreading out his hands
and smilingly pointing to his wife, as if to show how impossible it was
to resist so charming a creature.

Nekhludoff thanked the advocate's wife with extreme politeness for the
honour she did him in inviting him, but refused the invitation with a
sad and solemn look, and left the room.

"What an affected fellow!" said the advocate's wife, when he had gone
out.

In the ante-room the assistant handed him a ready-written petition,
and said that the fees, including the business with the Senate and the
commission, would come to 1,000 roubles, and explained that M. Fanarin
did not usually undertake this kind of business, but did it only to
oblige Nekhludoff.

"And about this petition. Who is to sign it?"

"The prisoner may do it herself, or if this is inconvenient, M. Fanarin
can, if he gets a power of attorney from her."

"Oh, no. I shall take the petition to her and get her to sign it," said
Nekhludoff, glad of the opportunity of seeing her before the appointed
day.



CHAPTER XLVI.

A PRISON FLOGGING.

At the usual time the jailer's whistle sounded in the corridors of the
prison, the iron doors of the cells rattled, bare feet pattered, heels
clattered, and the prisoners who acted as scavengers passed along the
corridors, filling the air with disgusting smells. The prisoners washed,
dressed, and came out for revision, then went to get boiling water for
their tea.

The conversation at breakfast in all the cells was very lively. It was
all about two prisoners who were to be flogged that day. One, Vasiliev,
was a young man of some education, a clerk, who had killed his mistress
in a fit of jealousy. His fellow-prisoners liked him because he
was merry and generous and firm in his behaviour with the prison
authorities. He knew the laws and insisted on their being carried out.
Therefore he was disliked by the authorities. Three weeks before a
jailer struck one of the scavengers who had spilt some soup over his new
uniform. Vasiliev took the part of the scavenger, saying that it was not
lawful to strike a prisoner.

"I'll teach you the law," said the jailer, and gave Vasiliev a scolding.
Vasiliev replied in like manner, and the jailer was going to hit him,
but Vasiliev seized the jailer's hands, held them fast for about three
minutes, and, after giving the hands a twist, pushed the jailer out of
the door. The jailer complained to the inspector, who ordered Vasiliev
to be put into a solitary cell.

The solitary cells were a row of dark closets, locked from outside, and
there were neither beds, nor chairs, nor tables in them, so that the
inmates had to sit or lie on the dirty floor, while the rats, of which
there were a great many in those cells, ran across them. The rats were
so bold that they stole the bread from the prisoners, and even attacked
them if they stopped moving. Vasiliev said he would not go into the
solitary cell, because he had not done anything wrong; but they used
force. Then he began struggling, and two other prisoners helped him to
free himself from the jailers. All the jailers assembled, and among them
was Petrov, who was distinguished for his strength. The prisoners got
thrown down and pushed into the solitary cells.

The governor was immediately informed that something very like a
rebellion had taken place. And he sent back an order to flog the two
chief offenders, Vasiliev and the tramp, Nepomnishy, giving each thirty
strokes with a birch rod. The flogging was appointed to take place in
the women's interviewing-room.

All this was known in the prison since the evening, and it was being
talked about with animation in all the cells.

Korableva, Khoroshevka, Theodosia, and Maslova sat together in their
corner, drinking tea, all of them flushed and animated by the vodka they
had drunk, for Maslova, who now had a constant supply of vodka, freely
treated her companions to it.

"He's not been a-rioting, or anything," Korableva said, referring to
Vasiliev, as she bit tiny pieces off a lump of sugar with her strong
teeth. "He only stuck up for a chum, because it's not lawful to strike
prisoners nowadays."

"And he's a fine fellow, I've heard say," said Theodosia, who sat
bareheaded, with her long plaits round her head, on a log of wood
opposite the shelf bedstead on which the teapot stood.

"There, now, if you were to ask _him_," the watchman's wife said to
Maslova (by him she meant Nekhludoff).

"I shall tell him. He'll do anything for me," Maslova said, tossing her
head, and smiling.

"Yes, but when is he coming? and they've already gone to fetch them,"
said Theodosia. "It is terrible," she added, with a sigh.

"I once did see how they flogged a peasant in the village.
Father-in-law, he sent me once to the village elder. Well, I went,
and there . . . " The watchman's wife began her long story, which was
interrupted by the sound of voices and steps in the corridor above them.

The women were silent, and sat listening.

"There they are, hauling him along, the devils!" Khoroshavka said.
"They'll do him to death, they will. The jailers are so enraged with him
because he never would give in to them."

All was quiet again upstairs, and the watchman's wife finished her story
of how she was that frightened when she went into the barn and saw
them flogging a peasant, her inside turned at the sight, and so on.
Khoroshevka related how Schegloff had been flogged, and never uttered
a sound. Then Theodosia put away the tea things, and Korableva and the
watchman's wife took up their sewing. Maslova sat down on the bedstead,
with her arms round her knees, dull and depressed. She was about to lie
down and try to sleep, when the woman warder called her into the office
to see a visitor.

"Now, mind, and don't forget to tell him about us," the old woman
(Menshova) said, while Maslova was arranging the kerchief on her head
before the dim looking-glass. "We did not set fire to the house, but he
himself, the fiend, did it; his workman saw him do it, and will not damn
his soul by denying it. You just tell to ask to see my Mitri. Mitri
will tell him all about it, as plain as can be. Just think of our being
locked up in prison when we never dreamt of any ill, while he, the
fiend, is enjoying himself at the pub, with another man's wife."

"That's not the law," remarked Korableva.

"I'll tell him--I'll tell him," answered Maslova. "Suppose I have
another drop, just to keep up courage," she added, with a wink; and
Korableva poured out half a cup of vodka, which Maslova drank. Then,
having wiped her mouth and repeating the words "just to keep up
courage," tossing her head and smiling gaily, she followed the warder
along the corridor.



CHAPTER XLVII.

NEKHLUDOFF AGAIN VISITS MASLOVA.

Nekhludoff had to wait in the hall for a long time. When he had arrived
at the prison and rung at the entrance door, he handed the permission of
the Procureur to the jailer on duty who met him.

"No, no," the jailer on duty said hurriedly, "the inspector is engaged."

"In the office?" asked Nekhludoff.

"No, here in the interviewing-room.".

"Why, is it a visiting day to-day?"

"No; it's special business."

"I should like to see him. What am I to do?" said Nekhludoff.

"When the inspector comes out you'll tell him--wait a bit," said the
jailer.

At this moment a sergeant-major, with a smooth, shiny face and
moustaches impregnated with tobacco smoke, came out of a side door, with
the gold cords of his uniform glistening, and addressed the jailer in a
severe tone.

"What do you mean by letting any one in here? The office. . . ."

"I was told the inspector was here," said Nekhludoff, surprised at the
agitation he noticed in the sergeant-major's manner.

At this moment the inner door opened, and Petrov came out, heated and
perspiring.

"He'll remember it," he muttered, turning to the sergeant major. The
latter pointed at Nekhludoff by a look, and Petrov knitted his brows and
went out through a door at the back.

"Who will remember it? Why do they all seem so confused? Why did the
sergeant-major make a sign to him?" Nekhludoff thought.

The sergeant-major, again addressing Nekhludoff, said: "You cannot meet
here; please step across to the office." And Nekhludoff was about to
comply when the inspector came out of the door at the back, looking even
more confused than his subordinates, and sighing continually. When he
saw Nekhludoff he turned to the jailer.

"Fedotoff, have Maslova, cell 5, women's ward, taken to the office."

"Will you come this way, please," he said, turning to Nekhludoff. They
ascended a steep staircase and entered a little room with one window, a
writing-table, and a few chairs in it. The inspector sat down.

"Mine are heavy, heavy duties," he remarked, again addressing
Nekhludoff, and took out a cigarette.

"You are tired, evidently," said Nekhludoff.

"Tired of the whole of the service--the duties are very trying. One
tries to lighten their lot and only makes it worse; my only thought is
how to get away. Heavy, heavy duties!"

Nekhludoff did not know what the inspector's particular difficulties
were, but he saw that to-day he was in a peculiarly dejected and
hopeless condition, calling for pity.

"Yes, I should think the duties were heavy for a kind-hearted man," he
said. "Why do you serve in this capacity?"

"I have a family."

"But, if it is so hard--"

"Well, still you know it is possible to be of use in some measure; I
soften down all I can. Another in my place would conduct the affairs
quite differently. Why, we have more than 2,000 persons here. And what
persons! One must know how to manage them. It is easier said than done,
you know. After all, they are also men; one cannot help pitying them."
The inspector began telling Nekhludoff of a fight that had lately taken
place among the convicts, which had ended by one man being killed.

The story was interrupted by the entrance of Maslova, who was
accompanied by a jailer.

Nekhludoff saw her through the doorway before she had noticed the
inspector. She was following the warder briskly, smiling and tossing her
head. When she saw the inspector she suddenly changed, and gazed at
him with a frightened look; but, quickly recovering, she addressed
Nekhludoff boldly and gaily.

"How d'you do?" she said, drawling out her words, and smilingly took his
hand and shook it vigorously, not like the first time.

"Here, I've brought you a petition to sign," said Nekhludoff, rather
surprised by the boldness with which she greeted him to-day.

"The advocate has written out a petition which you will have to sign,
and then we shall send it to Petersburg."

"All right! That can be done. Anything you like," she said, with a wink
and a smile.

And Nekhludoff drew a folded paper from his pocket and went up to the
table.

"May she sign it here?" asked Nekhludoff, turning to the inspector.

"It's all right, it's all right! Sit down. Here's a pen; you can write?"
said the inspector.

"I could at one time," she said; and, after arranging her skirt and the
sleeves of her jacket, she sat down at the table, smiled awkwardly, took
the pen with her small, energetic hand, and glanced at Nekhludoff with a
laugh.

Nekhludoff told her what to write and pointed out the place where to
sign.

Sighing deeply as she dipped her pen into the ink, and carefully shaking
some drops off the pen, she wrote her name.

"Is it all?" she asked, looking from Nekhludoff to the inspector, and
putting the pen now on the inkstand, now on the papers.

"I have a few words to tell you," Nekhludoff said, taking the pen from
her.

"All right; tell me," she said. And suddenly, as if remembering
something, or feeling sleepy, she grew serious.

The inspector rose and left the room, and Nekhludoff remained with her.



CHAPTER XLVIII.

MASLOVA REFUSES TO MARRY.

The jailer who had brought Maslova in sat on a windowsill at some
distance from them.

The decisive moment had come for Nekhludoff. He had been incessantly
blaming himself for not having told her the principal thing at the first
interview, and was now determined to tell her that he would marry her.
She was sitting at the further side of the table. Nekhludoff sat down
opposite her. It was light in the room, and Nekhludoff for the first
time saw her face quite near. He distinctly saw the crowsfeet round her
eyes, the wrinkles round her mouth, and the swollen eyelids. He felt
more sorry than before. Leaning over the table so as not to be heard by
the jailer--a man of Jewish type with grizzly whiskers, who sat by the
window--Nekhludoff said:

"Should this petition come to nothing we shall appeal to the Emperor.
All that is possible shall be done."

"There, now, if we had had a proper advocate from the first," she
interrupted. "My defendant was quite a silly. He did nothing but pay me
compliments," she said, and laughed. "If it had then been known that I
was acquainted with you, it would have been another matter. They think
every one's a thief."

"How strange she is to-day," Nekhludoff thought, and was just going to
say what he had on his mind when she began again:

"There's something I want to say. We have here an old woman; such a fine
one, d'you know, she just surprises every one; she is imprisoned for
nothing, and her son, too, and everybody knows they are innocent, though
they are accused of having set fire to a house. D'you know, hearing I
was acquainted with you, she says: 'Tell him to ask to see my son; he'll
tell him all about it."' Thus spoke Maslova, turning her head from side
to side, and glancing at Nekhludoff. "Their name's Menshoff. Well, will
you do it? Such a fine old thing, you know; you can see at once she's
innocent. You'll do it, there's a dear," and she smiled, glanced up at
him, and then cast down her eyes.

"All right. I'll find out about them," Nekhludoff said, more and more
astonished by her free-and-easy manner. "But I was going to speak to you
about myself. Do you remember what I told you last time?"

"You said a lot last time. What was it you told me?" she said,
continuing to smile and to turn her head from side to side.

"I said I had come to ask you to forgive me," he began.

"What's the use of that? Forgive, forgive, where's the good of--"

"To atone for my sin, not by mere words, but in deed. I have made up my
mind to marry you."

An expression of fear suddenly came over her face. Her squinting eyes
remained fixed on him, and yet seemed not to be looking at him.

"What's that for?" she said, with an angry frown.

"I feel that it is my duty before God to do it."

"What God have you found now? You are not saying what you ought to. God,
indeed! What God? You ought to have remembered God then," she said, and
stopped with her mouth open. It was only now that Nekhludoff noticed
that her breath smelled of spirits, and that he understood the cause of
her excitement.

"Try and be calm," he said.

"Why should I be calm?" she began, quickly, flushing scarlet. "I am a
convict, and you are a gentleman and a prince. There's no need for you
to soil yourself by touching me. You go to your princesses; my price is
a ten-rouble note."

"However cruelly you may speak, you cannot express what I myself am
feeling," he said, trembling all over; "you cannot imagine to what
extent I feel myself guilty towards you."

"Feel yourself guilty?" she said, angrily mimicking him. "You did not
feel so then, but threw me 100 roubles. That's your price."

"I know, I know; but what is to be done now?" said Nekhludoff. "I have
decided not to leave you, and what I have said I shall do."

"And I say you sha'n't," she said, and laughed aloud.

"Katusha," he said, touching her hand.

"You go away. I am a convict and you a prince, and you've no business
here," she cried, pulling away her hand, her whole appearance
transformed by her wrath. "You've got pleasure out of me in this life,
and want to save yourself through me in the life to come. You are
disgusting to me--your spectacles and the whole of your dirty fat mug.
Go, go!" she screamed, starting to her feet.

The jailer came up to them.

"What are you kicking up this row for?' That won't--"

"Let her alone, please," said Nekhludoff.

"She must not forget herself," said the jailer. "Please wait a little,"
said Nekhludoff, and the jailer returned to the window.

Maslova sat down again, dropping her eyes and firmly clasping her small
hands.

Nekhludoff stooped over her, not knowing what to do.

"You do not believe me?" he said.

"That you mean to marry me? It will never be. I'll rather hang myself.
So there!"

"Well, still I shall go on serving you."

"That's your affair, only I don't want anything from you. I am telling
you the plain truth," she said. "Oh, why did I not die then?" she added,
and began to cry piteously.

Nekhludoff could not speak; her tears infected him.

She lifted her eyes, looked at him in surprise, and began to wipe her
tears with her kerchief.

The jailer came up again and reminded them that it was time to part.

Maslova rose.

"You are excited. If it is possible, I shall come again tomorrow; you
think it over," said Nekhludoff.

She gave him no answer and, without looking up, followed the jailer out
of the room.

"Well, lass, you'll have rare times now," Korableva said, when Maslova
returned to the cell. "Seems he's mighty sweet on you; make the most
of it while he's after you. He'll help you out. Rich people can do
anything."

"Yes, that's so," remarked the watchman's wife, with her musical voice.
"When a poor man thinks of getting married, there's many a slip 'twixt
the cup and the lip; but a rich man need only make up his mind and it's
done. We knew a toff like that duckie. What d'you think he did?"

"Well, have you spoken about my affairs?" the old woman asked.

But Maslova gave her fellow-prisoners no answer; she lay down on the
shelf bedstead, her squinting eyes fixed on a corner of the room, and
lay there until the evening.

A painful struggle went on in her soul. What Nekhludoff had told her
called up the memory of that world in which she had suffered and which
she had left without having understood, hating it. She now feared to
wake from the trance in which she was living. Not having arrived at any
conclusion when evening came, she again bought some vodka and drank with
her companions.



CHAPTER XLIX.

VERA DOUKHOVA.

"So this is what it means, this," thought Nekhludoff as he left the
prison, only now fully understanding his crime. If he had not tried to
expiate his guilt he would never have found out how great his crime was.
Nor was this all; she, too, would never have felt the whole horror of
what had been done to her. He only now saw what he had done to the soul
of this woman; only now she saw and understood what had been done to
her.

Up to this time Nekhludoff had played with a sensation of
self-admiration, had admired his own remorse; now he was simply filled
with horror. He knew he could not throw her up now, and yet he could not
imagine what would come of their relations to one another.

Just as he was going out, a jailer, with a disagreeable, insinuating
countenance, and a cross and medals on his breast, came up and handed
him a note with an air of mystery.

"Here is a note from a certain person, your honour," he said to
Nekhludoff as he gave him the envelope.

"What person?"

"You will know when you read it. A political prisoner. I am in that
ward, so she asked me; and though it is against the rules, still
feelings of humanity--" The jailer spoke in an unnatural manner.

Nekhludoff was surprised that a jailer of the ward where political
prisoners were kept should pass notes inside the very prison walls, and
almost within sight of every one; he did not then know that this was
both a jailer and a spy. However, he took the note and read it on coming
out of the prison.

The note was written in a bold hand, and ran as follows: "Having heard
that you visit the prison, and are interested in the case of a criminal
prisoner, the desire of seeing you arose in me. Ask for a permission
to see me. I can give you a good deal of information concerning your
protegee, and also our group.--Yours gratefully, VERA DOUKHOVA."

Vera Doukhova had been a school-teacher in an out-of-the-way village of
the Novgorod Government, where Nekhludoff and some friends of his had
once put up while bear hunting. Nekhludoff gladly and vividly recalled
those old days, and his acquaintance with Doukhova. It was just before
Lent, in an isolated spot, 40 miles from the railway. The hunt had
been successful; two bears had been killed; and the company were having
dinner before starting on their return journey, when the master of the
hut where they were putting up came in to say that the deacon's daughter
wanted to speak to Prince Nekhludoff. "Is she pretty?" some one asked.
"None of that, please," Nekhludoff said, and rose with a serious look
on his face. Wiping his mouth, and wondering what the deacon's daughter
might want of him, he went into the host's private hut.

There he found a girl with a felt hat and a warm cloak on--a sinewy,
ugly girl; only her eyes with their arched brows were beautiful.

"Here, miss, speak to him," said the old housewife; "this is the prince
himself. I shall go out meanwhile."

"In what way can I be of service to you?" Nekhludoff asked.

"I--I--I see you are throwing away your money on such nonsense--on
hunting," began the girl, in great confusion. "I know--I only want one
thing--to be of use to the people, and I can do nothing because I know
nothing--" Her eyes were so truthful, so kind, and her expression of
resoluteness and yet bashfulness was so touching, that Nekhludoff, as
it often happened to him, suddenly felt as if he were in her position,
understood, and sympathised.

"What can I do, then?"

"I am a teacher, but should like to follow a course of study; and I
am not allowed to do so. That is, not that I am not allowed to; they'd
allow me to, but I have not got the means. Give them to me, and when I
have finished the course I shall repay you. I am thinking the rich kill
bears and give the peasants drink; all this is bad. Why should they not
do good? I only want 80 roubles. But if you don't wish to, never mind,"
she added, gravely.

"On the contrary, I am very grateful to you for this opportunity. . . .
I will bring it at once," said Nekhludoff.

He went out into the passage, and there met one of his comrades, who
had been overhearing his conversation. Paying no heed to his chaffing,
Nekhludoff got the money out of his bag and took it to her.

"Oh, please, do not thank me; it is I who should thank you," he said.

It was pleasant to remember all this now; pleasant to remember that
he had nearly had a quarrel with an officer who tried to make an
objectionable joke of it, and how another of his comrades had taken his
part, which led to a closer friendship between them. How successful the
whole of that hunting expedition had been, and how happy he had felt
when returning to the railway station that night. The line of sledges,
the horses in tandem, glide quickly along the narrow road that lies
through the forest, now between high trees, now between low firs weighed
down by the snow, caked in heavy lumps on their branches. A red light
flashes in the dark, some one lights an aromatic cigarette. Joseph, a
bear driver, keeps running from sledge to sledge, up to his knees in
snow, and while putting things to rights he speaks about the elk which
are now going about on the deep snow and gnawing the bark off the aspen
trees, of the bears that are lying asleep in their deep hidden dens, and
his breath comes warm through the opening in the sledge cover. All this
came back to Nekhludoff's mind; but, above all, the joyous sense of
health, strength, and freedom from care: the lungs breathing in the
frosty air so deeply that the fur cloak is drawn tightly on his chest,
the fine snow drops off the low branches on to his face, his body
is warm, his face feels fresh, and his soul is free from care,
self-reproach, fear, or desire. How beautiful it was. And now, O God!
what torment, what trouble!

Evidently Vera Doukhova was a revolutionist and imprisoned as such. He
must see her, especially as she promised to advise him how to lighten
Maslova's lot.



CHAPTER L.

THE VICE-GOVERNOR OF THE PRISON.

Awaking early the next morning, Nekhludoff remembered what he had done
the day before, and was seized with fear.

But in spite of this fear, he was more determined than ever to continue
what he had begun.

Conscious of a sense of duty, he left the house and went to see
Maslennikoff in order to obtain from him a permission to visit Maslova
in prison, and also the Menshoffs--mother and son--about whom Maslova
had spoken to him. Nekhludoff had known this Maslennikoff a long time;
they had been in the regiment together. At that time Maslennikoff was
treasurer to the regiment.

He was a kind-hearted and zealous officer, knowing and wishing to know
nothing beyond the regiment and the Imperial family. Now Nekhludoff
saw him as an administrator, who had exchanged the regiment for an
administrative office in the government where he lived. He was married
to a rich and energetic woman, who had forced him to exchange military
for civil service. She laughed at him, and caressed him, as if he were
her own pet animal. Nekhludoff had been to see them once during the
winter, but the couple were so uninteresting to him that he had not gone
again.

At the sight of Nekhludoff Maslennikoff's face beamed all over. He had
the same fat red face, and was as corpulent and as well dressed as in
his military days. Then, he used to be always dressed in a well-brushed
uniform, made according to the latest fashion, tightly fitting his chest
and shoulders; now, it was a civil service uniform he wore, and that,
too, tightly fitted his well-fed body and showed off his broad chest,
and was cut according to the latest fashion. In spite of the difference
in age (Maslennikoff was 40), the two men were very familiar with one
another.

"Halloo, old fellow! How good of you to come! Let us go and see my wife.
I have just ten minutes to spare before the meeting. My chief is away,
you know. I am at the head of the Government administration," he said,
unable to disguise his satisfaction.

"I have come on business."

"What is it?" said Maslennikoff, in an anxious and severe tone, putting
himself at once on his guard.

"There is a person, whom I am very much interested in, in prison" (at
the word "prison" Maslennikoff's face grew stern); "and I should like to
have an interview in the office, and not in the common visiting-room. I
have been told it depended on you."

"Certainly, mon cher," said Maslennikoff, putting both hands on
Nekhludoff's knees, as if to tone down his grandeur; "but remember, I am
monarch only for an hour."

"Then will you give me an order that will enable me to see her?"

"It's a woman?"

"Yes."

"What is she there for?"

"Poisoning, but she has been unjustly condemned."

"Yes, there you have it, your justice administered by jury, ils n'en
font point d'autres," he said, for some unknown reason, in French. "I
know you do not agree with me, but it can't be helped, c'est mon opinion
bien arretee," he added, giving utterance to an opinion he had for the
last twelve months been reading in the retrograde Conservative paper. "I
know you are a Liberal."

"I don't know whether I am a Liberal or something else," Nekhludoff
said, smiling; it always surprised him to find himself ranked with a
political party and called a Liberal, when he maintained that a man
should be heard before he was judged, that before being tried all men
were equal, that nobody at all ought to be ill-treated and beaten, but
especially those who had not yet been condemned by law. "I don't know
whether I am a Liberal or not; but I do know that however had the
present way of conducting a trial is, it is better than the old."

"And whom have you for an advocate?"

"I have spoken to Fanarin."

"Dear me, Fanarin!" said Meslennikoff, with a grimace, recollecting how
this Fanarin had examined him as a witness at a trial the year before
and had, in the politest manner, held him up to ridicule for half an
hour.

"I should not advise you to have anything to do with him. _Fanarin est
un homme tare_."

"I have one more request to make," said Nekhludoff, without answering
him. "There's a girl whom I knew long ago, a teacher; she is a very
pitiable little thing, and is now also imprisoned, and would like to see
me. Could you give me a permission to visit her?"

Meslennikoff bent his head on one side and considered.

"She's a political one?"

"Yes, I have been told so."

"Well, you see, only relatives get permission to visit political
prisoners. Still, I'll give you an open order. _Je sais que vous
n'abuserez pas_. What's the name of your protegee? Doukhova? _Elle est
jolie?_"

"Hideuse."

Maslennikoff shook his head disapprovingly, went up to the table, and
wrote on a sheet of paper, with a printed heading: "The bearer, Prince
Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff, is to be allowed to interview in the
prison office the meschanka Maslova, and also the medical assistant,
Doukhova," and he finished with an elaborate flourish.

"Now you'll be able to see what order we have got there. And it is
very difficult to keep order, it is so crowded, especially with people
condemned to exile; but I watch strictly, and love the work. You will
see they are very comfortable and contented. But one must know
how to deal with them. Only a few days ago we had a little
trouble--insubordination; another would have called it mutiny, and would
have made many miserable, but with us it all passed quietly. We must
have solicitude on one hand, firmness and power on the other," and he
clenched the fat, white, turquoise-ringed fist, which issued out of
the starched cuff of his shirt sleeve, fastened with a gold stud.
"Solicitude and firm power."

"Well, I don't know about that," said Nekhludoff. "I went there twice,
and felt very much depressed."

"Do you know, you ought to get acquainted with the Countess Passek,"
continued Maslennikoff, growing talkative. "She has given herself up
entirely to this sort of work. Elle fait beaucoup de bien. Thanks to
her--and, perhaps I may add without false modesty, to me--everything has
been changed, changed in such a way that the former horrors no longer
exist, and they are really quite comfortable there. Well, you'll see.
There's Fanarin. I do not know him personally; besides, my social
position keeps our ways apart; but he is positively a bad man, and
besides, he takes the liberty of saying such things in the court--such
things!"

"Well, thank you," Nekhludoff said, taking the paper, and without
listening further he bade good-day to his former comrade.

"And won't you go in to see my wife?"

"No, pray excuse me; I have no time now."

"Dear me, why she will never forgive me," said Maslennikoff,
accompanying his old acquaintance down to the first landing, as he was
in the habit of doing to persons of not the greatest, but the second
greatest importance, with whom he classed Nekhludoff; "now do go in, if
only for a moment."

But Nekhludoff remained firm; and while the footman and the door-keeper
rushed to give him his stick and overcoat, and opened the door, outside
of which there stood a policeman, Nekhludoff repeated that he really
could not come in.

"Well, then; on Thursday, please. It is her 'at-home.' I will tell her
you will come," shouted Maslennikoff from the stairs.



CHAPTER LI.

THE CELLS.

Nekhludoff drove that day straight from Maslennikoff's to the prison,
and went to the inspector's lodging, which he now knew. He was again
struck by the sounds of the same piano of inferior quality; but this
time it was not a rhapsody that was being played, but exercises by
Clementi, again with the same vigour, distinctness, and quickness. The
servant with the bandaged eye said the inspector was in, and showed
Nekhludoff to a small drawing-room, in which there stood a sofa and,
in front of it, a table, with a large lamp, which stood on a piece of
crochet work, and the paper shade of which was burnt on one side. The
chief inspector entered, with his usual sad and weary look.

"Take a seat, please. What is it you want?" he said, buttoning up the
middle button of his uniform.

"I have just been to the vice-governor's, and got this order from him. I
should like to see the prisoner Maslova."

"Markova?" asked the inspector, unable to bear distinctly because of the
music.

"Maslova!"

"Well, yes." The inspector got up and went to the door whence proceeded
Clementi's roulades.

"Mary, can't you stop just a minute?" he said, in a voice that showed
that this music was the bane of his life. "One can't hear a word."

The piano was silent, but one could hear the sound of reluctant steps,
and some one looked in at the door.

The inspector seemed to feel eased by the interval of silence, lit a
thick cigarette of weak tobacco, and offered one to Nekhludoff.

Nekhludoff refused.

"What I want is to see Maslova."

"Oh, yes, that can be managed. Now, then, what do you want?" he said,
addressing a little girl of five or six, who came into the room and
walked up to her father with her head turned towards Nekhludoff, and her
eyes fixed on him.

"There, now, you'll fall down," said the inspector, smiling, as the
little girl ran up to him, and, not looking where she was going, caught
her foot in a little rug.

"Well, then, if I may, I shall go."

"It's not very convenient to see Maslova to-day," said the inspector.

"How's that?"

"Well, you know, it's all your own fault," said the inspector, with a
slight smile. "Prince, give her no money into her hands. If you like,
give it me. I will keep it for her. You see, you gave her some money
yesterday; she got some spirits (it's an evil we cannot manage to root
out), and to-day she is quite tipsy, even violent."

"Can this be true?"

"Oh, yes, it is. I have even been obliged to have recourse to severe
measures, and to put her into a separate cell. She is a quiet woman in
an ordinary way. But please do not give her any money. These people are
so--" What had happened the day before came vividly back to Nekhludoff's
mind, and again he was seized with fear.

"And Doukhova, a political prisoner; might I see her?"

"Yes, if you like," said the inspector. He embraced the little girl,
who was still looking at Nekhludoff, got up, and, tenderly motioning
her aside, went into the ante-room. Hardly had he got into the overcoat
which the maid helped him to put on, and before he had reached the door,
the distinct sounds of Clementi's roulades again began.

"She entered the Conservatoire, but there is such disorder there. She
has a great gift," said the inspector, as they went down the stairs.
"She means to play at concerts."

The inspector and Nekhludoff arrived at the prison. The gates were
instantly opened as they appeared. The jailers, with their fingers
lifted to their caps, followed the inspector with their eyes. Four
men, with their heads half shaved, who were carrying tubs filled with
something, cringed when they saw the inspector. One of them frowned
angrily, his black eyes glaring.

"Of course a talent like that must be developed; it would not do to bury
it, but in a small lodging, you know, it is rather hard." The inspector
went on with the conversation, taking no notice of the prisoners.

"Who is it you want to see?"

"Doukhova."

"Oh, she's in the tower. You'll have to wait a little," he said.

"Might I not meanwhile see the prisoners Menshoff, mother and son, who
are accused of incendiarism?"

"Oh, yes. Cell No. 21. Yes, they can be sent for."

"But might I not see Menshoff in his cell?"

"Oh, you'll find the waiting-room more pleasant."

"No. I should prefer the cell. It is more interesting."

"Well, you have found something to be interested in!"

Here the assistant, a smartly-dressed officer, entered the side door.

"Here, see the Prince into Menshoff's cell, No. 21," said the inspector
to his assistant, "and then take him to the office. And I'll go and
call--What's her name? Vera Doukhova."

The inspector's assistant was young, with dyed moustaches, and diffusing
the smell of eau-de-cologne. "This way, please," he said to Nekhludoff,
with a pleasant smile. "Our establishment interests you?"

"Yes, it does interest me; and, besides, I look upon it as a duty to
help a man who I heard was confined here, though innocent."

The assistant shrugged his shoulders.

"Yes, that may happen," he said quietly, politely stepping aside to let
the visitor enter, the stinking corridor first. "But it also happens
that they lie. Here we are."

The doors of the cells were open, and some of the prisoners were in the
corridor. The assistant nodded slightly to the jailers, and cast a side
glance at the prisoners, who, keeping close to the wall, crept back to
their cells, or stood like soldiers, with their arms at their sides,
following the official with their eyes. After passing through one
corridor, the assistant showed Nekhludoff into another to the left,
separated from the first by an iron door. This corridor was darker, and
smelt even worse than the first. The corridor had doors on both sides,
with little holes in them about an inch in diameter. There was only an
old jailer, with an unpleasant face, in this corridor.

"Where is Menshoff?" asked the inspector's assistant.

"The eighth cell to the left."

"And these? Are they occupied?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Yes, all but one."



CHAPTER LII.

NO. 21.

"May I look in?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Oh, certainly," answered the assistant, smiling, and turned to the
jailer with some question.

Nekhludoff looked into one of the little holes, and saw a tall young man
pacing up and down the cell. When the man heard some one at the door he
looked up with a frown, but continued walking up and down.

Nekhludoff looked into another hole. His eye met another large eye
looking out of the hole at him, and he quickly stepped aside. In the
third cell he saw a very small man asleep on the bed, covered, head and
all, with his prison cloak. In the fourth a broad-faced man was sitting
with his elbows on his knees and his head low down. At the sound of
footsteps this man raised his head and looked up. His face, especially
his large eyes, bore the expression of hopeless dejection. One could see
that it did not even interest him to know who was looking into his
cell. Whoever it might be, he evidently hoped for nothing good from him.
Nekhludoff was seized with dread, and went to Menshoff's cell, No. 21,
without stopping to look through any more holes. The jailer unlocked the
door and opened it. A young man, with long neck, well-developed muscles,
a small head, and kind, round eyes, stood by the bed, hastily putting
on his cloak, and looking at the newcomers with a frightened face.
Nekhludoff was specially struck by the kind, round eyes that were
throwing frightened and inquiring glances in turns at him, at the
jailer, and at the assistant, and back again.

"Here's a gentleman wants to inquire into your affair."

"Thank you kindly."

"Yes, I was told about you," Nekhludoff said, going through the cell up
to the dirty grated window, "and I should like to hear all about it from
yourself."

Menshoff also came up to the window, and at once started telling his
story, at first looking shyly at the inspector's assistant, but growing
gradually bolder. When the assistant left the cell and went into the
corridor to give some order the man grew quite bold. The story was told
with the accent and in the manner common to a most ordinary good peasant
lad. To hear it told by a prisoner dressed in this degrading clothing,
and inside a prison, seemed very strange to Nekhludoff. Nekhludoff
listened, and at the same time kept looking around him--at the low
bedstead with its straw mattress, the window and the dirty, damp wall,
and the piteous face and form of this unfortunate, disfigured peasant
in his prison cloak and shoes, and he felt sadder and sadder, and would
have liked not to believe what this good-natured fellow was saying. It
seemed too dreadful to think that men could do such a thing as to take
a man, dress him in convict clothes, and put him in this horrible place
without any reason only because he himself had been injured. And yet the
thought that this seemingly true story, told with such a good-natured
expression on the face, might be an invention and a lie was still
more dreadful. This was the story: The village public-house keeper had
enticed the young fellow's wife. He tried to get justice by all sorts
of means. But everywhere the public-house keeper managed to bribe the
officials, and was acquitted. Once, he took his wife back by force, but
she ran away next day. Then he came to demand her back, but, though he
saw her when he came in, the public-house keeper told him she was not
there, and ordered him to go away. He would not go, so the public-house
keeper and his servant beat him so that they drew blood. The next day
a fire broke out in the public-house, and the young man and his mother
were accused of having set the house on fire. He had not set it on fire,
but was visiting a friend at the time.

"And it is true that you did not set it on fire?"

"It never entered my head to do it, sir. It must be my enemy that did
it himself. They say he had only just insured it. Then they said it was
mother and I that did it, and that we had threatened him. It is true I
once did go for him, my heart couldn't stand it any longer."

"Can this be true?"

"God is my witness it is true. Oh, sir, be so good--" and Nekhludoff had
some difficulty to prevent him from bowing down to the ground. "You see
I am perishing without any reason." His face quivered and he turned
up the sleeve of his cloak and began to cry, wiping the tears with the
sleeve of his dirty shirt.

"Are you ready?" asked the assistant.

"Yes. Well, cheer up. We will consult a good lawyer, and will do what we
can," said Nekhludoff, and went out. Menshoff stood close to the door,
so that the jailer knocked him in shutting it, and while the jailer was
locking it he remained looking out through the little hole.



CHAPTER LIII.

VICTIMS OF GOVERNMENT.

Passing back along the broad corridor (it was dinner time, and the cell
doors were open), among the men dressed in their light yellow cloaks,
short, wide trousers, and prison shoes, who were looking eagerly at him,
Nekhludoff felt a strange mixture of sympathy for them, and horror and
perplexity at the conduct of those who put and kept them here, and,
besides, he felt, he knew not why, ashamed of himself calmly examining
it all.

In one of the corridors, some one ran, clattering with his shoes, in
at the door of a cell. Several men came out from here, and stood in
Nekhludoff's way, bowing to him.

"Please, your honour (we don't know what to call you), get our affair
settled somehow."

"I am not an official. I know nothing about it."

"Well, anyhow, you come from outside; tell somebody--one of the
authorities, if need be," said an indignant voice. "Show some pity
on us, as a human being. Here we are suffering the second month for
nothing."

"What do you mean? Why?" said Nekhludoff.

"Why? We ourselves don't know why, but are sitting here the second
month."

"Yes, it's quite true, and it is owing to an accident," said the
inspector. "These people were taken up because they had no passports,
and ought to have been sent back to their native government; but the
prison there is burnt, and the local authorities have written, asking us
not to send them on. So we have sent all the other passportless people
to their different governments, but are keeping these."

"What! For no other reason than that?" Nekhludoff exclaimed, stopping at
the door.

A crowd of about forty men, all dressed in prison clothes, surrounded
him and the assistant, and several began talking at once. The assistant
stopped them.

"Let some one of you speak."

A tall, good-looking peasant, a stone-mason, of about fifty, stepped out
from the rest. He told Nekhludoff that all of them had been ordered back
to their homes and were now being kept in prison because they had no
passports, yet they had passports which were only a fortnight overdue.
The same thing had happened every year; they had many times omitted to
renew their passports till they were overdue, and nobody had ever said
anything; but this year they had been taken up and were being kept in
prison the second month, as if they were criminals.

"We are all masons, and belong to the same artel. We are told that the
prison in our government is burnt, but this is not our fault. Do help
us."

Nekhludoff listened, but hardly understood what the good-looking old
man was saying, because his attention was riveted to a large, dark-grey,
many-legged louse that was creeping along the good-looking man's cheek.

"How's that? Is it possible for such a reason?" Nekhludoff said, turning
to the assistant.

"Yes, they should have been sent off and taken back to their homes,"
calmly said the assistant, "but they seem to have been forgotten or
something."

Before the assistant had finished, a small, nervous man, also in prison
dress, came out of the crowd, and, strangely contorting his mouth, began
to say that they were being ill-used for nothing.

"Worse than dogs," he began.

"Now, now; not too much of this. Hold your tongue, or you know--"

"What do I know?" screamed the little man, desperately. "What is our
crime?"

"Silence!" shouted the assistant, and the little man was silent.

"But what is the meaning of all this?" Nekhludoff thought to himself
as he came out of the cell, while a hundred eyes were fixed upon him
through the openings of the cell doors and from the prisoners that met
him, making him feel as if he were running the gauntlet.

"Is it really possible that perfectly innocent people are kept here?"
Nekhludoff uttered when they left the corridor.

"What would you have us do? They lie so. To hear them talk they are all
of them innocent," said the inspector's assistant. "But it does happen
that some are really imprisoned for nothing."

"Well, these have done nothing."

"Yes, we must admit it. Still, the people are fearfully spoilt. There
are such types--desperate fellows, with whom one has to look sharp.
To-day two of that sort had to be punished."

"Punished? How?"

"Flogged with a birch-rod, by order."

"But corporal punishment is abolished."

"Not for such as are deprived of their rights. They are still liable to
it."

Nekhludoff thought of what he had seen the day before while waiting
in the hall, and now understood that the punishment was then being
inflicted, and the mixed feeling of curiosity, depression, perplexity,
and moral nausea, that grew into physical sickness, took hold of him
more strongly than ever before.

Without listening to the inspector's assistant, or looking round, he
hurriedly left the corridor, and went to the office. The inspector was
in the office, occupied with other business, and had forgotten to send
for Doukhova. He only remembered his promise to have her called when
Nekhludoff entered the office.

"Sit down, please. I'll send for her at once," said the inspector.



CHAPTER LIV.

PRISONERS AND FRIENDS.

The office consisted of two rooms. The first room, with a large,
dilapidated stove and two dirty windows, had a black measure for
measuring the prisoners in one corner, and in another corner hung a
large image of Christ, as is usual in places where they torture people.
In this room stood several jailers. In the next room sat about twenty
persons, men and women in groups and in pairs, talking in low voices.
There was a writing table by the window.

The inspector sat down by the table, and offered Nekhludoff a chair
beside him. Nekhludoff sat down, and looked at the people in the room.

The first who drew his attention was a young man with a pleasant face,
dressed in a short jacket, standing in front of a middle-aged woman
with dark eyebrows, and he was eagerly telling her something and
gesticulating with his hands. Beside them sat an old man, with blue
spectacles, holding the hand of a young woman in prisoner's clothes, who
was telling him something. A schoolboy, with a fixed, frightened look on
his face, was gazing at the old man. In one corner sat a pair of
lovers. She was quite young and pretty, and had short, fair hair, looked
energetic, and was elegantly dressed; he had fine features, wavy hair,
and wore a rubber jacket. They sat in their corner and seemed stupefied
with love. Nearest to the table sat a grey-haired woman dressed in
black, evidently the mother of a young, consumptive-looking fellow, in
the same kind of jacket. Her head lay on his shoulder. She was trying
to say something, but the tears prevented her from speaking; she began
several times, but had to stop. The young man held a paper in his hand,
and, apparently not knowing what to do, kept folding and pressing it
with an angry look on his face.

Beside them was a short-haired, stout, rosy girl, with very prominent
eyes, dressed in a grey dress and a cape; she sat beside the weeping
mother, tenderly stroking her. Everything about this girl was beautiful;
her large, white hands, her short, wavy hair, her firm nose and lips,
but the chief charm of her face lay in her kind, truthful hazel eyes.
The beautiful eyes turned away from the mother for a moment when
Nekhludoff came in, and met his look. But she turned back at once and
said something to the mother.

Not far from the lovers a dark, dishevelled man, with a gloomy face, sat
angrily talking to a beardless visitor, who looked as if he belonged to
the Scoptsy sect.

At the very door stood a young man in a rubber jacket, who seemed more
concerned about the impression he produced on the onlooker than about
what he was saying. Nekhludoff, sitting by the inspector's side, looked
round with strained curiosity. A little boy with closely-cropped hair
came up to him and addressed him in a thin little voice.

"And whom are you waiting for?"

Nekhludoff was surprised at the question, but looking at the boy, and
seeing the serious little face with its bright, attentive eyes fixed
on him, answered him seriously that he was waiting for a woman of his
acquaintance.

"Is she, then, your sister?" the boy asked.

"No, not my sister," Nekhludoff answered in surprise.

"And with whom are you here?" he inquired of the boy.

"I? With mamma; she is a political one," he replied.

"Mary Pavlovna, take Kolia!" said the inspector, evidently considering
Nekhludoff's conversation with the boy illegal.

Mary Pavlovna, the beautiful girl who had attracted Nekhludoff's
attention, rose tall and erect, and with firm, almost manly steps,
approached Nekhludoff and the boy.

"What is he asking you? Who you are?" she inquired with a slight smile,
and looking straight into his face with a trustful look in her kind,
prominent eyes, and as simply as if there could be no doubt whatever
that she was and must be on sisterly terms with everybody.

"He likes to know everything," she said, looking at the boy with so
sweet and kind a smile that both the boy and Nekhludoff were obliged to
smile back.

"He was asking me whom I have come to see."

"Mary Pavlovna, it is against the rules to speak to strangers. You know
it is," said the inspector.

"All right, all right," she said, and went back to the consumptive lad's
mother, holding Kolia's little hand in her large, white one, while he
continued gazing up into her face.

"Whose is this little boy?" Nekhludoff asked of the inspector.

"His mother is a political prisoner, and he was born in prison,"
said the inspector, in a pleased tone, as if glad to point out how
exceptional his establishment was.

"Is it possible?"

"Yes, and now he is going to Siberia with her."

"And that young girl?"

"I cannot answer your question," said the inspector, shrugging his
shoulders. "Besides, here is Doukhova."



CHAPTER LV.

VERA DOUKHOVA EXPLAINS.

Through a door, at the back of the room, entered, with a wriggling gait,
the thin, yellow Vera Doukhova, with her large, kind eyes.

"Thanks for having come," she said, pressing Nekhludoff's hand. "Do you
remember me? Let us sit down."

"I did not expect to see you like this."

"Oh, I am very happy. It is so delightful, so delightful, that I desire
nothing better," said Vera Doukhova, with the usual expression of fright
in the large, kind, round eyes fixed on Nekhludoff, and twisting the
terribly thin, sinewy neck, surrounded by the shabby, crumpled, dirty
collar of her bodice. Nekhludoff asked her how she came to be in prison.

In answer she began relating all about her affairs with great animation.
Her speech was intermingled with a great many long words, such as
propaganda, disorganisation, social groups, sections and sub-sections,
about which she seemed to think everybody knew, but which Nekhludoff had
never heard of.

She told him all the secrets of the Nardovolstvo, [literally, "People's
Freedom," a revolutionary movement] evidently convinced that he was
pleased to hear them. Nekhludoff looked at her miserable little neck,
her thin, unkempt hair, and wondered why she had been doing all these
strange things, and why she was now telling all this to him. He pitied
her, but not as he had pitied Menshoff, the peasant, kept for no fault
of his own in the stinking prison. She was pitiable because of the
confusion that filled her mind. It was clear that she considered herself
a heroine, and was ready to give her life for a cause, though she could
hardly have explained what that cause was and in what its success would
lie.

The business that Vera Doukhova wanted to see Nekhludoff about was
the following: A friend of hers, who had not even belonged to their
"sub-group," as she expressed it, had been arrested with her about five
months before, and imprisoned in the Petropavlovsky fortress because
some prohibited books and papers (which she had been asked to keep) had
been found in her possession. Vera Doukhova felt herself in some measure
to blame for her friend's arrest, and implored Nekhludoff, who had
connections among influential people, to do all he could in order to set
this friend free.

Besides this, Doukhova asked him to try and get permission for
another friend of hers, Gourkevitch (who was also imprisoned in the
Petropavlovsky fortress), to see his parents, and to procure some
scientific books which he required for his studies. Nekhludoff promised
to do what he could when he went to Petersburg.

As to her own story, this is what she said: Having finished a course
of midwifery, she became connected with a group of adherents to the
Nardovolstvo, and made up her mind to agitate in the revolutionary
movement. At first all went on smoothly. She wrote proclamations
and occupied herself with propaganda work in the factories; then, an
important member having been arrested, their papers were seized and all
concerned were arrested. "I was also arrested, and shall be exiled. But
what does it matter? I feel perfectly happy." She concluded her story
with a piteous smile.

Nekhludoff made some inquiries concerning the girl with the prominent
eyes. Vera Doukhova told him that this girl was the daughter of a
general, and had been long attached to the revolutionary party, and was
arrested because she had pleaded guilty to having shot a gendarme.
She lived in a house with some conspirators, where they had a secret
printing press. One night, when the police came to search this house,
the occupiers resolved to defend themselves, put out the light, and
began destroying the things that might incriminate them. The police
forced their way in, and one of the conspirators fired, and mortally
wounded a gendarme. When an inquiry was instituted, this girl said that
it was she who had fired, although she had never had a revolver in her
hands, and would not have hurt a fly. And she kept to it, and was now
condemned to penal servitude in Siberia.

"An altruistic, fine character," said Vera Doukhova, approvingly.

The third business that Vera Doukhova wanted to talk about concerned
Maslova. She knew, as everybody does know in prison, the story of
Maslova's life and his connection with her, and advised him to take
steps to get her removed into the political prisoner's ward, or into
the hospital to help to nurse the sick, of which there were very many at
that time, so that extra nurses were needed.

Nekhludoff thanked her for the advice, and said he would try to act upon
it.



CHAPTER LVI.

NEKHLUDOFF AND THE PRISONERS.

Their conversation was interrupted by the inspector, who said that the
time was up, and the prisoners and their friends must part. Nekhludoff
took leave of Vera Doukhova and went to the door, where he stopped to
watch what was going on.

The inspector's order called forth only heightened animation among the
prisoners in the room, but no one seemed to think of going. Some rose
and continued to talk standing, some went on talking without rising.
A few began crying and taking leave of each other. The mother and
her consumptive son seemed especially pathetic. The young fellow kept
twisting his bit of paper and his face seemed angry, so great were his
efforts not to be infected by his mother's emotion. The mother, hearing
that it was time to part, put her head on his shoulder and sobbed and
sniffed aloud.

The girl with the prominent eyes--Nekhludoff could not help watching
her--was standing opposite the sobbing mother, and was saying something
to her in a soothing tone. The old man with the blue spectacles stood
holding his daughter's hand and nodding in answer to what she said. The
young lovers rose, and, holding each other's hands, looked silently into
one another's eyes.

"These are the only two who are merry," said a young man with a short
coat who stood by Nekhludoff's side, also looking at those who were
about to part, and pointed to the lovers. Feeling Nekhludoff's and
the young man's eyes fixed on them, the lovers--the young man with the
rubber coat and the pretty girl--stretched out their arms, and with
their hands clasped in each other's, danced round and round again.
"To-night they are going to be married here in prison, and she will
follow him to Siberia," said the young man.

"What is he?"

"A convict, condemned to penal servitude. Let those two at least have a
little joy, or else it is too painful," the young man added, listening
to the sobs of the consumptive lad's mother.

"Now, my good people! Please, please do not oblige me to have recourse
to severe measures," the inspector said, repeating the same words
several times over. "Do, please," he went on in a weak, hesitating
manner. "It is high time. What do you mean by it? This sort of thing is
quite impossible. I am now asking you for the last time," he repeated
wearily, now putting out his cigarette and then lighting another.

It was evident that, artful, old, and common as were the devices
enabling men to do evil to others without feeling responsible for it,
the inspector could not but feel conscious that he was one of those who
were guilty of causing the sorrow which manifested itself in this
room. And it was apparent that this troubled him sorely. At length the
prisoners and their visitors began to go--the first out of the inner,
the latter out of the outer door. The man with the rubber jacket passed
out among them, and the consumptive youth and the dishevelled man. Mary
Pavlovna went out with the boy born in prison.

The visitors went out too. The old man with the blue spectacles,
stepping heavily, went out, followed by Nekhludoff.

"Yes, a strange state of things this," said the talkative young man, as
if continuing an interrupted conversation, as he descended the stairs
side by side with Nekhludoff. "Yet we have reason to be grateful to the
inspector who does not keep strictly to the rules, kind-hearted fellow.
If they can get a talk it does relieve their hearts a bit, after all!"

While talking to the young man, who introduced himself as Medinzeff,
Nekhludoff reached the hall. There the inspector came up to them with
weary step.

"If you wish to see Maslova," he said, apparently desiring to be polite
to Nekhludoff, "please come to-morrow."

"Very well," answered Nekhludoff, and hurried away, experiencing
more than ever that sensation of moral nausea which he always felt on
entering the prison.

The sufferings of the evidently innocent Menshoff seemed terrible, and
not so much his physical suffering as the perplexity, the distrust in
the good and in God which he must feel, seeing the cruelty of the people
who tormented him without any reason.

Terrible were the disgrace and sufferings cast on these hundreds of
guiltless people simply because something was not written on paper as it
should have been. Terrible were the brutalised jailers, whose occupation
is to torment their brothers, and who were certain that they were
fulfilling an important and useful duty; but most terrible of all seemed
this sickly, elderly, kind-hearted inspector, who was obliged to part
mother and son, father and daughter, who were just the same sort of
people as he and his own children.

"What is it all for?" Nekhludoff asked himself, and could not find an
answer.



CHAPTER LVII.

THE VICE-GOVERNOR'S "AT-HOME".

The next day Nekhludoff went to see the advocate, and spoke to him
about the Menshoffs' case, begging him to undertake their defence. The
advocate promised to look into the case, and if it turned out to be as
Nekhludoff said he would in all probability undertake the defence free
of charge. Then Nekhludoff told him of the 130 men who were kept in
prison owing to a mistake. "On whom did it depend? Whose fault was it?"

The advocate was silent for a moment, evidently anxious to give a
correct reply.

"Whose fault is it? No one's," he said, decidedly. "Ask the Procureur,
he'll say it is the Governor's; ask the Governor, he'll say it is the
Procureur's fault. No one is in fault."

"I am just going to see the Vice-Governor. I shall tell him."

"Oh, that's quite useless," said the advocate, with a smile. "He is such
a--he is not a relation or friend of yours?--such a blockhead, if I may
say so, and yet a crafty animal at the same time."

Nekhludoff remembered what Maslennikoff had said about the advocate, and
did not answer, but took leave and went on to Maslennikoff's. He had
to ask Maslennikoff two things: about Maslova's removal to the prison
hospital, and about the 130 passportless men innocently imprisoned.
Though it was very hard to petition a man whom he did not respect, and
by whose orders men were flogged, yet it was the only means of gaining
his end, and he had to go through with it.

As he drove up to Maslennikoff's house Nekhludoff saw a number of
different carriages by the front door, and remembered that it was
Maslennikoff's wife's "at-home" day, to which he had been invited. At
the moment Nekhludoff drove up there was a carriage in front of the
door, and a footman in livery, with a cockade in his hat, was helping
a lady down the doorstep. She was holding up her train, and showing her
thin ankles, black stockings, and slippered feet. Among the carriages
was a closed landau, which he knew to be the Korchagins'.

The grey-haired, red-checked coachman took off his hat and bowed in a
respectful yet friendly manner to Nekhludoff, as to a gentleman he knew
well. Nekhludoff had not had time to inquire for Maslennikoff, when the
latter appeared on the carpeted stairs, accompanying a very important
guest not only to the first landing but to the bottom of the stairs.
This very important visitor, a military man, was speaking in French
about a lottery for the benefit of children's homes that were to be
founded in the city, and expressed the opinion that this was a good
occupation for the ladies. "It amuses them, and the money comes."

_"Qu'elles s'amusent et que le bon dieu les benisse. M. Nekhludoff!_ How
d'you do? How is it one never sees you?" he greeted Nekhludoff. "_Allez
presenter vos devoirs a Madame._ And the Korchagins are here et Nadine
Bukshevden. _Toutes les jolies femmes de la ville,_" said the important
guest, slightly raising his uniformed shoulders as he presented them to
his own richly liveried servant to have his military overcoat put on.
"_Au revoir, mon cher._" And he pressed Maslennikoff's hand.

"Now, come up; I am so glad," said Maslennikoff, grasping Nekhludoff's
hand. In spite of his corpulency Maslennikoff hurried quickly up the
stairs. He was in particularly good spirits, owing to the attention paid
him by the important personage. Every such attention gave him the same
sense of delight as is felt by an affectionate dog when its master pats
it, strokes it, or scratches its ears. It wags its tail, cringes,
jumps about, presses its ears down, and madly rushes about in a circle.
Maslennikoff was ready to do the same. He did not notice the serious
expression on Nekhludoff's face, paid no heed to his words, but pulled
him irresistibly towards the drawing-room, so that it was impossible for
Nekhludoff not to follow. "Business after wards. I shall do whatever
you want," said Meslennikoff, as he drew Nekhludoff through the dancing
hall. "Announce Prince Nekhludoff," he said to a footman, without
stopping on his way. The footman started off at a trot and passed them.

"_Vous n'avez qu' a ordonner._ But you must see my wife. As it is, I got
it for letting you go without seeing her last time."

By the time they reached the drawing-room the footman had already
announced Nekhludoff, and from between the bonnets and heads that
surrounded it the smiling face of Anna Ignatievna, the Vice-Governor's
wife, beamed on Nekhludoff. At the other end of the drawing-room several
ladies were seated round the tea-table, and some military men and some
civilians stood near them. The clatter of male and female voices went on
unceasingly.

"Enfin! you seem to have quite forgotten us. How have we offended?"
With these words, intended to convey an idea of intimacy which had never
existed between herself and Nekhludoff, Anna Ignatievna greeted the
newcomer.

"You are acquainted?--Madam Tilyaevsky, M. Chernoff. Sit down a bit
nearer. Missy _vene donc a notre table on vous apportera votre_ the
. . . And you," she said, having evidently forgotten his name, to an officer
who was talking to Missy, "do come here. A cup of tea, Prince?"

"I shall never, never agree with you. It's quite simple; she did not
love," a woman's voice was heard saying.

"But she loved tarts."

"Oh, your eternal silly jokes!" put in, laughingly, another lady
resplendent in silks, gold, and jewels.

"C'est excellent these little biscuits, and so light. I think I'll take
another."

"Well, are you moving soon?"

"Yes, this is our last day. That's why we have come. Yes, it must be
lovely in the country; we are having a delightful spring."

Missy, with her hat on, in a dark-striped dress of some kind that fitted
her like a skin, was looking very handsome. She blushed when she saw
Nekhludoff.

"And I thought you had left," she said to him.

"I am on the point of leaving. Business is keeping me in town, and it is
on business I have come here."

"Won't you come to see mamma? She would like to see you," she said, and
knowing that she was saying what was not true, and that he knew it also,
she blushed still more.

"I fear I shall scarcely have time," Nekhludoff said gloomily, trying
to appear as if he had not noticed her blush. Missy frowned angrily,
shrugged her shoulders, and turned towards an elegant officer, who
grasped the empty cup she was holding, and knocking his sword against
the chairs, manfully carried the cup across to another table.

"You must contribute towards the Home fund."

"I am not refusing, but only wish to keep my bounty fresh for the
lottery. There I shall let it appear in all its glory."

"Well, look out for yourself," said a voice, followed by an evidently
feigned laugh.

Anna Ignatievna was in raptures; her "at-home" had turned out a
brilliant success. "Micky tells me you are busying yourself with prison
work. I can understand you so well," she said to Nekhludoff. "Micky (she
meant her fat husband, Maslennikoff) may have other defects, but you
know how kind-hearted he is. All these miserable prisoners are his
children. He does not regard them in any other light. _Il est d'une
bonte---_" and she stopped, finding no words to do justice to this bonte
of his, and quickly turned to a shrivelled old woman with bows of lilac
ribbon all over, who came in just then.

Having said as much as was absolutely necessary, and with as little
meaning as conventionality required, Nekhludoff rose and went up to
Meslennikoff. "Can you give me a few minutes' hearing, please?"

"Oh, yes. Well, what is it?"

"Let us come in here."

They entered a small Japanese sitting-room, and sat down by the window.



CHAPTER LVIII.

THE VICE-GOVERNOR SUSPICIOUS.

"Well? _Je suis a vous_. Will you smoke? But wait a bit; we must be
careful and not make a mess here," said Maslennikoff, and brought an
ashpan. "Well?"

"There are two matters I wish to ask you about."

"Dear me!"

An expression of gloom and dejection came over Maslennikoff's
countenance, and every trace of the excitement, like that of the dog's
whom its master has scratched behind the cars, vanished completely. The
sound of voices reached them from the drawing-room. A woman's voice was
heard, saying, _"Jamais je ne croirais,"_ and a man's voice from
the other side relating something in which the names of la Comtesse
Voronzoff and Victor Apraksine kept recurring. A hum of voices, mixed
with laughter, came from another side. Maslennikoff tried to listen to
what was going on in the drawing-room and to what Nekhludoff was saying
at the same time.

"I am again come about that same woman," said Nekhludoff.

"Oh, yes; I know. The one innocently condemned."

"I would like to ask that she should be appointed to serve in the prison
hospital. I have been told that this could be arranged."

Maslennikoff compressed his lips and meditated. "That will be scarcely
possible," he said. "However, I shall see what can be done, and shall
wire you an answer tomorrow."

"I have been told that there were many sick, and help was needed."

"All right, all right. I shall let you know in any case."

"Please do," said Nekhludoff.

The sound of a general and even a natural laugh came from the
drawing-room.

"That's all that Victor. He is wonderfully sharp when he is in the right
vein," said Maslennikoff.

"The next thing I wanted to tell you," said Nekhludoff, "is that 130
persons are imprisoned only because their passports are overdue. They
have been kept here a month."

And he related the circumstances of the case.

"How have you come to know of this?" said Maslennikoff, looking uneasy
and dissatisfied.

"I went to see a prisoner, and these men came and surrounded me in the
corridor, and asked . . ."

"What prisoner did you go to see?"

"A peasant who is kept in prison, though innocent. I have put his case
into the hands of a lawyer. But that is not the point."

"Is it possible that people who have done no wrong are imprisoned only
because their passports are overdue? And . . ."

"That's the Procureur's business," Maslennikoff interrupted, angrily.
"There, now, you see what it is you call a prompt and just form of
trial. It is the business of the Public Prosecutor to visit the prison
and to find out if the prisoners are kept there lawfully. But that set
play cards; that's all they do."

"Am I to understand that you can do nothing?" Nekhludoff said,
despondently, remembering that the advocate had foretold that the
Governor would put the blame on the Procureur.

"Oh, yes, I can. I shall see about it at once."

"So much the worse for her. _C'est un souffre douleur_," came the voice
of a woman, evidently indifferent to what she was saying, from the
drawing-room.

"So much the better. I shall take it also," a man's voice was heard to
say from the other side, followed by the playful laughter of a woman,
who was apparently trying to prevent the man from taking something away
from her.

"No, no; not on any account," the woman's voice said.

"All right, then. I shall do all this," Maslennikoff repeated, and put
out the cigarette he held in his white, turquoise-ringed hand. "And now
let us join the ladies."

"Wait a moment," Nekhludoff said, stopping at the door of the
drawing-room. "I was told that some men had received corporal punishment
in the prison yesterday. Is this true?"

Maslennikoff blushed.

"Oh, that's what you are after? No, mon cher, decidedly it won't do to
let you in there; you want to get at everything. Come, come; Anna is
calling us," he said, catching Nekhludoff by the arm, and again becoming
as excited as after the attention paid him by the important person, only
now his excitement was not joyful, but anxious.

Nekhludoff pulled his arm away, and without taking leave of any one
and without saying a word, he passed through the drawing-room with a
dejected look, went down into the hall, past the footman, who sprang
towards him, and out at the street door.

"What is the matter with him? What have you done to him?" asked Anna of
her husband.

"This is _a la Francaise_," remarked some one.

"_A la Francaise_, indeed--it is _a la Zoulou_."

"Oh, but he's always been like that."

Some one rose, some one came in, and the clatter went on its course.
The company used this episode with Nekhludoff as a convenient topic of
conversation for the rest of the "at-home."

On the day following his visit to Maslennikoff, Nekhludoff received a
letter from him, written in a fine, firm hand, on thick, glazed paper,
with a coat-of-arms, and sealed with sealing-wax. Maslennikoff said
that he had written to the doctor concerning Maslova's removal to the
hospital, and hoped Nekhludoff's wish would receive attention. The
letter was signed, "Your affectionate elder comrade," and the signature
ended with a large, firm, and artistic flourish. "Fool!" Nekhludoff
could not refrain from saying, especially because in the word
"comrade" he felt Maslennikoff's condescension towards him, i.e., while
Maslennikoff was filling this position, morally most dirty and shameful,
he still thought himself a very important man, and wished, if not
exactly to flatter Nekhludoff, at least to show that he was not too
proud to call him comrade.



CHAPTER LIX.

NEKHLUDOFF'S THIRD INTERVIEW WITH MASLOVA IN PRISON.

One of the most widespread superstitions is that every man has his own
special, definite qualities; that a man is kind, cruel, wise, stupid,
energetic, apathetic, etc. Men are not like that. We may say of a man
that he is more often kind than cruel, oftener wise than stupid, oftener
energetic than apathetic, or the reverse; but it would be false to say
of one man that he is kind and wise, of another that he is wicked and
foolish. And yet we always classify mankind in this way. And this is
untrue. Men are like rivers: the water is the same in each, and alike in
all; but every river is narrow here, is more rapid there, here slower,
there broader, now clear, now cold, now dull, now warm. It is the same
with men. Every man carries in himself the germs of every human quality,
and sometimes one manifests itself, sometimes another, and the man often
becomes unlike himself, while still remaining the same man, In some
people these changes are very rapid, and Nekhludoff was such a man.
These changes in him were due to physical and to spiritual causes. At
this time he experienced such a change.

That feeling of triumph and joy at the renewal of life which he had
experienced after the trial and after the first interview with Katusha,
vanished completely, and after the last interview fear and revulsion
took the place of that joy. He was determined not to leave her, and not
to change his decision of marrying her, if she wished it; but it seemed
very hard, and made him suffer.

On the day after his visit to Maslennikoff, he again went to the prison
to see her.

The inspector allowed him to speak to her, only not in the advocate's
room nor in the office, but in the women's visiting-room. In spite
of his kindness, the inspector was more reserved with Nekhludoff than
hitherto.

An order for greater caution had apparently been sent, as a result of
his conversation with Meslennikoff.

"You may see her," the inspector said; "but please remember what I
said as regards money. And as to her removal to the hospital, that his
excellency wrote to me about, it can be done; the doctor would agree.
Only she herself does not wish it. She says, 'Much need have I to carry
out the slops for the scurvy beggars.' You don't know what these people
are, Prince," he added.

Nekhludoff did not reply, but asked to have the interview. The
inspector called a jailer, whom Nekhludoff followed into the women's
visiting-room, where there was no one but Maslova waiting. She came from
behind the grating, quiet and timid, close up to him, and said, without
looking at him:

"Forgive me, Dmitri Ivanovitch, I spoke hastily the day before
yesterday."

"It is not for me to forgive you," Nekhludoff began.

"But all the same, you must leave me," she interrupted, and in the
terribly squinting eyes with which she looked at him Nekhludoff read the
former strained, angry expression.

"Why should I leave you?"

"So."

"But why so?"

She again looked up, as it seemed to him, with the same angry look.

"Well, then, thus it is," she said. "You must leave me. It is true
what I am saying. I cannot. You just give it up altogether." Her lips
trembled and she was silent for a moment. "It is true. I'd rather hang
myself."

Nekhludoff felt that in this refusal there was hatred and unforgiving
resentment, but there was also something besides, something good. This
confirmation of the refusal in cold blood at once quenched all the
doubts in Nekhludoff's bosom, and brought back the serious, triumphant
emotion he had felt in relation to Katusha.

"Katusha, what I have said I will again repeat," he uttered, very
seriously. "I ask you to marry me. If you do not wish it, and for as
long as you do not wish it, I shall only continue to follow you, and
shall go where you are taken."

"That is your business. I shall not say anything more," she answered,
and her lips began to tremble again.

He, too, was silent, feeling unable to speak.

"I shall now go to the country, and then to Petersburg," he said, when
he was quieter again. "I shall do my utmost to get your--our case, I
mean, reconsidered, and by the help of God the sentence may be revoked."

"And if it is not revoked, never mind. I have deserved it, if not in
this case, in other ways," she said, and he saw how difficult it was for
her to keep down her tears.

"Well, have you seen Menshoff?" she suddenly asked, to hide her emotion.
"It's true they are innocent, isn't it?"

"Yes, I think so."

"Such a splendid old woman," she said.

There was another pause.

"Well, and as to the hospital?" she suddenly said, and looking at him
with her squinting eyes. "If you like, I will go, and I shall not drink
any spirits, either."

Nekhludoff looked into her eyes. They were smiling.

"Yes, yes, she is quite a different being," Nekhludoff thought. After
all his former doubts, he now felt something he had never before
experienced--the certainty that love is invincible.

When Maslova returned to her noisome cell after this interview, she took
off her cloak and sat down in her place on the shelf bedstead with her
hands folded on her lap. In the cell were only the consumptive woman,
the Vladimir woman with her baby, Menshoff's old mother, and the
watchman's wife. The deacon's daughter had the day before been declared
mentally diseased and removed to the hospital. The rest of the women
were away, washing clothes. The old woman was asleep, the cell door
stood open, and the watchman's children were in the corridor outside.
The Vladimir woman, with her baby in her arms, and the watchman's
wife, with the stocking she was knitting with deft fingers, came up to
Maslova. "Well, have you had a chat?" they asked. Maslova sat silent on
the high bedstead, swinging her legs, which did not reach to the floor.

"What's the good of snivelling?" said the watchman's wife. "The chief
thing's not to go down into the dumps. Eh, Katusha? Now, then!" and she
went on, quickly moving her fingers.

Maslova did not answer.

"And our women have all gone to wash," said the Vladimir woman. "I
heard them say much has been given in alms to-day. Quite a lot has been
brought."

"Finashka," called out the watchman's wife, "where's the little imp gone
to?"

She took a knitting needle, stuck it through both the ball and the
stocking, and went out into the corridor.

At this moment the sound of women's voices was heard from the corridor,
and the inmates of the cell entered, with their prison shoes, but
no stockings on their feet. Each was carrying a roll, some even two.
Theodosia came at once up to Maslova.

"What's the matter; is anything wrong?" Theodosia asked, looking
lovingly at Maslova with her clear, blue eyes. "This is for our tea,"
and she put the rolls on a shelf.

"Why, surely he has not changed his mind about marrying?" asked
Korableva.

"No, he has not, but I don't wish to," said Maslova, "and so I told
him."

"More fool you!" muttered Korableva in her deep tones.

"If one's not to live together, what's the use of marrying?" said
Theodosia.

"There's your husband--he's going with you," said the watchman's wife.

"Well, of course, we're married," said Theodosia. "But why should he go
through the ceremony if he is not to live with her?"

"Why, indeed! Don't be a fool! You know if he marries her she'll roll in
wealth," said Korableva.

"He says, 'Wherever they take you, I'll follow,'" said Maslova. "If he
does, it's well; if he does not, well also. I am not going to ask him
to. Now he is going to try and arrange the matter in Petersburg. He is
related to all the Ministers there. But, all the same, I have no need of
him," she continued.

"Of course not," suddenly agreed Korableva, evidently thinking about
something else as she sat examining her bag. "Well, shall we have a
drop?"

"You have some," replied Maslova. "I won't."

END OF BOOK I.




BOOK II.



CHAPTER I.

PROPERTY IN LAND.

It was possible for Maslova's case to come before the Senate in a
fortnight, at which time Nekhludoff meant to go to Petersburg, and, if
need be, to appeal to the Emperor (as the advocate who had drawn up the
petition advised) should the appeal be disregarded (and, according to
the advocate, it was best to be prepared for that, since the causes for
appeal were so slight). The party of convicts, among whom was Maslova,
would very likely leave in the beginning of June. In order to be able to
follow her to Siberia, as Nekhludoff was firmly resolved to do, he was
now obliged to visit his estates, and settle matters there. Nekhludoff
first went to the nearest, Kousminski, a large estate that lay in the
black earth district, and from which he derived the greatest part of his
income.

He had lived on that estate in his childhood and youth, and had been
there twice since, and once, at his mother's request, he had taken a
German steward there, and had with him verified the accounts. The state
of things there and the peasants' relations to the management, i.e.,
the landlord, had therefore been long known to him. The relations of the
peasants to the administration were those of utter dependence on that
management. Nekhludoff knew all this when still a university student,
he had confessed and preached Henry Georgeism, and, on the basis of that
teaching, had given the land inherited from his father to the peasants.
It is true that after entering the army, when he got into the habit of
spending 20,000 roubles a year, those former occupations ceased to be
regarded as a duty, and were forgotten, and he not only left off asking
himself where the money his mother allowed him came from, but even
avoided thinking about it. But his mother's death, the coming into the
property, and the necessity of managing it, again raised the question
as to what his position in reference to private property in land was. A
month before Nekhludoff would have answered that he had not the strength
to alter the existing order of things; that it was not he who was
administering the estate; and would one way or another have eased his
conscience, continuing to live far from his estates, and having the
money sent him. But now he decided that he could not leave things to go
on as they were, but would have to alter them in a way unprofitable
to himself, even though he had all these complicated and difficult
relations with the prison world which made money necessary, as well as a
probable journey to Siberia before him. Therefore he decided not to farm
the land, but to let it to the peasants at a low rent, to enable them
to cultivate it without depending on a landlord. More than once, when
comparing the position of a landowner with that of an owner of serfs,
Nekhludoff had compared the renting of land to the peasants instead
of cultivating it with hired labour, to the old system by which serf
proprietors used to exact a money payment from their serfs in place of
labour. It was not a solution of the problem, and yet a step towards the
solution; it was a movement towards a less rude form of slavery. And it
was in this way he meant to act.

Nekhludoff reached Kousminski about noon. Trying to simplify his life
in every way, he did not telegraph, but hired a cart and pair at the
station. The driver was a young fellow in a nankeen coat, with a belt
below his long waist. He was glad to talk to the gentleman, especially
because while they were talking his broken-winded white horse and the
emaciated spavined one could go at a foot-pace, which they always liked
to do.

The driver spoke about the steward at Kousminski without knowing that he
was driving "the master." Nekhludoff had purposely not told him who he
was.

"That ostentatious German," said the driver (who had been to town and
read novels) as he sat sideways on the box, passing his hand from
the top to the bottom of his long whip, and trying to show off his
accomplishments--"that ostentatious German has procured three light
bays, and when he drives out with his lady---oh, my! At Christmas he had
a Christmas-tree in the big house. I drove some of the visitors there.
It had 'lectric lights; you could not see the like of it in the whole
of the government. What's it to him, he has cribbed a heap of money. I
heard say he has bought an estate."

Nekhludoff had imagined that he was quite indifferent to the way the
steward managed his estate, and what advantages the steward derived from
it. The words of the long-waisted driver, however, were not pleasant to
hear.

A dark cloud now and then covered the sun; the larks were soaring above
the fields of winter corn; the forests were already covered with fresh
young green; the meadows speckled with grazing cattle and horses. The
fields were being ploughed, and Nekhludoff enjoyed the lovely day. But
every now and then he had an unpleasant feeling, and, when he asked
himself what it was caused by, he remembered what the driver had told
him about the way the German was managing Kousminski. When he got to his
estate and set to work this unpleasant feeling vanished.

Looking over the books in the office, and a talk with the foreman, who
naively pointed out the advantages to be derived from the facts that the
peasants had very little land of their own and that it lay in the midst
of the landlord's fields, made Nekhludoff more than ever determined to
leave off farming and to let his land to the peasants.

From the office books and his talk with the foreman, Nekhludoff found
that two-thirds of the best of the cultivated land was still being
tilled with improved machinery by labourers receiving fixed wages, while
the other third was tilled by the peasants at the rate of five roubles
per desiatin [about two and three-quarter acres]. So that the peasants
had to plough each desiatin three times, harrow it three times, sow
and mow the corn, make it into sheaves, and deliver it on the threshing
ground for five roubles, while the same amount of work done by wage
labour came to at least 10 roubles. Everything the peasants got from the
office they paid for in labour at a very high price. They paid in labour
for the use of the meadows, for wood, for potato-stalks, and were nearly
all of them in debt to the office. Thus, for the land that lay beyond
the cultivated fields, which the peasants hired, four times the price
that its value would bring in if invested at five per cent was taken
from the peasants.

Nekhludoff had known all this before, but he now saw it in a new light,
and wondered how he and others in his position could help seeing how
abnormal such conditions are. The steward's arguments that if the land
were let to the peasants the agricultural implements would fetch next to
nothing, as it would be impossible to get even a quarter of their value
for them, and that the peasants would spoil the land, and how great a
loser Nekhludoff would be, only strengthened Nekhludoff in the opinion
that he was doing a good action in letting the land to the peasants
and thus depriving himself of a large part of his income. He decided to
settle this business now, at once, while he was there. The reaping and
selling of the corn he left for the steward to manage in due season, and
also the selling of the agricultural implements and useless buildings.
But he asked his steward to call the peasants of the three neighbouring
villages that lay in the midst of his estate (Kousminski) to a meeting,
at which he would tell them of his intentions and arrange about the
price at which they were to rent the land.

With the pleasant sense of the firmness he had shown in the face of the
steward's arguments, and his readiness to make a sacrifice, Nekhludoff
left the office, thinking over the business before him, and strolled
round the house, through the neglected flower-garden--this year the
flowers were planted in front of the steward's house--over the tennis
ground, now overgrown with dandelions, and along the lime-tree walk,
where he used to smoke his cigar, and where he had flirted with the
pretty Kirimova, his mother's visitor. Having briefly prepared in his
mind the speech he was going to make to the peasants, he again went in
to the steward, and, after tea, having once more arranged his thoughts,
he went into the room prepared for him in the big house, which used to
be a spare bedroom.

In this clean little room, with pictures of Venice on the walls, and a
mirror between the two windows, there stood a clean bed with a spring
mattress, and by the side of it a small table, with a decanter of water,
matches, and an extinguisher. On a table by the looking-glass lay his
open portmanteau, with his dressing-case and some books in it; a Russian
book, The Investigation of the Laws of Criminality, and a German and
an English book on the same subject, which he meant to read while
travelling in the country. But it was too late to begin to-day, and he
began preparing to go to bed.

An old-fashioned inlaid mahogany arm-chair stood in the corner of
the room, and this chair, which Nekhludoff remembered standing in his
mother's bedroom, suddenly raised a perfectly unexpected sensation in
his soul. He was suddenly filled with regret at the thought of the house
that would tumble to ruin, and the garden that would run wild, and the
forest that would be cut down, and all these farmyards, stables, sheds,
machines, horses, cows which he knew had cost so much effort, though not
to himself, to acquire and to keep. It had seemed easy to give up all
this, but now it was hard, not only to give this, but even to let the
land and lose half his income. And at once a consideration, which proved
that it was unreasonable to let the land to the peasants, and thus to
destroy his property, came to his service. "I must not hold property in
land. If I possess no property in land, I cannot keep up the house and
farm. And, besides, I am going to Siberia, and shall not need either
the house or the estate," said one voice. "All this is so," said another
voice, "but you are not going to spend all your life in Siberia. You may
marry, and have children, and must hand the estate on to them in as good
a condition as you received it. There is a duty to the land, too.
To give up, to destroy everything is very easy; to acquire it very
difficult. Above all, you must consider your future life, and what
you will do with yourself, and you must dispose of your property
accordingly. And are you really firm in your resolve? And then, are you
really acting according to your conscience, or are you acting in order
to be admired of men?" Nekhludoff asked himself all this, and had to
acknowledge that he was influenced by the thought of what people would
say about him. And the more he thought about it the more questions
arose, and the more unsolvable they seemed.

In hopes of ridding himself of these thoughts by falling asleep, and
solving them in the morning when his head would be fresh, he lay down on
his clean bed. But it was long before he could sleep. Together with the
fresh air and the moonlight, the croaking of the frogs entered the room,
mingling with the trills of a couple of nightingales in the park and
one close to the window in a bush of lilacs in bloom. Listening to
the nightingales and the frogs, Nekhludoff remembered the inspector's
daughter, and her music, and the inspector; that reminded him of
Maslova, and how her lips trembled, like the croaking of the frogs, when
she said, "You must just leave it." Then the German steward began going
down to the frogs, and had to be held back, but he not only went down
but turned into Maslova, who began reproaching Nekhludoff, saying, "You
are a prince, and I am a convict." "No, I must not give in," thought
Nekhludoff, waking up, and again asking himself, "Is what I am doing
right? I do not know, and no matter, no matter, I must only fall asleep
now." And he began himself to descend where he had seen the inspector
and Maslova climbing down to, and there it all ended.



CHAPTER II.

EFFORTS AT LAND RESTORATION.

The next day Nekhludoff awoke at nine o'clock. The young office clerk
who attended on "the master" brought him his boots, shining as they had
never shone before, and some cold, beautifully clear spring water, and
informed him that the peasants were already assembling.

Nekhludoff jumped out of bed, and collected his thoughts. Not a trace
of yesterday's regret at giving up and thus destroying his property
remained now. He remembered this feeling of regret with surprise; he was
now looking forward with joy to the task before him, and could not help
being proud of it. He could see from the window the old tennis ground,
overgrown with dandelions, on which the peasants were beginning to
assemble. The frogs had not croaked in vain the night before; the day
was dull. There was no wind; a soft warm rain had begun falling in the
morning, and hung in drops on leaves, twigs, and grass. Besides the
smell of the fresh vegetation, the smell of damp earth, asking for more
rain, entered in at the window. While dressing, Nekhludoff several times
looked out at the peasants gathered on the tennis ground. One by one
they came, took off their hats or caps to one another, and took their
places in a circle, leaning on their sticks. The steward, a stout,
muscular, strong young man, dressed in a short pea-jacket, with a
green stand-up collar, and enormous buttons, came to say that all had
assembled, but that they might wait until Nekhludoff had finished his
breakfast--tea and coffee, whichever he pleased; both were ready.

"No, I think I had better go and see them at once," said Nekhludoff,
with an unexpected feeling of shyness and shame at the thought of the
conversation he was going to have with the peasants. He was going to
fulfil a wish of the peasants, the fulfilment of which they did not
even dare to hope for--to let the land to them at a low price, i.e.,
to confer a great boon; and yet he felt ashamed of something. When
Nekhludoff came up to the peasants, and the fair, the curly, the bald,
the grey heads were bared before him, he felt so confused that he
could say nothing. The rain continued to come down in small drops,
that remained on the hair, the beards, and the fluff of the men's rough
coats. The peasants looked at "the master," waiting for him to speak,
and he was so abashed that he could not speak. This confused silence
was broken by the sedate, self-assured German steward, who considered
himself a good judge of the Russian peasant, and who spoke Russian
remarkably well. This strong, over-fed man, and Nekhludoff himself,
presented a striking contrast to the peasants, with their thin, wrinkled
faces and the shoulder blades protruding beneath their coarse coats.

"Here's the Prince wanting to do you a favor, and to let the land to
you; only you are not worthy of it," said the steward.

"How are we not worthy of it, Vasili Karlovitch? Don't we work for you?
We were well satisfied with the deceased lady--God have mercy on her
soul--and the young Prince will not desert us now. Our thanks to him,"
said a redhaired, talkative peasant.

"Yes, that's why I have called you together. I should like to let you
have all the land, if you wish it."

The peasants said nothing, as if they did not understand or did not
believe it.

"Let's see. Let us have the land? What do you mean?" asked a middle-aged
man.

"To let it to you, that you might have the use of it, at a low rent."

"A very agreeable thing," said an old man.

"If only the pay is such as we can afford," said another.

"There's no reason why we should not rent the land."

"We are accustomed to live by tilling the ground."

"And it's quieter for you, too, that way. You'll have to do nothing
but receive the rent. Only think of all the sin and worry now!" several
voices were heard saying.

"The sin is all on your side," the German remarked. "If only you did
your work, and were orderly."

"That's impossible for the likes of us," said a sharp-nosed old man.
"You say, 'Why do you let the horse get into the corn?' just as if I
let it in. Why, I was swinging my scythe, or something of the kind,
the livelong day, till the day seemed as long as a year, and so I fell
asleep while watching the herd of horses at night, and it got into your
oats, and now you're skinning me."

"And you should keep order."

"It's easy for you to talk about order, but it's more than our strength
will bear," answered a tall, dark, hairy middleaged man.

"Didn't I tell you to put up a fence?"

"You give us the wood to make it of," said a short, plain-looking
peasant. "I was going to put up a fence last year, and you put me to
feed vermin in prison for three months. That was the end of that fence."

"What is it he is saying?" asked Nekhludoff, turning to the steward.

"Der ersto Dieb im Dorfe," [The greatest thief in the village] answered
the steward in German. "He is caught stealing wood from the forest every
year." Then turning to the peasant, he added, "You must learn to respect
other people's property."

"Why, don't we respect you?" said an old man. "We are obliged to respect
you. Why, you could twist us into a rope; we are in your hands."

"Eh, my friend, it's impossible to do you. It's you who are ever ready
to do us," said the steward.

"Do you, indeed. Didn't you smash my jaw for me, and I got nothing for
it? No good going to law with the rich, it seems."

"You should keep to the law."

A tournament of words was apparently going on without those who took
part in it knowing exactly what it was all about; but it was noticeable
that there was bitterness on one side, restricted by fear, and on the
other a consciousness of importance and power. It was very trying to
Nekhludoff to listen to all this, so he returned to the question of
arranging the amount and the terms of the rent.

"Well, then, how about the land? Do you wish to take it, and what price
will you pay if I let you have the whole of it?"

"The property is yours: it is for you to fix the price."

Nekhludoff named the price. Though it was far below that paid in the
neighbourhood, the peasants declared it too high, and began bargaining,
as is customary among them. Nekhludoff thought his offer would be
accepted with pleasure, but no signs of pleasure were visible.

One thing only showed Nekhludoff that his offer was a profitable one
to the peasants. The question as to who would rent the land, the whole
commune or a special society, was put, and a violent dispute arose among
those peasants who were in favour of excluding the weak and those not
likely to pay the rent regularly, and the peasants who would have to be
excluded on that score. At last, thanks to the steward, the amount and
the terms of the rent were fixed, and the peasants went down the hill
towards their villages, talking noisily, while Nekhludoff and the
steward went into the office to make up the agreement. Everything was
settled in the way Nekhludoff wished and expected it to be. The peasants
had their land 30 per cent. cheaper than they could have got it anywhere
in the district, the revenue from the land was diminished by half, but
was more than sufficient for Nekhludoff, especially as there would be
money coming in for a forest he sold, as well as for the agricultural
implements, which would be sold, too. Everything seemed excellently
arranged, yet he felt ashamed of something. He could see that the
peasants, though they spoke words of thanks, were not satisfied, and
had expected something greater. So it turned out that he had deprived
himself of a great deal, and yet not done what the peasants had
expected.

The next day the agreement was signed, and accompanied by several old
peasants, who had been chosen as deputies, Nekhludoff went out, got
into the steward's elegant equipage (as the driver from the station had
called it), said "good-bye" to the peasants, who stood shaking their
heads in a dissatisfied and disappointed manner, and drove off to the
station. Nekhludoff was dissatisfied with himself without knowing why,
but all the time he felt sad and ashamed of something.



CHAPTER III.

OLD ASSOCIATIONS.

From Kousminski Nekhludoff went to the estate he had inherited from his
aunts, the same where he first met Katusha. He meant to arrange about
the land there in the way he had done in Kousminski. Besides this, he
wished to find out all he could about Katusha and her baby, and when and
how it had died. He got to Panovo early one morning, and the first thing
that struck him when he drove up was the look of decay and dilapidation
that all the buildings bore, especially the house itself. The iron
roofs, which had once been painted green, looked red with rust, and
a few sheets of iron were bent back, probably by a storm. Some of the
planks which covered the house from outside were torn away in several
places; these were easier to get by breaking the rusty nails that held
them. Both porches, but especially the side porch he remembered so well,
were rotten and broken; only the banister remained. Some of the windows
were boarded up, and the building in which the foreman lived, the
kitchen, the stables--all were grey and decaying. Only the garden had
not decayed, but had grown, and was in full bloom; from over the fence
the cherry, apple, and plum trees looked like white clouds. The lilac
bushes that formed the hedge were in full bloom, as they had been
when, 14 years ago, Nekhludoff had played gorelki with the 15-year-old
Katusha, and had fallen and got his hand stung by the nettles behind one
of those lilac bushes. The larch that his aunt Sophia had planted near
the house, which then was only a short stick, had grown into a tree,
the trunk of which would have made a beam, and its branches were covered
with soft yellow green needles as with down. The river, now within its
banks, rushed noisily over the mill dam. The meadow the other side of
the river was dotted over by the peasants' mixed herds. The foreman,
a student, who had left the seminary without finishing the course, met
Nekhludoff in the yard, with a smile on his face, and, still smiling,
asked him to come into the office, and, as if promising something
exceptionally good by this smile, he went behind a partition. For a
moment some whispering was heard behind the partition. The isvostchik
who had driven Nekhludoff from the station, drove away after receiving
a tip, and all was silent. Then a barefooted girl passed the window;
she had on an embroidered peasant blouse, and long earrings in her ears;
then a man walked past, clattering with his nailed boots on the trodden
path.

Nekhludoff sat down by the little casement, and looked out into the
garden and listened. A soft, fresh spring breeze, smelling of newly-dug
earth, streamed in through the window, playing with the hair on his damp
forehead and the papers that lay on the window-sill, which was all cut
about with a knife.

"Tra-pa-trop, tra-pa-trop," comes a sound from the river, as the women
who were washing clothes there slapped them in regular measure with
their wooden bats, and the sound spread over the glittering surface of
the mill pond while the rhythmical sound of the falling water came from
the mill, and a frightened fly suddenly flew loudly buzzing past his
ear.

And all at once Nekhludoff remembered how, long ago, when he was young
and innocent, he had heard the women's wooden bats slapping the wet
clothes above the rhythmical sound from the mill, and in the same way
the spring breeze had blown about the hair on his wet forehead and the
papers on the window-sill, which was all cut about with a knife, and
just in the same way a fly had buzzed loudly past his car.

It was not exactly that he remembered himself as a lad of 15, but he
seemed to feel himself the same as he was then, with the same freshness
and purity, and full of the same grand possibilities for the future, and
at the same time, as it happens in a dream, he knew that all this could
be no more, and he felt terribly sad. "At what time would you like
something to eat?" asked the foreman, with a smile.

"When you like; I am not hungry. I shall go for a walk through the
village."

"Would you not like to come into the house? Everything is in order
there. Have the goodness to look in. If the outside---"

"Not now; later on. Tell me, please, have you got a woman here called
Matrona Kharina?" (This was Katusha's aunt, the village midwife.)

"Oh, yes; in the village she keeps a secret pot-house. I know she does,
and I accuse her of it and scold her; but as to taking her up, it would
be a pity. An old woman, you know; she has grandchildren," said the
foreman, continuing to smile in the same manner, partly wishing to
be pleasant to the master, and partly because he was convinced that
Nekhludoff understood all these matters just as well as he did himself.

"Where does she live? I shall go across and see her."

"At the end of the village; the further side, the third from the end. To
the left there is a brick cottage, and her hut is beyond that. But I'd
better see you there," the foreman said with a graceful smile.

"No, thanks, I shall find it; and you be so good as to call a meeting
of the peasants, and tell them that I want to speak to them about
the land," said Nekhludoff, with the intention of coming to the same
agreement with the peasants here as he had done in Kousminski, and, if
possible, that same evening.



CHAPTER IV.

THE PEASANTS' LOT.

When Nekhludoff came out of the gate he met the girl with the long
earrings on the well-trodden path that lay across the pasture
ground, overgrown with dock and plantain leaves. She had a long,
brightly-coloured apron on, and was quickly swinging her left arm in
front of herself as she stepped briskly with her fat, bare feet. With
her right arm she was pressing a fowl to her stomach. The fowl, with
red comb shaking, seemed perfectly calm; he only rolled up his eyes and
stretched out and drew in one black leg, clawing the girl's apron. When
the girl came nearer to "the master," she began moving more slowly, and
her run changed into a walk. When she came up to him she stopped, and,
after a backward jerk with her head, bowed to him; and only when he had
passed did she recommence to run homeward with the cock. As he went down
towards the well, he met an old woman, who had a coarse dirty blouse on,
carrying two pails full of water, that hung on a yoke across her bent
back. The old woman carefully put down the pails and bowed, with the
same backward jerk of her head.

After passing the well Nekhludoff entered the village. It was a bright,
hot day, and oppressive, though only ten o'clock. At intervals the sun
was hidden by the gathering clouds. An unpleasant, sharp smell of manure
filled the air in the street. It came from carts going up the hillside,
but chiefly from the disturbed manure heaps in the yards of the huts,
by the open gates of which Nekhludoff had to pass. The peasants,
barefooted, their shirts and trousers soiled with manure, turned to look
at the tall, stout gentleman with the glossy silk ribbon on his grey hat
who was walking up the village street, touching the ground every other
step with a shiny, bright-knobbed walking-stick. The peasants returning
from the fields at a trot and jotting in their empty carts, took
off their hats, and, in their surprise, followed with their eyes the
extraordinary man who was walking up their street. The women came out
of the gates or stood in the porches of their huts, pointing him out to
each other and gazing at him as he passed.

When Nekhludoff was passing the fourth gate, he was stopped by a cart
that was coming out, its wheels creaking, loaded high with manure, which
was pressed down, and was covered with a mat to sit on. A six-year-old
boy, excited by the prospect of a drive, followed the cart. A young
peasant, with shoes plaited out of bark on his feet, led the horse out
of the yard. A long-legged colt jumped out of the gate; but, seeing
Nekhludoff, pressed close to the cart, and scraping its legs against the
wheels, jumped forward, past its excited, gently-neighing mother, as she
was dragging the heavy load through the gateway. The next horse was led
out by a barefooted old man, with protruding shoulder-blades, in a dirty
shirt and striped trousers.

When the horses got out on to the hard road, strewn over with bits
of dry, grey manure, the old man returned to the gate, and bowed to
Nekhludoff.

"You are our ladies' nephew, aren't you?"

"Yes, I am their nephew."

"You've kindly come to look us up, eh?" said the garrulous old man.

"Yes, I have. Well, how are you getting on?"

"How do we get on? We get on very badly," the old man drawled, as if it
gave him pleasure.

"Why so badly?" Nekhludoff asked, stepping inside the gate.

"What is our life but the very worst life?" said the old man, following
Nekhludoff into that part of the yard which was roofed over.

Nekhludoff stopped under the roof.

"I have got 12 of them there," continued the old man, pointing to two
women on the remainder of the manure heap, who stood perspiring with
forks in their hands, the kerchiefs tumbling off their heads, with their
skirts tucked up, showing the calves of their dirty, bare legs. "Not a
month passes but I have to buy six poods [a pood is 36 English pounds]
of corn, and where's the money to come from?"

"Have you not got enough corn of your own?"

"My own?" repeated the old man, with a smile of contempt; "why I have
only got land for three, and last year we had not enough to last till
Christmas."

"What do you do then?"

"What do we do? Why, I hire out as a labourer; and then I borrowed some
money from your honour. We spent it all before Lent, and the tax is not
paid yet."

"And how much is the tax?"

"Why, it's 17 roubles for my household. Oh, Lord, such a life! One
hardly knows one's self how one manages to live it."

"May I go into your hut?" asked Nekhludoff, stepping across the yard
over the yellow-brown layers of manure that had been raked up by the
forks, and were giving off a strong smell.

"Why not? Come in," said the old man, and stepping quickly with his
bare feet over the manure, the liquid oozing between his toes, he passed
Nekhludoff and opened the door of the hut.

The women arranged the kerchiefs on their heads and let down their
skirts, and stood looking with surprise at the clean gentleman with gold
studs to his sleeves who was entering their house. Two little girls,
with nothing on but coarse chemises, rushed out of the hut. Nekhludoff
took off his hat, and, stooping to get through the low door, entered,
through a passage into the dirty, narrow hut, that smelt of sour food,
and where much space was taken up by two weaving looms. In the hut an
old woman was standing by the stove, with the sleeves rolled up over her
thin, sinewy brown arms.

"Here is our master come to see us," said the old man.

"I'm sure he's very welcome," said the old woman, kindly.

"I would like to see how you live."

"Well, you see how we live. The hut is coming down, and might kill one
any day; but my old man he says it's good enough, and so we live like
kings," said the brisk old woman, nervously jerking her head. "I'm
getting the dinner; going to feed the workers."

"And what are you going to have for dinner?"

"Our food is very good. First course, bread and kvas; [kvas is a kind of
sour, non-intoxicant beer made of rye] second course, kvas and bread,"
said the old woman, showing her teeth, which were half worn away.

"No," seriously; "let me see what you are going to eat."

"To eat?" said the old man, laughing. "Ours is not a very cunning meal.
You just show him, wife."

"Want to see our peasant food? Well, you are an inquisitive gentleman,
now I come to look at you. He wants to know everything. Did I not tell
you bread and kvas and then we'll have soup. A woman brought us some
fish, and that's what the soup is made of, and after that, potatoes."

"Nothing more?"

"What more do you want? We'll also have a little milk," said the old
woman, looking towards the door. The door stood open, and the passage
outside was full of people--boys, girls, women with babies--thronged
together to look at the strange gentleman who wanted to see the
peasants' food. The old woman seemed to pride herself on the way she
behaved with a gentleman.

"Yes, it's a miserable life, ours; that goes without saying, sir," said
the old man. "What are you doing there?" he shouted to those in the
passage. "Well, good-bye," said Nekhludoff, feeling ashamed and uneasy,
though unable to account for the feeling.

"Thank you kindly for having looked us up," said the old man.

The people in the passage pressed closer together to let Nekhludoff
pass, and he went out and continued his way up the street.

Two barefooted boys followed him out of the passage the elder in a
shirt that had once been white, the other in a worn and faded pink one.
Nekhludoff looked back at them.

"And where are you going now?" asked the boy with the white shirt.
Nekhludoff answered: "To Matrona Kharina. Do you know her?" The boy
with the pink shirt began laughing at something; but the elder asked,
seriously:

"What Matrona is that? Is she old?"

"Yes, she is old."

"Oh--oh," he drawled; "that one; she's at the other end of the village;
we'll show you. Yes, Fedka, we'll go with him. Shall we?"

"Yes, but the horses?"

"They'll be all right, I dare say."

Fedka agreed, and all three went up the street.



CHAPTER V.

MASLOVA'S AUNT.

Nekhludoff felt more at ease with the boys than with the grown-up
people, and he began talking to them as they went along. The little
one with the pink shirt stopped laughing, and spoke as sensibly and as
exactly as the elder one.

"Can you tell me who are the poorest people you have got here?" asked
Nekhludoff.

"The poorest? Michael is poor, Simon Makhroff, and Martha, she is very
poor."

"And Anisia, she is still poorer; she's not even got a cow. They go
begging," said little Fedka.

"She's not got a cow, but they are only three persons, and Martha's
family are five," objected the elder boy.

"But the other's a widow," the pink boy said, standing up for Anisia.

"You say Anisia is a widow, and Martha is no better than a widow," said
the elder boy; "she's also no husband."

"And where is her husband?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Feeding vermin in prison," said the elder boy, using this expression,
common among the peasants.

"A year ago he cut down two birch trees in the land-lord's forest," the
little pink boy hurried to say, "so he was locked up; now he's sitting
the sixth month there, and the wife goes begging. There are three
children and a sick grandmother," he went on with his detailed account.

"And where does she live?" Nekhludoff asked.

"In this very house," answered the boy, pointing to a hut, in front
of which, on the footpath along which Nekhludoff was walking, a tiny,
flaxen-headed infant stood balancing himself with difficulty on his
rickety legs.

"Vaska! Where's the little scamp got to?" shouted a woman, with a dirty
grey blouse, and a frightened look, as she ran out of the house, and,
rushing forward, seized the baby before Nekhludoff came up to it, and
carried it in, just as if she were afraid that Nekhludoff would hurt her
child.

This was the woman whose husband was imprisoned for Nekhludoff's birch
trees.

"Well, and this Matrona, is she also poor?" Nekhludoff asked, as they
came up to Matrona's house.

"She poor? No. Why, she sells spirits," the thin, pink little boy
answered decidedly.

When they reached the house Nekhludoff left the boys outside and went
through the passage into the hut. The hut was 14 feet long. The bed
that stood behind the big stove was not long enough for a tall person
to stretch out on. "And on this very bed," Nekhludoff thought, "Katusha
bore her baby and lay ill afterwards." The greater part of the hut was
taken up by a loom, on which the old woman and her eldest granddaughter
were arranging the warp when Nekhludoff came in, striking his forehead
against the low doorway. Two other grandchildren came rushing in after
Nekhludoff, and stopped, holding on to the lintels of the door.

"Whom do you want?" asked the old woman, crossly. She was in a bad
temper because she could not manage to get the warp right, and, besides,
carrying on an illicit trade in spirits, she was always afraid when any
stranger came in.

"I am--the owner of the neighbouring estates, and should like to speak
to you."

"Dear me; why, it's you, my honey; and I, fool, thought it was just some
passer-by. Dear me, you--it's you, my precious," said the old woman,
with simulated tenderness in her voice.

"I should like to speak to you alone," said Nekhludoff, with a glance
towards the door, where the children were standing, and behind them a
woman holding a wasted, pale baby, with a sickly smile on its face, who
had a little cap made of different bits of stuff on its head.

"What are you staring at? I'll give it you. Just hand me my crutch," the
old woman shouted to those at the door.

"Shut the door, will you!" The children went away, and the woman closed
the door.

"And I was thinking, who's that? And it's 'the master' himself. My
jewel, my treasure. Just think," said the old woman, "where he has
deigned to come. Sit down here, your honour," she said, wiping the seat
with her apron. "And I was thinking what devil is it coming in, and it's
your honour, 'the master' himself, the good gentleman, our benefactor.
Forgive me, old fool that I am; I'm getting blind."

Nekhludoff sat down, and the old woman stood in front of him, leaning
her cheek on her right hand, while the left held up the sharp elbow of
her right arm.

"Dear me, you have grown old, your honour; and you used to be as fresh
as a daisy. And now! Cares also, I expect?"

"This is what I have come about: Do you remember Katusha Maslova?"

"Katerina? I should think so. Why, she is my niece. How could I help
remembering; and the tears I have shed because of her. Why, I know all
about it. Eh, sir, who has not sinned before God? who has not offended
against the Tsar? We know what youth is. You used to be drinking tea and
coffee, so the devil got hold of you. He is strong at times. What's to
be done? Now, if you had chucked her; but no, just see how you rewarded
her, gave her a hundred roubles. And she? What has she done? Had she
but listened to me she might have lived all right. I must say the truth,
though she is my niece: that girl's no good. What a good place I found
her! She would not submit, but abused her master. Is it for the likes
of us to scold gentlefolk? Well, she was sent away. And then at the
forester's. She might have lived there; but no, she would not."

"I want to know about the child. She was confined at your house, was she
not? Where's the child?"

"As to the child, I considered that well at the time. She was so bad
I never thought she would get up again. Well, so I christened the baby
quite properly, and we sent it to the Foundlings'. Why should one let
an innocent soul languish when the mother is dying? Others do like this:
they just leave the baby, don't feed it, and it wastes away. But, thinks
I, no; I'd rather take some trouble, and send it to the Foundlings'.
There was money enough, so I sent it off."

"Did you not get its registration number from the Foundlings' Hospital?"

"Yes, there was a number, but the baby died," she said. "It died as soon
as she brought it there."

"Who is she?"

"That same woman who used to live in Skorodno. She made a business of
it. Her name was Malania. She's dead now. She was a wise woman. What do
you think she used to do? They'd bring her a baby, and she'd keep it and
feed it; and she'd feed it until she had enough of them to take to the
Foundlings'. When she had three or four, she'd take them all at once.
She had such a clever arrangement, a sort of big cradle--a double one
she could put them in one way or the other. It had a handle. So she'd
put four of them in, feet to feet and the heads apart, so that they
should not knock against each other. And so she took four at once. She'd
put some pap in a rag into their mouths to keep 'em silent, the pets."

"Well, go on."

"Well, she took Katerina's baby in the same way, after keeping it a
fortnight, I believe. It was in her house it began to sicken."

"And was it a fine baby?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Such a baby, that if you wanted a finer you could not find one. Your
very image," the old woman added, with a wink.

"Why did it sicken? Was the food bad?"

"Eh, what food? Only just a pretence of food. Naturally, when it's not
one's own child. Only enough to get it there alive. She said she
just managed to get it to Moscow, and there it died. She brought a
certificate--all in order. She was such a wise woman."

That was all Nekhludoff could find out concerning his child.



CHAPTER VI.

REFLECTIONS OF A LANDLORD.

Again striking his head against both doors, Nekhludoff went out into the
street, where the pink and the white boys were waiting for him. A few
newcomers were standing with them. Among the women, of whom several
had babies in their arms, was the thin woman with the baby who had the
patchwork cap on its head. She held lightly in her arms the bloodless
infant, who kept strangely smiling all over its wizened little face, and
continually moving its crooked thumbs.

Nekhludoff knew the smile to be one of suffering. He asked who the woman
was.

"It is that very Anisia I told you about," said the elder boy.

Nekhludoff turned to Anisia.

"How do you live?" he asked. "By what means do you gain your
livelihood?"

"How do I live? I go begging," said Anisia, and began to cry.

Nekhludoff took out his pocket-book, and gave the woman a 10-rouble
note. He had not had time to take two steps before another woman with
a baby caught him up, then an old woman, then another young one. All of
them spoke of their poverty, and asked for help. Nekhludoff gave them
the 60 roubles--all in small notes--which he had with him, and, terribly
sad at heart, turned home, i.e., to the foreman's house.

The foreman met Nekhludoff with a smile, and informed him that the
peasants would come to the meeting in the evening. Nekhludoff thanked
him, and went straight into the garden to stroll along the paths strewn
over with the petals of apple-blossom and overgrown with weeds, and to
think over all he had seen.

At first all was quiet, but soon Nekhludoff heard from behind the
foreman's house two angry women's voices interrupting each other, and
now and then the voice of the ever-smiling foreman. Nekhludoff listened.

"My strength's at an end. What are you about, dragging the very cross
[those baptized in the Russo-Greek Church always wear a cross round
their necks] off my neck," said an angry woman's voice.

"But she only got in for a moment," said another voice. "Give it her
back, I tell you. Why do you torment the beast, and the children, too,
who want their milk?"

"Pay, then, or work it off," said the foreman's voice.

Nekhludoff left the garden and entered the porch, near which stood two
dishevelled women--one of them pregnant and evidently near her time.
On one of the steps of the porch, with his hands in the pockets of his
holland coat, stood the foreman. When they saw the master, the women
were silent, and began arranging the kerchiefs on their heads, and the
foreman took his hands out of his pockets and began to smile.

This is what had happened. From the foreman's words, it seemed that the
peasants were in the habit of letting their calves and even their cows
into the meadow belonging to the estate. Two cows belonging to the
families of these two women were found in the meadow, and driven into
the yard. The foreman demanded from the women 30 copecks for each cow
or two days' work. The women, however, maintained that the cows had got
into the meadow of their own accord; that they had no money, and asked
that the cows, which had stood in the blazing sun since morning without
food, piteously lowing, should be returned to them, even if it had to be
on the understanding that the price should be worked off later on.

"How often have I not begged of you," said the smiling foreman, looking
back at Nekhludoff as if calling upon him to be a witness, "if you drive
your cattle home at noon, that you should have an eye on them?"

"I only ran to my little one for a bit, and they got away."

"Don't run away when you have undertaken to watch the cows."

"And who's to feed the little one? You'd not give him the breast, I
suppose?" said the other woman. "Now, if they had really damaged the
meadow, one would not take it so much to heart; but they only strayed in
a moment."

"All the meadows are damaged," the foreman said, turning to Nekhludoff.
"If I exact no penalty there will be no hay."

"There, now, don't go sinning like that; my cows have never been caught
there before," shouted the pregnant woman.

"Now that one has been caught, pay up or work it off."

"All right, I'll work it off; only let me have the cow now, don't
torture her with hunger," she cried, angrily. "As it is, I have no rest
day or night. Mother-in-law is ill, husband taken to drink; I'm all
alone to do all the work, and my strength's at an end. I wish you'd
choke, you and your working it off."

Nekhludoff asked the foreman to let the women take the cows, and went
back into the garden to go on thinking out his problem, but there was
nothing more to think about.

Everything seemed so clear to him now that he could not stop wondering
how it was that everybody did not see it, and that he himself had for
such a long while not seen what was so clearly evident. The people were
dying out, and had got used to the dying-out process, and had formed
habits of life adapted to this process: there was the great mortality
among the children, the over-working of the women, the under-feeding,
especially of the aged. And so gradually had the people come to this
condition that they did not realise the full horrors of it, and did
not complain. Therefore, we consider their condition natural and as it
should be. Now it seemed as clear as daylight that the chief cause of
the people's great want was one that they themselves knew and always
pointed out, i.e., that the land which alone could feed them had been
taken from them by the landlords.

And how evident it was that the children and the aged died because they
had no milk, and they had no milk because there was no pasture land, and
no land to grow corn or make hay on. It was quite evident that all the
misery of the people or, at least by far the greater part of it, was
caused by the fact that the land which should feed them was not in their
hands, but in the hands of those who, profiting by their rights to the
land, live by the work of these people. The land so much needed by men
was tilled by these people, who were on the verge of starvation, so
that the corn might be sold abroad and the owners of the land might buy
themselves hats and canes, and carriages and bronzes, etc. He understood
this as clearly as he understood that horses when they have eaten all
the grass in the inclosure where they are kept will have to grow thin
and starve unless they are put where they can get food off other land.

This was terrible, and must not go on. Means must be found to alter it,
or at least not to take part in it. "And I will find them," he thought,
as he walked up and down the path under the birch trees.

In scientific circles, Government institutions, and in the papers we
talk about the causes of the poverty among the people and the means of
ameliorating their condition; but we do not talk of the only sure means
which would certainly lighten their condition, i.e., giving back to them
the land they need so much.

Henry George's fundamental position recurred vividly to his mind and how
he had once been carried away by it, and he was surprised that he could
have forgotten it. The earth cannot be any one's property; it cannot be
bought or sold any more than water, air, or sunshine. All have an equal
right to the advantages it gives to men. And now he knew why he had felt
ashamed to remember the transaction at Kousminski. He had been deceiving
himself. He knew that no man could have a right to own land, yet he had
accepted this right as his, and had given the peasants something which,
in the depth of his heart, he knew he had no right to. Now he would not
act in this way, and would alter the arrangement in Kousminski also. And
he formed a project in his mind to let the land to the peasants, and to
acknowledge the rent they paid for it to be their property, to be kept
to pay the taxes and for communal uses. This was, of course, not the
single-tax system, still it was as near an approach to it as could be
had under existing circumstances. His chief consideration, however, was
that in this way he would no longer profit by the possession of landed
property.

When he returned to the house the foreman, with a specially pleasant
smile, asked him if he would not have his dinner now, expressing the
fear that the feast his wife was preparing, with the help of the girl
with the earrings, might be overdone.

The table was covered with a coarse, unbleached cloth and an embroidered
towel was laid on it in lieu of a napkin. A vieux-saxe soup tureen with
a broken handle stood on the table, full of potato soup, the stock made
of the fowl that had put out and drawn in his black leg, and was now
cut, or rather chopped, in pieces, which were here and there covered
with hairs. After the soup more of the same fowl with the hairs was
served roasted, and then curd pasties, very greasy, and with a great
deal of sugar. Little appetising as all this was, Nekhludoff hardly
noticed what he was eating; he was occupied with the thought which had
in a moment dispersed the sadness with which he had returned from the
village.

The foreman's wife kept looking in at the door, whilst the frightened
maid with the earrings brought in the dishes; and the foreman smiled
more and more joyfully, priding himself on his wife's culinary skill.
After dinner, Nekhludoff succeeded, with some trouble, in making the
foreman sit down. In order to revise his own thoughts, and to express
them to some one, he explained his project of letting the land to the
peasants, and asked the foreman for his opinion. The foreman, smiling
as if he had thought all this himself long ago, and was very pleased
to hear it, did not really understand it at all. This was not because
Nekhludoff did not express himself clearly, but because according to
this project it turned out that Nekhludoff was giving up his own
profit for the profit of others, and the thought that every one is only
concerned about his own profit, to the harm of others, was so deeply
rooted in the foreman's conceptions that he imagined he did not
understand something when Nekhludoff said that all the income from the
land must be placed to form the communal capital of the peasants.

"Oh, I see; then you, of course, will receive the percentages from that
capital," said the foreman, brightening up.

"Dear me! no. Don't you see, I am giving up the land altogether."

"But then you will not get any income," said the foreman, smiling no
longer.

"Yes, I am going to give it up."

The foreman sighed heavily, and then began smiling again. Now he
understood. He understood that Nekhludoff was not quite normal, and
at once began to consider how he himself could profit by Nekhludoff's
project of giving up the land, and tried to see this project in such a
way that he might reap some advantage from it. But when he saw that this
was impossible he grew sorrowful, and the project ceased to interest
him, and he continued to smile only in order to please the master.

Seeing that the foreman did not understand him, Nekhludoff let him go
and sat down by the window-sill, that was all cut about and inked over,
and began to put his project down on paper.

The sun went down behind the limes, that were covered with fresh green,
and the mosquitoes swarmed in, stinging Nekhludoff. Just as he finished
his notes, he heard the lowing of cattle and the creaking of opening
gates from the village, and the voices of the peasants gathering
together for the meeting. He told the foreman not to call the peasants
up to the office, as he meant to go into the village himself and meet
the men where they would assemble. Having hurriedly drank a cup of tea
offered him by the foreman, Nekhludoff went to the village.



CHAPTER VII.

THE DISINHERITED.

From the crowd assembled in front of the house of the village elder
came the sound of voices; but as soon as Nekhludoff came up the talking
ceased, and all the peasants took off their caps, just as those in
Kousminski had done. The peasants here were of a much poorer class than
those in Kousminski. The men wore shoes made of bark and homespun shirts
and coats. Some had come straight from their work in their shirts and
with bare feet.

Nekhludoff made an effort, and began his speech by telling the peasants
of his intention to give up his land to them altogether. The peasants
were silent, and the expression on their faces did not undergo any
change.

"Because I hold," said Nekhludoff, "and believe that every one has a
right to the use of the land."

"That's certain. That's so, exactly," said several voices.

Nekhludoff went on to say that the revenue from the land ought to be
divided among all, and that he would therefore suggest that they
should rent the land at a price fixed by themselves, the rent to form
a communal fund for their own use. Words of approval and agreement were
still to be heard, but the serious faces of the peasants grew still more
serious, and the eyes that had been fixed on the gentleman dropped, as
if they were unwilling to put him to shame by letting him see that every
one had understood his trick, and that no one would be deceived by him.

Nekhludoff spoke clearly, and the peasants were intelligent, but they
did not and could not understand him, for the same reason that the
foreman had so long been unable to understand him.

They were fully convinced that it is natural for every man to consider
his own interest. The experience of many generations had proved to them
that the landlords always considered their own interest to the detriment
of the peasants. Therefore, if a landlord called them to a meeting and
made them some kind of a new offer, it could evidently only be in order
to swindle them more cunningly than before.

"Well, then, what are you willing to rent the land at?" asked
Nekhludoff.

"How can we fix a price? We cannot do it. The land is yours, and the
power is in your hands," answered some voices from among the crowd.

"Oh, not at all. You will yourselves have the use of the money for
communal purposes."

"We cannot do it; the commune is one thing, and this is another."

"Don't you understand?" said the foreman, with a smile (he had followed
Nekhludoff to the meeting), "the Prince is letting the land to you
for money, and is giving you the money back to form a capital for the
commune."

"We understand very well," said a cross, toothless old man, without
raising his eyes. "Something like a bank; we should have to pay at a
fixed time. We do not wish it; it is hard enough as it is, and that
would ruin us completely."

"That's no go. We prefer to go on the old way," began several
dissatisfied, and even rude, voices.

The refusals grew very vehement when Nekhludoff mentioned that he would
draw up an agreement which would have to be signed by him and by them.

"Why sign? We shall go on working as we have done hitherto. What is all
this for? We are ignorant men."

"We can't agree, because this sort of thing is not what we have been
used to. As it was, so let it continue to be. Only the seeds we should
like to withdraw."

This meant that under the present arrangement the seeds had to be
provided by the peasants, and they wanted the landlord to provide them.

"Then am I to understand that you refuse to accept the land?" Nekhludoff
asked, addressing a middle-aged, barefooted peasant, with a tattered
coat, and a bright look on his face, who was holding his worn cap
with his left hand, in a peculiarly straight position, in the same way
soldiers hold theirs when commanded to take them off.

"Just so," said this peasant, who had evidently not yet rid himself of
the military hypnotism he had been subjected to while serving his time.

"It means that you have sufficient land," said Nekhludoff.

"No, sir, we have not," said the ex-soldier, with an artificially
pleased look, carefully holding his tattered cap in front of him, as if
offering it to any one who liked to make use of it.

"Well, anyhow, you'd better think over what I have said." Nekhludoff
spoke with surprise, and again repeated his offer.

"We have no need to think about it; as we have said, so it will be,"
angrily muttered the morose, toothless old man.

"I shall remain here another day, and if you change your minds, send to
let me know."

The peasants gave no answer.

So Nekhludoff did not succeed in arriving at any result from this
interview.

"If I might make a remark, Prince," said the foreman, when they got
home, "you will never come to any agreement with them; they are so
obstinate. At a meeting these people just stick in one place, and there
is no moving them. It is because they are frightened of everything. Why,
these very peasants--say that white-haired one, or the dark one, who
were refusing, are intelligent peasants. When one of them comes to the
office and one makes him sit down to cup of tea it's like in the Palace
of Wisdom--he is quite diplomatist," said the foreman, smiling; "he will
consider everything rightly. At a meeting it's a different man--he keeps
repeating one and the same . . ."

"Well, could not some of the more intelligent men be asked to come
here?" said Nekhludoff. "I would carefully explain it to them."

"That can be done," said the smiling foreman.

"Well, then, would you mind calling them here to-morrow?"

"Oh, certainly I will," said the foreman, and smiled still more
joyfully. "I shall call them to-morrow."

"Just hear him; he's not artful, not he," said a blackhaired peasant,
with an unkempt beard, as he sat jolting from side to side on a well-fed
mare, addressing an old man in a torn coat who rode by his side. The two
men were driving a herd of the peasants' horses to graze in the night,
alongside the highroad and secretly, in the landlord's forest.

"Give you the land for nothing--you need only sign--have they not
done the likes of us often enough? No, my friend, none of your humbug.
Nowadays we have a little sense," he added, and began shouting at a colt
that had strayed.

He stopped his horse and looked round, but the colt had not remained
behind; it had gone into the meadow by the roadside. "Bother that son
of a Turk; he's taken to getting into the landowner's meadows," said the
dark peasant with the unkempt beard, hearing the cracking of the sorrel
stalks that the neighing colt was galloping over as he came running back
from the scented meadow.

"Do you hear the cracking? We'll have to send the women folk to weed
the meadow when there's a holiday," said the thin peasant with the torn
coat, "or else we'll blunt our scythes."

"Sign," he says. The unkempt man continued giving his opinion of the
landlord's speech. "'Sign,' indeed, and let him swallow you up."

"That's certain," answered the old man. And then they were silent, and
the tramping of the horses' feet along the highroad was the only sound
to be heard.



CHAPTER VIII.

GOD'S PEACE IN THE HEART.

When Nekhludoff returned he found that the office had been arranged as
a bedroom for him. A high bedstead, with a feather bed and two large
pillows, had been placed in the room. The bed was covered with a dark
red doublebedded silk quilt, which was elaborately and finely quilted,
and very stiff. It evidently belonged to the trousseau of the foreman's
wife. The foreman offered Nekhludoff the remains of the dinner, which
the latter refused, and, excusing himself for the poorness of the fare
and the accommodation, he left Nekhludoff alone.

The peasants' refusal did not at all bother Nekhludoff. On the contrary,
though at Kousminski his offer had been accepted and he had even been
thanked for it, and here he was met with suspicion and even enmity, he
felt contented and joyful.

It was close and dirty in the office. Nekhludoff went out into the yard,
and was going into the garden, but he remembered: that night, the window
of the maid-servant's room, the side porch, and he felt uncomfortable,
and did not like to pass the spot desecrated by guilty memories. He
sat down on the doorstep, and breathing in the warm air, balmy with the
strong scent of fresh birch leaves, he sat for a long time looking into
the dark garden and listening to the mill, the nightingales, and some
other bird that whistled monotonously in the bush close by. The light
disappeared from the foreman's window; in the cast, behind the barn,
appeared the light of the rising moon, and sheet lightning began to
light up the dilapidated house, and the blooming, over-grown garden more
and more frequently. It began to thunder in the distance, and a black
cloud spread over one-third of the sky. The nightingales and the other
birds were silent. Above the murmur of the water from the mill came the
cackling of geese, and then in the village and in the foreman's yard
the first cocks began to crow earlier than usual, as they do on warm,
thundery nights. There is a saying that if the cocks crow early the
night will be a merry one. For Nekhludoff the night was more than merry;
it was a happy, joyful night. Imagination renewed the impressions of
that happy summer which he had spent here as an innocent lad, and he
felt himself as he had been not only at that but at all the best moments
of his life. He not only remembered but felt as he had felt when, at
the age of 14, he prayed that God would show him the truth; or when as
a child he had wept on his mother's lap, when parting from her, and
promising to be always good, and never give her pain; he felt as he did
when he and Nikolenka Irtenieff resolved always to support each other in
living a good life and to try to make everybody happy.

He remembered how he had been tempted in Kousminski, so that he had
begun to regret the house and the forest and the farm and the land, and
he asked himself if he regretted them now, and it even seemed strange to
think that he could regret them. He remembered all he had seen to-day;
the woman with the children, and without her husband, who was in prison
for having cut down trees in his (Nekhludoff's) forest, and the terrible
Matrona, who considered, or at least talked as if she considered,
that women of her position must give themselves to the gentlefolk; he
remembered her relation to the babies, the way in which they were taken
to the Foundlings' Hospital, and the unfortunate, smiling, wizened
baby with the patchwork cap, dying of starvation. And then he suddenly
remembered the prison, the shaved heads, the cells, the disgusting
smells, the chains, and, by the side of it all, the madly lavish city
lift of the rich, himself included.

The bright moon, now almost full, rose above the barn. Dark shadows fell
across the yard, and the iron roof of the ruined house shone bright.
As if unwilling to waste this light, the nightingales again began their
trills.

Nekhludoff called to mind how he had begun to consider his life in
the garden of Kousminski when deciding what he was going to do, and
remembered how confused he had become, how he could not arrive at any
decision, how many difficulties each question had presented. He asked
himself these questions now, and was surprised how simple it all was. It
was simple because he was not thinking now of what would be the results
for himself, but only thought of what he had to do. And, strange to say,
what he had to do for himself he could not decide, but what he had to do
for others he knew without any doubt. He had no doubt that he must
not leave Katusha, but go on helping her. He had no doubt that he must
study, investigate, clear up, understand all this business concerning
judgment and punishment, which he felt he saw differently to other
people. What would result from it all he did not know, but he knew for
certain that he must do it. And this firm assurance gave him joy.

The black cloud had spread all over the sky; the lightning flashed
vividly across the yard and the old house with its tumble-down porches,
the thunder growled overhead. All the birds were silent, but the leaves
rustled and the wind reached the step where Nekhludoff stood and played
with his hair. One drop came down, then another; then they came drumming
on the dock leaves and on the iron of the roof, and all the air was
filled by a bright flash, and before Nekhludoff could count three a
fearful crash sounded over head and spread pealing all over the sky.

Nekhludoff went in.

"Yes, yes," he thought. "The work that our life accomplishes, the whole
of this work, the meaning of it is not, nor can be, intelligible to
me. What were my aunts for? Why did Nikolenka Irtenieff die? Why am
I living? What was Katusha for? And my madness? Why that war? Why my
subsequent lawless life? To understand it, to understand the whole
of the Master's will is not in my power. But to do His will, that is
written down in my conscience, is in my power; that I know for certain.
And when I am fulfilling it I have sureness and peace."

The rain came down in torrents and rushed from the roof into a tub
beneath; the lightning lit up the house and yard less frequently.
Nekhludoff went into his room, undressed, and lay down, not without
fear of the bugs, whose presence the dirty, torn wall-papers made him
suspect.

"Yes, to feel one's self not the master but a servant," he thought, and
rejoiced at the thought. His fears were not vain. Hardly had he put out
his candle when the vermin attacked and stung him. "To give up the land
and go to Siberia. Fleas, bugs, dirt! Ah, well; if it must be borne, I
shall bear it." But, in spite of the best of intentions, he could not
bear it, and sat down by the open window and gazed with admiration at
the retreating clouds and the reappearing moon.



CHAPTER IX.

THE LAND SETTLEMENT.

It was morning before Nekhludoff could fall asleep, and therefore he
woke up late. At noon seven men, chosen from among the peasants at
the foreman's invitation, came into the orchard, where the foreman
had arranged a table and benches by digging posts into the ground,
and fixing boards on the top, under the apple trees. It took some time
before the peasants could be persuaded to put on their caps and to sit
down on the benches. Especially firm was the ex-soldier, who to-day had
bark shoes on. He stood erect, holding his cap as they do at
funerals, according to military regulation. When one of them, a
respectable-looking, broad-shouldered old man, with a curly, grizzly
beard like that of Michael Angelo's "Moses," and grey hair that curled
round the brown, bald forehead, put on his big cap, and, wrapping his
coat round him, got in behind the table and sat down, the rest followed
his example. When all had taken their places Nekhludoff sat down
opposite them, and leaning on the table over the paper on which he had
drawn up his project, he began explaining it.

Whether it was that there were fewer present, or that he was occupied
with the business in hand and not with himself, anyhow, this
time Nekhludoff felt no confusion. He involuntarily addressed the
broad-shouldered old man with white ringlets in his grizzly beard,
expecting approbation or objections from him. But Nekhludoff's
conjecture was wrong. The respectable-looking old patriarch, though he
nodded his handsome head approvingly or shook it, and frowned when the
others raised an objection, evidently understood with great difficulty,
and only when the others repeated what Nekhludoff had said in their own
words. A little, almost beardless old fellow, blind in one eye, who sat
by the side of the patriarch, and had a patched nankeen coat and old
boots on, and, as Nekhludoff found out later, was an oven-builder,
understood much better. This man moved his brows quickly, attending to
Nekhludoff's words with an effort, and at once repeated them in his
own way. An old, thick-set man with a white beard and intelligent eyes
understood as quickly, and took every opportunity to put in an ironical
joke, clearly wishing to show off. The ex-soldier seemed also to
understand matters, but got mixed, being used to senseless soldiers'
talk. A tall man with a small beard, a long nose, and a bass voice, who
wore clean, home-made clothes and new bark-plaited shoes, seemed to be
the one most seriously interested. This man spoke only when there
was need of it. The two other old men, the same toothless one who
had shouted a distinct refusal at the meeting the day before to every
proposal of Nekhludoff's, and a tall, white lame old man with a kind
face, his thin legs tightly wrapped round with strips of linen, said
little, though they listened attentively. First of all Nekhludoff
explained his views in regard to personal property in land. "The land,
according to my idea, can neither be bought nor sold, because if it
could be, he who has got the money could buy it all, and exact anything
he liked for the use of the land from those who have none."

"That's true," said the long-nosed man, in a deep bass.

"Just so," said the ex-soldier.

"A woman gathers a little grass for her cow; she's caught and
imprisoned," said the white-bearded old man.

"Our own land is five versts away, and as to renting any it's
impossible; the price is raised so high that it won't pay," added the
cross, toothless old man. "They twist us into ropes, worse than during
serfdom."

"I think as you do, and I count it a sin to possess land, so I wish to
give it away," said Nekhludoff.

"Well, that's a good thing," said the old man, with curls like Angelo's
"Moses," evidently thinking that Nekhludoff meant to let the land.

"I have come here because I no longer wish to possess any land, and now
we must consider the best way of dividing it."

"Just give it to the peasants, that's all," said the cross, toothless
old man.

Nekhludoff was abashed for a moment, feeling a suspicion of his not
being honest in these words, but he instantly recovered, and made use of
the remark, in order to express what was in his mind, in reply.

"I should be glad to give it them," he said, "but to whom, and how?
To which of the peasants? Why, to your commune, and not to that of
Deminsk." (That was the name of a neighbouring village with very little
land.) All were silent. Then the ex-soldier said, "Just so."

"Now, then, tell me how would you divide the land among the peasants if
you had to do it?" said Nekhludoff.

"We should divide it up equally, so much for every man," said the
oven-builder, quickly raising and lowering his brows.

"How else? Of course, so much per man," said the good natured lame man
with the white strips of linen round his legs.

Every one confirmed this statement, considering it satisfactory.

"So much per man? Then are the servants attached to the house also to
have a share?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Oh, no," said the ex-soldier, trying to appear bold and merry. But the
tall, reasonable man would not agree with him.

"If one is to divide, all must share alike," he said, in his deep bass,
after a little consideration.

"It can't be done," said Nekhludoff, who had already prepared his reply.
"If all are to share alike, then those who do not work themselves--do
not plough--will sell their shares to the rich. The rich will again get
at the land. Those who live by working the land will multiply, and land
will again be scarce. Then the rich will again get those who need land
into their power."

"Just so," quickly said the ex-soldier.

"Forbid to sell the land; let only him who ploughs it have it," angrily
interrupted the oven-builder.

To this Nekhludoff replied that it was impossible to know who was
ploughing for himself and who for another.

The tall, reasonable man proposed that an arrangement be made so that
they should all plough communally, and those who ploughed should get the
produce and those who did not should get nothing.

To this communistic project Nekhludoff had also an answer ready. He said
that for such an arrangement it would be necessary that all should have
ploughs, and that all the horses should be alike, so that none should
be left behind, and that ploughs and horses and all the implements would
have to be communal property, and that in order to get that, all the
people would have to agree.

"Our people could not be made to agree in a lifetime," said the cross
old man.

"We should have regular fights," said the white-bearded old man with the
laughing eyes. "So that the thing is not as simple as it looks,"
said Nekhludoff, "and this is a thing not only we but many have been
considering. There is an American, Henry George. This is what he has
thought out, and I agree with him."

"Why, you are the master, and you give it as you like. What's it to you?
The power is yours," said the cross old man.

This confused Nekhludoff, but he was pleased to see that not he alone
was dissatisfied with this interruption.

"You wait a bit, Uncle Simon; let him tell us about it," said the
reasonable man, in his imposing bass.

This emboldened Nekhludoff, and he began to explain Henry George's
single-tax system "The earth is no man's; it is God's," he began.

"Just so; that it is," several voices replied.

"The land is common to all. All have the same right to it, but there is
good land and bad land, and every one would like to take the good land.
How is one to do in order to get it justly divided? In this way: he that
will use the good land must pay those who have got no land the value of
the land he uses," Nekhludoff went on, answering his own question. "As
it would be difficult to say who should pay whom, and money is needed
for communal use, it should be arranged that he who uses the good land
should pay the amount of the value of his land to the commune for its
needs. Then every one would share equally. If you want to use land pay
for it--more for the good, less for the bad land. If you do not wish to
use land, don't pay anything, and those who use the land will pay the
taxes and the communal expenses for you."

"Well, he had a head, this George," said the oven-builder, moving his
brows. "He who has good land must pay more."

"If only the payment is according to our strength," said the tall man
with the bass voice, evidently foreseeing how the matter would end.

"The payment should be not too high and not too low. If it is too high
it will not get paid, and there will be a loss; and if it is too low it
will be bought and sold. There would be a trading in land. This is what
I wished to arrange among you here."

"That is just, that is right; yes, that would do," said the peasants.

"He has a head, this George," said the broad-shouldered old man with the
curls. "See what he has invented."

"Well, then, how would it be if I wished to take some land?" asked the
smiling foreman.

"If there is an allotment to spare, take it and work it," said
Nekhludoff.

"What do you want it for? You have sufficient as it is," said the old
man with the laughing eyes.

With this the conference ended.

Nekhludoff repeated his offer, and advised the men to talk it over with
the rest of the commune and to return with the answer.

The peasants said they would talk it over and bring an answer, and left
in a state of excitement. Their loud talk was audible as they went along
the road, and up to late in the night the sound of voices came along the
river from the village.

The next day the peasants did not go to work, but spent it in
considering the landlord's offer. The commune was divided into two
parties--one which regarded the offer as a profitable one to themselves
and saw no danger in agreeing with it, and another which suspected and
feared the offer it did not understand. On the third day, however, all
agreed, and some were sent to Nekhludoff to accept his offer. They were
influenced in their decision by the explanation some of the old men gave
of the landlord's conduct, which did away with all fear of deceit. They
thought the gentleman had begun to consider his soul, and was acting as
he did for its salvation. The alms which Nekhludoff had given away while
in Panovo made his explanation seem likely. The fact that Nekhludoff
had never before been face to face with such great poverty and so bare
a life as the peasants had come to in this place, and was so appalled
by it, made him give away money in charity, though he knew that this was
not reasonable. He could not help giving the money, of which he now had
a great deal, having received a large sum for the forest he had sold
the year before, and also the hand money for the implements and stock in
Kousminski. As soon as it was known that the master was giving money in
charity, crowds of people, chiefly women, began to come to ask him for
help. He did not in the least know how to deal with them, how to decide,
how much, and whom to give to. He felt that to refuse to give money, of
which he had a great deal, to poor people was impossible, yet to give
casually to those who asked was not wise. The last day he spent in
Panovo, Nekhludoff looked over the things left in his aunts' house, and
in the bottom drawer of the mahogany wardrobe, with the brass lions'
heads with rings through them, he found many letters, and amongst them a
photograph of a group, consisting of his aunts, Sophia Ivanovna and Mary
Ivanovna, a student, and Katusha. Of all the things in the house he took
only the letters and the photograph. The rest he left to the miller who,
at the smiling foreman's recommendation, had bought the house and all it
contained, to be taken down and carried away, at one-tenth of the real
value.

Recalling the feeling of regret at the loss of his property which he had
felt in Kousminski, Nekhludoff was surprised how he could have felt this
regret. Now he felt nothing but unceasing joy at the deliverance, and
a sensation of newness something like that which a traveller must
experience when discovering new countries.



CHAPTER X.

NEKHLUDOFF RETURNS TO TOWN.

The town struck Nekhludoff in a new and peculiar light on his return.
He came back in the evening, when the gas was lit, and drove from
the railway station to his house, where the rooms still smelt of
naphthaline. Agraphena Petrovna and Corney were both feeling tired and
dissatisfied, and had even had a quarrel over those things that seemed
made only to be aired and packed away. Nekhludoff's room was empty, but
not in order, and the way to it was blocked up with boxes, so that his
arrival evidently hindered the business which, owing to a curious kind
of inertia, was going on in this house. The evident folly of these
proceedings, in which he had once taken part, was so distasteful to
Nekhludoff after the impressions the misery of the life of the peasants
had made on him, that he decided to go to a hotel the next day, leaving
Agraphena Petrovna to put away the things as she thought fit until his
sister should come and finally dispose of everything in the house.

Nekhludoff left home early and chose a couple of rooms in a very modest
and not particularly clean lodging-house within easy reach of the
prison, and, having given orders that some of his things should be sent
there, he went to see the advocate. It was cold out of doors. After some
rainy and stormy weather it had turned out cold, as it often does in
spring. It was so cold that Nekhludoff felt quite chilly in his light
overcoat, and walked fast hoping to get warmer. His mind was filled
with thoughts of the peasants, the women, children, old men, and all the
poverty and weariness which he seemed to have seen for the first time,
especially the smiling, old-faced infant writhing with his calfless
little legs, and he could not help contrasting what was going on in the
town. Passing by the butchers', fishmongers', and clothiers' shops, he
was struck, as if he saw them for the first time, by the appearance
of the clean, well-fed shopkeepers, like whom you could not find one
peasant in the country. These men were apparently convinced that the
pains they took to deceive the people who did not know much about their
goods was not a useless but rather an important business. The coachmen
with their broad hips and rows of buttons down their sides, and the
door-keepers with gold cords on their caps, the servant-girls with their
aprons and curly fringes, and especially the smart isvostchiks with
the nape of their necks clean shaved, as they sat lolling back in their
traps, and examined the passers-by with dissolute and contemptuous
air, looked well fed. In all these people Nekhludoff could not now help
seeing some of these very peasants who had been driven into the town by
lack of land. Some of the peasants driven to the town had found means
of profiting by the conditions of town life and had become like the
gentlefolk and were pleased with their position; others were in a worse
position than they had been in the country and were more to be pitied
than the country people.

Such seemed the bootmakers Nekhludoff saw in the cellar, the pale,
dishevelled washerwomen with their thin, bare, arms ironing at an open
window, out of which streamed soapy steam; such the two house-painters
with their aprons, stockingless feet, all bespattered and smeared with
paint, whom Nekhludoff met--their weak, brown arms bared to above the
elbows--carrying a pailful of paint, and quarrelling with each other.
Their faces looked haggard and cross. The dark faces of the carters
jolting along in their carts bore the same expression, and so did the
faces of the tattered men and women who stood begging at the street
corners. The same kind of faces were to be seen at the open, windows of
the eating-houses which Nekhludoff passed. By the dirty tables on which
stood tea things and bottles, and between which waiters dressed in white
shirts were rushing hither and thither, sat shouting and singing red,
perspiring men with stupefied faces. One sat by the window with
lifted brows and pouting lips and fixed eyes as if trying to remember
something.

"And why are they all gathered here?" Nekhludoff thought, breathing
in together with the dust which the cold wind blew towards him the air
filled with the smell of rank oil and fresh paint.

In one street he met a row of carts loaded with something made of iron,
that rattled so on the uneven pavement that it made his ears and head
ache. He started walking still faster in order to pass the row of carts,
when he heard himself called by name. He stopped and saw an officer with
sharp pointed moustaches and shining face who sat in the trap of a swell
isvostchik and waved his hand in a friendly manner, his smile disclosing
unusually long, white teeth.

"Nekhludoff! Can it be you?"

Nekhludoff's first feeling was one of pleasure. "Ah, Schonbock!" he
exclaimed joyfully; but he knew the next moment that there was nothing
to be joyful about.

This was that Schonbock who had been in the house of Nekhludoff's aunts
that day, and whom Nekhludoff had quite lost out of sight, but about
whom he had heard that in spite of his debts he had somehow managed to
remain in the cavalry, and by some means or other still kept his place
among the rich. His gay, contented appearance corroborated this report.

"What a good thing that I have caught you. There is no one in town. Ah,
old fellow; you have grown old," he said, getting out of the trap and
moving his shoulders about. "I only knew you by your walk. Look here, we
must dine together. Is there any place where they feed one decently?"

"I don't think I can spare the time," Nekhludoff answered, thinking only
of how he could best get rid of his companion without hurting him.

"And what has brought you here?" he asked.

"Business, old fellow. Guardianship business. I am a guardian now. I am
managing Samanoff's affairs--the millionaire, you know. He has softening
of the brain, and he's got fifty-four thousand desiatins of land,"
he said, with peculiar pride, as if he had himself made all these
desiatins. "The affairs were terribly neglected. All the land was let
to the peasants. They did not pay anything. There were more than eighty
thousand roubles debts. I changed it all in one year, and have got 70
per cent. more out of it. What do you think of that?" he asked proudly.

Nekhludoff remembered having heard that this Schonbock, just because, he
had spent all he had, had attained by some special influence the post of
guardian to a rich old man who was squandering his property--and was now
evidently living by this guardianship.

"How am I to get rid of him without offending him?" thought Nekhludoff,
looking at this full, shiny face with the stiffened moustache and
listening to his friendly, good-humoured chatter about where one gets
fed best, and his bragging about his doings as a guardian.

"Well, then, where do we dine?"

"Really, I have no time to spare," said Nekhludoff, glancing at his
watch.

"Then, look here. To-night, at the races--will you be there?"

"No, I shall not be there."

"Do come. I have none of my own now, but I back Grisha's horses. You
remember; he has a fine stud. You'll come, won't you? And we'll have
some supper together."

"No, I cannot have supper with you either," said Nekhludoff with a
smile.

"Well, that's too bad! And where are you off to now? Shall I give you a
lift?"

"I am going to see an advocate, close to here round the corner."

"Oh, yes, of course. You have got something to do with the prisons--have
turned into a prisoners' mediator, I hear," said Schonbock, laughing.
"The Korchagins told me. They have left town already. What does it all
mean? Tell me."

"Yes, yes, it is quite true," Nekhludoff answered; "but I cannot tell
you about it in the street."

"Of course; you always were a crank. But you will come to the races?"

"No. I neither can nor wish to come. Please do not be angry with me."

"Angry? Dear me, no. Where do you live?" And suddenly his face became
serious, his eyes fixed, and he drew up his brows. He seemed to be
trying to remember something, and Nekhludoff noticed the same dull
expression as that of the man with the raised brows and pouting lips
whom he had seen at the window of the eating-house.

"How cold it is! Is it not? Have you got the parcels?" said Schonbock,
turning to the isvostchik.

"All right. Good-bye. I am very glad indeed to have met you," and
warmly pressing Nekhludoff's hand, he jumped into the trap and waved
his white-gloved hand in front of his shiny face, with his usual smile,
showing his exceptionally white teeth.

"Can I have also been like that?" Nekhludoff thought, as he continued
his way to the advocate's. "Yes, I wished to be like that, though I was
not quite like it. And I thought of living my life in that way."



CHAPTER XI.

AN ADVOCATE'S VIEWS ON JUDGES AND PROSECUTORS.

Nekhludoff was admitted by the advocate before his turn. The advocate at
once commenced to talk about the Menshoffs' case, which he had read with
indignation at the inconsistency of the accusation.

"This case is perfectly revolting," he said; "it is very likely that
the owner himself set fire to the building in order to get the insurance
money, and the chief thing is that there is no evidence to prove the
Menshoffs' guilt. There are no proofs whatever. It is all owing to the
special zeal of the examining magistrate and the carelessness of the
prosecutor. If they are tried here, and not in a provincial court, I
guarantee that they will be acquitted, and I shall charge nothing.
Now then, the next case, that of Theodosia Birukoff. The appeal to the
Emperor is written. If you go to Petersburg, you'd better take it with
you, and hand it in yourself, with a request of your own, or else they
will only make a few inquiries, and nothing will come of it. You must
try and get at some of the influential members of the Appeal Committee."

"Well, is this all?"

"No; here I have a letter . . . I see you have turned into a pipe--a
spout through which all the complaints of the prison are poured," said
the advocate, with a smile. "It is too much; you'll not be able to
manage it."

"No, but this is a striking case," said Nekhludoff, and gave a brief
outline of the case of a peasant who began to read the Gospels to the
peasants in the village, and to discuss them with his friends. The
priests regarded this as a crime and informed the authorities. The
magistrate examined him and the public prosecutor drew up an act of
indictment, and the law courts committed him for trial.

"This is really too terrible," Nekhludoff said. "Can it be true?"

"What are you surprised at?"

"Why, everything. I can understand the police-officer, who simply obeys
orders, but the prosecutor drawing up an act of that kind. An educated
man . . ."

"That is where the mistake lies, that we are in the habit of considering
that the prosecutors and the judges in general are some kind of liberal
persons. There was a time when they were such, but now it is quite
different. They are just officials, only troubled about pay-day.
They receive their salaries and want them increased, and there their
principles end. They will accuse, judge, and sentence any one you like."

"Yes; but do laws really exist that can condemn a man to Siberia for
reading the Bible with his friends?"

"Not only to be exiled to the less remote parts of Siberia, but even to
the mines, if you can only prove that reading the Bible they took the
liberty of explaining it to others not according to orders, and in this
way condemned the explanations given by the Church. Blaming the Greek
orthodox religion in the presence of the common people means, according
to Statute . . . the mines."

"Impossible!"

"I assure you it is so. I always tell these gentlemen, the judges,"
the advocate continued, "that I cannot look at them without gratitude,
because if I am not in prison, and you, and all of us, it is only owing
to their kindness. To deprive us of our privileges, and send us all to
the less remote parts of Siberia, would be an easy thing for them."

"Well, if it is so, and if everything depends on the Procureur and
others who can, at will, either enforce the laws or not, what are the
trials for?"

The advocate burst into a merry laugh. "You do put strange questions.
My dear sir, that is philosophy. Well, we might have a talk about that,
too. Could you come on Saturday? You will meet men of science, literary
men, and artists at my house, and then we might discuss these general
questions," said the advocate, pronouncing the words "general questions"
with ironical pathos. "You have met my wife? Do come."

"Thank you; I will try to," said Nekhludoff, and felt that he was saying
an untruth, and knew that if he tried to do anything it would be to keep
away froth the advocate's literary evening, and the circle of the men of
science, art, and literature.

The laugh with which the advocate met Nekhludoff's remark that trials
could have no meaning if the judges might enforce the laws or not,
according to their notion, and the tone with which he pronounced the
words "philosophy" and "general questions" proved to Nekhludoff how very
differently he and the advocate and, probably, the advocate's friends,
looked at things; and he felt that in spite of the distance that now
existed between himself and his former companions, Schonbock, etc.,
the difference between himself and the circle of the advocate and his
friends was still greater.



CHAPTER XII.

WHY THE PEASANTS FLOCK TO TOWN.

The prison was a long way off and it was getting late, so Nekhludoff
took an isvostchik. The isvostchik, a middle-aged man with an
intelligent and kind face, turned round towards Nekhludoff as they were
driving along one of the streets and pointed to a huge house that was
being built there.

"Just see what a tremendous house they have begun to build," he said, as
if he was partly responsible for the building of the house and proud of
it. The house was really immense and was being built in a very original
style. The strong pine beams of the scaffolding were firmly fixed
together with iron bands and a plank wall separated the building from
the street.

On the boards of the scaffolding workmen, all bespattered with plaster,
moved hither and thither like ants. Some were laying bricks, some hewing
stones, some carrying up the heavy hods and pails and bringing them down
empty. A fat and finely-dressed gentleman--probably the architect--stood
by the scaffolding, pointing upward and explaining something to a
contractor, a peasant from the Vladimir Government, who was respectfully
listening to him. Empty carts were coming out of the gate by which the
architect and the contractor were standing, and loaded ones were going
in. "And how sure they all are--those that do the work as well as those
that make them do it--that it ought to be; that while their wives at
home, who are with child, are labouring beyond their strength, and their
children with the patchwork caps, doomed soon to the cold grave, smile
with suffering and contort their little legs, they must be building this
stupid and useless palace for some stupid and useless person--one of
those who spoil and rob them," Nekhludoff thought, while looking at the
house.

"Yes, it is a stupid house," he said, uttering his thought out aloud.

"Why stupid?" replied the isvostchik, in an offended tone. "Thanks to
it, the people get work; it's not stupid."

"But the work is useless."

"It can't be useless, or why should it be done?" said the isvostchik.
"The people get bread by it."

Nekhludoff was silent, and it would have been difficult to talk because
of the clatter the wheels made.

When they came nearer the prison, and the isvostchik turned off the
paved on to the macadamised road, it became easier to talk, and he again
turned to Nekhludoff.

"And what a lot of these people are flocking to the town nowadays; it's
awful," he said, turning round on the box and pointing to a party of
peasant workmen who were coming towards them, carrying saws, axes,
sheepskins, coats, and bags strapped to their shoulders.

"More than in other years?" Nekhludoff asked.

"By far. This year every place is crowded, so that it's just terrible.
The employers just fling the workmen about like chaff. Not a job to be
got."

"Why is that?"

"They've increased. There's no room for them."

"Well, what if they have increased? Why do not they stay in the
village?"

"There's nothing for them to do in the village--no land to be had."

Nekhludoff felt as one does when touching a sore place. It feels as if
the bruised part was always being hit; yet it is only because the place
is sore that the touch is felt.

"Is it possible that the same thing is happening everywhere?" he
thought, and began questioning the isvostchik about the quantity of land
in his village, how much land the man himself had, and why he had left
the country.

"We have a desiatin per man, sir," he said. "Our family have three men's
shares of the land. My father and a brother are at home, and manage the
land, and another brother is serving in the army. But there's nothing to
manage. My brother has had thoughts of coming to Moscow, too."

"And cannot land be rented?"

"How's one to rent it nowadays? The gentry, such as they were, have
squandered all theirs. Men of business have got it all into their own
hands. One can't rent it from them. They farm it themselves. We have
a Frenchman ruling in our place; he bought the estate from our former
landlord, and won't let it--and there's an end of it."

"Who's that Frenchman?"

"Dufour is the Frenchman's name. Perhaps you've heard of him. He makes
wigs for the actors in the big theatre; it is a good business, so he's
prospering. He bought it from our lady, the whole of the estate, and now
he has us in his power; he just rides on us as he pleases. The Lord be
thanked, he is a good man himself; only his wife, a Russian, is such a
brute that--God have mercy on us. She robs the people. It's awful. Well,
here's the prison. Am I to drive you to the entrance? I'm afraid they'll
not let us do it, though."



CHAPTER XIII.

NURSE MASLOVA.

When he rang the bell at the front entrance Nekhludoff's heart stood
still with horror as he thought of the state he might find Maslova in
to-day, and at the mystery that he felt to be in her and in the people
that were collected in the prison. He asked the jailer who opened the
door for Maslova. After making the necessary inquiry the jailer informed
him that she was in the hospital. Nekhludoff went there. A kindly old
man, the hospital doorkeeper, let him in at once and, after asking
Nekhludoff whom he wanted, directed him to the children's ward. A young
doctor saturated with carbolic acid met Nekhludoff in the passage and
asked him severely what he wanted. This doctor was always making all
sorts of concessions to the prisoners, and was therefore continually
coming into conflict with the prison authorities and even with the head
doctor. Fearing lest Nekhludoff should demand something unlawful, and
wishing to show that he made no exceptions for any one, he pretended to
be cross. "There are no women here; it is the children's ward," he said.

"Yes, I know; but a prisoner has been removed here to be an assistant
nurse."

"Yes, there are two such here. Then whom do you want?"

"I am closely connected with one of them, named Maslova," Nekhludoff
answered, "and should like to speak to her. I am going to Petersburg to
hand in an appeal to the Senate about her case and should like to give
her this. It is only a photo," Nekhludoff said, taking an envelope out
of his pocket.

"All right, you may do that," said the doctor, relenting, and turning to
an old woman with a white apron, he told her to call the prisoner--Nurse
Maslova.

"Will you take a seat, or go into the waiting-room?"

"Thanks," said Nekhludoff, and profiting by the favourable change in
the manner of the doctor towards him asked how they were satisfied with
Maslova in the hospital.

"Oh, she is all right. She works fairly well, if you the conditions of
her former life into account. But here she is."

The old nurse came in at one of the doors, followed by Maslova, who wore
a blue striped dress, a white apron, a kerchief that quite covered her
hair. When she saw Nekhludoff her face flushed, and she stopped as if
hesitating, then frowned, and with downcast eyes went quickly towards
him along the strip of carpet in the middle of the passage. When she
came up to Nekhludoff she did not wish to give him her hand, and then
gave it, growing redder still. Nekhludoff had not seen her since the
day when she begged forgiveness for having been in a passion, and he
expected to find her the same as she was then. But to-day she was
quite different. There was something new in the expression of her face,
reserve and shyness, and, as it seemed to him, animosity towards him. He
told her what he had already said to the doctor, i.e., that he was going
to Petersburg, and he handed her the envelope with the photograph which
he had brought from Panovo.

"I found this in Panovo--it's an old photo; perhaps you would like it.
Take it."

Lifting her dark eyebrows, she looked at him with surprise in her
squinting eyes, as if asking, "What is this for?" took the photo
silently and put it in the bib of her apron.

"I saw your aunt there," said Nekhludoff.

"Did you?" she said, indifferently.

"Are you all right here?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Oh, yes, it's all right," she said.

"Not too difficult?"

"Oh, no. But I am not used to it yet."

"I am glad, for your sake. Anyhow, it is better than there."

"Than where--there?" she asked, her face flushing again.

"There--in the prison," Nekhludoff hurriedly answered.

"Why better?" she asked.

"I think the people are better. Here are none such as there must be
there."

"There are many good ones there," she said.

"I have been seeing about the Menshoffs, and hope they will be
liberated," said Nekhludoff.

"God grant they may. Such a splendid old woman," she said, again
repeating her opinion of the old woman, and slightly smiling.

"I am going to Petersburg to-day. Your case will come on soon, and I
hope the sentence will be repealed."

"Whether it is repealed or not won't matter now," she said.

"Why not now?"

"So," she said, looking with a quick, questioning glance into his eyes.

Nekhludoff understood the word and the look to mean that she wished
to know whether he still kept firm to his decision or had accepted her
refusal.

"I do not know why it does not matter to you," he said. "It certainly
does not matter as far as I am concerned whether you are acquitted or
not. I am ready to do what I told you in any case," he said decidedly.

She lifted her head and her black squinting eyes remained fixed on him
and beyond him, and her face beamed with joy. But the words she spoke
were very different from what her eyes said.

"You should not speak like that," she said.

"I am saying it so that you should know."

"Everything has been said about that, and there is no use speaking," she
said, with difficulty repressing a smile.

A sudden noise came from the hospital ward, and the sound of a child
crying.

"I think they are calling me," she said, and looked round uneasily.

"Well, good-bye, then," he said. She pretended not to see his extended
hand, and, without taking it, turned away and hastily walked along the
strip of carpet, trying to hide the triumph she felt.

"What is going on in her? What is she thinking? What does she feel? Does
she mean to prove me, or can she really not forgive me? Is it that she
cannot or that she will not express what she feels and thinks? Has she
softened or hardened?" he asked himself, and could find no answer. He
only knew that she had altered and that an important change was going on
in her soul, and this change united him not only to her but also to Him
for whose sake that change was being wrought. And this union brought on
a state of joyful animation and tenderness.

When she returned to the ward, in which there stood eight small beds,
Maslova began, in obedience to the nurse's order, to arrange one of the
beds; and, bending over too far with the sheet, she slipped and nearly
fell down.

A little convalescent boy with a bandaged neck, who was looking at her,
laughed. Maslova could no longer contain herself and burst into loud
laughter, and such contagious laughter that several of the children also
burst out laughing, and one of the sisters rebuked her angrily.

"What are you giggling at? Do you think you are where you used to be?
Go and fetch the food." Maslova obeyed and went where she was sent; but,
catching the eye of the bandaged boy who was not allowed to laugh, she
again burst out laughing.

Whenever she was alone Maslova again and again pulled the photograph
partly out of the envelope and looked at it admiringly; but only in the
evening when she was off duty and alone in the bedroom which she shared
with a nurse, did she take it quite out of the envelope and gaze long
at the faded yellow photograph, caressing with, her eyes every detail
of faces and clothing, the steps of the veranda, and the bushes which
served as a background to his and hers and his aunts' faces, and could
not cease from admiring especially herself--her pretty young face with
the curly hair round the forehead. She was so absorbed that she did not
hear her fellow-nurse come into the room.

"What is it that he's given you?" said the good-natured, fat nurse,
stooping over the photograph.

"Who's this? You?"

"Who else?" said Maslova, looking into her companion's face with a
smile.

"And who's this?"

"Himself."

"And is this his mother?"

"No, his aunt. Would you not have known me?"

"Never. The whole face is altered. Why, it must be 10 years since then."

"Not years, but a lifetime," said Maslova. And suddenly her animation
went, her face grew gloomy, and a deep line appeared between her brows.

"Why so? Your way of life must have been an easy one."

"Easy, indeed," Maslova reiterated, closing her eyes and shaking her
head. "It is hell."

"Why, what makes it so?"

"What makes it so! From eight till four in the morning, and every night
the same!"

"Then why don't they give it up?"

"They can't give it up if they want to. But what's the use of talking?"
Maslova said, jumping up and throwing the photograph into the drawer of
the table. And with difficulty repressing angry tears, she ran out into
the passage and slammed the door.

While looking at the group she imagined herself such as she was there
and dreamt of her happiness then and of the possibility of happiness
with him now. But her companion's words reminded her of what she was now
and what she had been, and brought back all the horrors of that life,
which she had felt but dimly, and not allowed herself to realise.

It was only now that the memory of all those terrible nights came
vividly back to her, especially one during the carnival when she was
expecting a student who had promised to buy her out. She remembered how
she--wearing her low necked silk dress stained with wine, a red bow in
her untidy hair, wearied, weak, half tipsy, having seen her visitors
off, sat down during an interval in the dancing by the piano beside the
bony pianiste with the blotchy face, who played the accompaniments
to the violin, and began complaining of her hard fate; and how this
pianiste said that she, too, was feeling how heavy her position was and
would like to change it; and how Clara suddenly came up to them; and how
they all three decided to change their life. They thought that the night
was over, and were about to go away, when suddenly the noise of tipsy
voices was heard in the ante-room. The violinist played a tune and the
pianiste began hammering the first figure of a quadrille on the piano,
to the tune of a most merry Russian song. A small, perspiring man,
smelling of spirits, with a white tie and swallow-tail coat, which he
took off after the first figure, came up to her, hiccoughing, and
caught her up, while another fat man, with a beard, and also wearing a
dress-coat (they had come straight from a ball) caught Clara up, and for
a long time they turned, danced, screamed, drank. . . . And so it
went on for another year, and another, and a third. How could she help
changing? And he was the cause of it all. And, suddenly, all her former
bitterness against him reawoke; she wished to scold, to reproach him.
She regretted having neglected the opportunity of repeating to him once
more that she knew him, and would not give in to him--would not let him
make use of her spiritually as he had done physically.

And she longed for drink in order to stifle the feeling of pity to
herself and the useless feeling of reproach to him. And she would have
broken her word if she had been inside the prison. Here she could not
get any spirits except by applying to the medical assistant, and she was
afraid of him because he made up to her, and intimate relations with
men were disgusting to her now. After sitting a while on a form in the
passage she returned to her little room, and without paying any heed to
her companion's words, she wept for a long time over her wrecked life.



CHAPTER XIV.

AN ARISTOCRATIC CIRCLE.

Nekhludoff had four matters to attend to in Petersburg. The first was
the appeal to the Senate in Maslova's case; the second, to hand in
Theodosia Birukoff's petition to the committee; the third, to comply
with Vera Doukhova's requests--i.e., try to get her friend Shoustova
released from prison, and get permission for a mother to visit her son
in prison. Vera Doukhova had written to him about this, and he was
going to the Gendarmerie Office to attend to these two matters, which he
counted as one.

The fourth matter he meant to attend to was the case of some sectarians
who had been separated from their families and exiled to the Caucasus
because they read and discussed the Gospels. It was not so much to
them as to himself he had promised to do all he could to clear up this
affair.

Since his last visit to Maslennikoff, and especially since he had been
in the country, Nekhludoff had not exactly formed a resolution but felt
with his whole nature a loathing for that society in which he had lived
till then, that society which so carefully hides the sufferings of
millions in order to assure ease and pleasure to a small number of
people, that the people belonging to this society do not and cannot
see these sufferings, nor the cruelty and wickedness of their life.
Nekhludoff could no longer move in this society without feeling ill at
ease and reproaching himself. And yet all the ties of relationship and
friendship, and his own habits, were drawing him back into this society.
Besides, that which alone interested him now, his desire to help Maslova
and the other sufferers, made it necessary to ask for help and service
from persons belonging to that society, persons whom he not only could
not respect, but who often aroused in him indignation and a feeling of
contempt.

When he came to Petersburg and stopped at his aunt's--his mother's
sister, the Countess Tcharsky, wife of a former minister--Nekhludoff at
once found himself in the very midst of that aristocratic circle which
had grown so foreign to him. This was very unpleasant, but there was no
possibility of getting out of it. To put up at an hotel instead of at
his aunt's house would have been to offend his aunt, and, besides, his
aunt had important connections and might be extremely useful in all
these matters he meant to attend to.

"What is this I hear about you? All sorts of marvels," said the Countess
Katerina Ivanovna Tcharsky, as she gave him his coffee immediately after
his arrival. "_Vous posez pour un Howard_. Helping criminals, going the
round of prisons, setting things right."

"Oh, no. I never thought of it."

"Why not? It is a good thing, only there seems to be some romantic story
connected with it. Let us hear all about it."

Nekhludoff told her the whole truth about his relations to Maslova.

"Yes, yes, I remember your poor mother telling me about it. That was
when you were staying with those old women. I believe they wished to
marry you to their ward (the Countess Katerina Ivanovna had always
despised Nekhludoff's aunts on his father's side). So it's she. _Elle
est encore jolie?_"

Katerina Ivanovna was a strong, bright, energetic, talkative woman of
60. She was tall and very stout, and had a decided black moustache
on her lip. Nekhludoff was fond of her and had even as a child been
infected by her energy and mirth.

"No, ma tante, that's at an end. I only wish to help her, because she is
innocently accused. I am the cause of it and the cause of her fate being
what it is. I feel it my duty to do all I can for her."

"But what is this I have heard about your intention of marrying her?"

"Yes, it was my intention, but she does not wish it."

Katerina Ivanovna looked at her nephew with raised brows and drooping
eyeballs, in silent amazement. Suddenly her face changed, and with a
look of pleasure she said: "Well, she is wiser than you. Dear me, you
are a fool. And you would have married her?"

"Most certainly."

"After her having been what she was?"

"All the more, since I was the cause of it."

"Well, you are a simpleton," said his aunt, repressing a smile, "a
terrible simpleton; but it is just because you are such a terrible
simpleton that I love you." She repeated the word, evidently liking it,
as it seemed to correctly convey to her mind the idea of her nephew's
moral state. "Do you know--What a lucky chance. Aline has a wonderful
home--the Magdalene Home. I went there once. They are terribly
disgusting. After that I had to pray continually. But Aline is devoted
to it, body and soul, so we shall place her there--yours, I mean."

"But she is condemned to Siberia. I have come on purpose to appeal about
it. This is one of my requests to you."

"Dear me, and where do you appeal to in this case?"

"To the Senate."

"Ah, the Senate! Yes, my dear Cousin Leo is in the Senate, but he is in
the heraldry department, and I don't know any of the real ones. They are
all some kind of Germans--Gay, Fay, Day--tout l'alphabet, or else all
sorts of Ivanoffs, Simenoffs, Nikitines, or else Ivanenkos, Simonenkos,
Nikitenkos, pour varier. Des gens de l'autre monde. Well, it is all the
same. I'll tell my husband, he knows them. He knows all sorts of people.
I'll tell him, but you will have to explain, he never understands me.
Whatever I may say, he always maintains he does not understand it. C'est
un parti pris, every one understands but only not he."

At this moment a footman with stockinged legs came in with a note on a
silver platter.

"There now, from Aline herself. You'll have a chance of hearing
Kiesewetter."

"Who is Kiesewetter?"

"Kiesewetter? Come this evening, and you will find out who he is. He
speaks in such a way that the most hardened criminals sink on their
knees and weep and repent."

The Countess Katerina Ivanovna, however strange it may seem, and however
little it seemed in keeping with the rest of her character, was a
staunch adherent to that teaching which holds that the essence of
Christianity lies in the belief in redemption. She went to meetings
where this teaching, then in fashion, was being preached, and assembled
the "faithful" in her own house. Though this teaching repudiated all
ceremonies, icons, and sacraments, Katerina Ivanovna had icons in every
room, and one on the wall above her bed, and she kept all that the
Church prescribed without noticing any contradiction in that.

"There now; if your Magdalene could hear him she would be converted,"
said the Countess. "Do stay at home to-night; you will hear him. He is a
wonderful man."

"It does not interest me, ma tante."

"But I tell you that it is interesting, and you must come home. Now you
may go. What else do you want of me? _Videz votre sac_."

"The next is in the fortress."

"In the fortress? I can give you a note for that to the Baron
Kriegsmuth. _Cest un tres brave homme_. Oh, but you know him; he was a
comrade of your father's. _Il donne dans le spiritisme_. But that does
not matter, he is a good fellow. What do you want there?"

"I want to get leave for a mother to visit her son who is imprisoned
there. But I was told that this did not depend on Kriegsmuth but on
Tcherviansky."

"I do not like Tcherviansky, but he is Mariette's husband; we might ask
her. She will do it for me. _Elle est tres gentille_."

"I have also to petition for a woman who is imprisoned there without
knowing what for."

"No fear; she knows well enough. They all know it very well, and it
serves them right, those short-haired [many advanced women wear their
hair short, like men] ones."

"We do not know whether it serves them right or not. But they suffer.
You are a Christian and believe in the Gospel teaching and yet you are
so pitiless."

"That has nothing to do with it. The Gospels are the Gospels, but what
is disgusting remains disgusting. It would be worse if I pretended to
love Nihilists, especially short-haired women Nihilists, when I cannot
bear them."

"Why can you not bear them?"

"You ask why, after the 1st of March?" [The Emperor Alexander II was
killed on the first of March, old style.]

"They did not all take part in it on the 1st of March."

"Never mind; they should not meddle with what is no business of theirs.
It's not women's business."

"Yet you consider that Mariette may take part in business."

"Mariette? Mariette is Mariette, and these are goodness knows what. Want
to teach everybody."

"Not to teach but simply to help the people."

"One knows whom to help and whom not to help without them."

"But the peasants are in great need. I have just returned from the
country. Is it necessary, that the peasants should work to the very
limits of their strength and never have sufficient to eat while we are
living in the greatest luxury?" said Nekhludoff, involuntarily led on by
his aunt's good nature into telling her what he was in his thoughts.

"What do you want, then? That I should work and not eat anything?"

"No, I do not wish you not to eat. I only wish that we should all work
and all eat." He could not help smiling as he said it.

Again raising her brow and drooping her eyeballs his aunt looked at him
curiously. "_Mon cher vous finirez mal_," she said.

Just then the general, and former minister, Countess Tcharsky's husband,
a tall, broad-shouldered man, came into the room.

"Ah, Dmitri, how d'you do?" he said, turning his freshly-shaved cheek to
Nekhludoff to be kissed. "When did you get here?" And he silently kissed
his wife on the forehead.

"_Non il est impayable_," the Countess said, turning to her husband.
"He wants me to go and wash clothes and live on potatoes. He is an awful
fool, but all the same do what he is going to ask of you. A terrible
simpleton," she added. "Have you heard? Kamenskaya is in such despair
that they fear for her life," she said to her husband. "You should go
and call there."

"Yes; it is dreadful," said her husband.

"Go along, then, and talk to him. I must write some letters."

Hardly had Nekhludoff stepped into the room next the drawing-room than
she called him back.

"Shall I write to Mariette, then?"

"Please, ma tante."

"I shall leave a blank for what you want to say about the short-haired
one, and she will give her husband his orders, and he'll do it. Do not
think me wicked; they are all so disgusting, your prologues, but _je
ne leur veux pas de mal_, bother them. Well, go, but be sure to stay at
home this evening to hear Kiesewetter, and we shall have some prayers.
And if only you do not resist _cela vous fera beaucoup de bien_. I
know your poor mother and all of you were always very backward in these
things."



CHAPTER XV.

AN AVERAGE STATESMAN.

Count Ivan Michaelovitch had been a minister, and was a man of strong
convictions. The convictions of Count Ivan Michaelovitch consisted in
the belief that, just as it was natural for a bird to feed on worms,
to be clothed in feathers and down, and to fly in the air, so it
was natural for him to feed on the choicest and most expensive food,
prepared by highly-paid cooks, to wear the most comfortable and most
expensive clothing, to drive with the best and fastest horses, and that,
therefore, all these things should be ready found for him. Besides this,
Count Ivan Michaelovitch considered that the more money he could get out
of the treasury by all sorts of means, the more orders he had, including
different diamond insignia of something or other, and the oftener he
spoke to highly-placed individuals of both sexes, so much the better it
was.

All the rest Count Ivan Michaelovitch considered insignificant and
uninteresting beside these dogmas. All the rest might be as it was, or
just the reverse. Count Ivan Michaelovitch lived and acted according
to these lights for 40 years, and at the end of 40 years reached the
position of a Minister of State. The chief qualities that enabled
Count Ivan Michaelovitch to reach this position were his capacity of
understanding the meaning of documents and laws and of drawing up,
though clumsily, intelligible State papers, and of spelling them
correctly; secondly, his very stately appearance, which enabled him,
when necessary, to seem not only extremely proud, but unapproachable
and majestic, while at other times he could be abjectly and almost
passionately servile; thirdly, the absence of any general principles
or rules, either of personal or administrative morality, which made it
possible for him either to agree or disagree with anybody according to
what was wanted at the time. When acting thus his only endeavour was
to sustain the appearance of good breeding and not to seem too plainly
inconsistent. As for his actions being moral or not, in themselves, or
whether they were going to result in the highest welfare or greatest
evil for the whole of the Russian Empire, or even the entire world, that
was quite indifferent to him. When he became minister, not only
those dependent on him (and there were great many of them) and people
connected with him, but many strangers and even he himself were
convinced that he was a very clever statesman. But after some time had
elapsed and he had done nothing and had nothing to show, and when in
accordance with the law of the struggle for existence others, like
himself, who had learnt to write and understand documents, stately and
unprincipled officials, had displaced him, he turned out to be not
only far from clever but very limited and badly educated. Though
self-assured, his views hardly reaching the level of those in the
leading articles of the Conservative papers, it became apparent
that there was nothing in him to distinguish him from those other
badly-educated and self-assured officials who had pushed him out, and
he himself saw it. But this did not shake his conviction that he had to
receive a great deal of money out of the Treasury every year, and new
decorations for his dress clothes. This conviction was so firm that no
one had the pluck to refuse these things to him, and he received yearly,
partly in form of a pension, partly as a salary for being a member in
a Government institution and chairman of all sorts of committees
and councils, several tens of thousands of roubles, besides the
right--highly prized by him--of sewing all sorts of new cords to his
shoulders and trousers, and ribbons to wear under and enamel stars
to fix on to his dress coat. In consequence of this Count Ivan
Michaelovitch had very high connections.

Count Ivan Michaelovitch listened to Nekhludoff as he was wont to listen
to the reports of the permanent secretary of his department, and, having
heard him, said he would give him two notes, one to the Senator Wolff,
of the Appeal Department. "All sorts of things are reported of him, but
dans tous les cas c'est un homme tres comme ii faut," he said. "He is
indebted to me, and will do all that is possible." The other note Count
Ivan Michaelovitch gave Nekhludoff was to an influential member of
the Petition Committee. The story of Theodosia Birukoff as told by
Nekhludoff interested him very much. When Nekhludoff said that he
thought of writing to the Empress, the Count replied that it certainly
was a very touching story, and might, if occasion presented itself, he
told her, but he could not promise. Let the petition be handed in in due
form.

Should there be an opportunity, and if a petit comite were called on
Thursday, he thought he would tell her the story. As soon as Nekhludoff
had received these two notes, and a note to Mariette from his aunt, he
at once set off to these different places.

First he went to Mariette's. He had known her as a half-grown girl, the
daughter of an aristocratic but not wealthy family, and had heard how
she had married a man who was making a career, whom Nekhludoff had heard
badly spoken of; and, as usual, he felt it hard to ask a favour of a man
he did not esteem. In these cases he always felt an inner dissension
and dissatisfaction, and wavered whether to ask the favour or not, and
always resolved to ask. Besides feeling himself in a false position
among those to whose set he no longer regarded himself as belonging, who
yet regarded him as belonging to them, he felt himself getting into the
old accustomed rut, and in spite of himself fell into the thoughtless
and immoral tone that reigned in that circle. He felt that from the
first, with his aunt, he involuntarily fell into a bantering tone while
talking about serious matters.

Petersburg in general affected him with its usual physically
invigorating and mentally dulling effect.

Everything so clean, so comfortably well-arranged and the people so
lenient in moral matters, that life seemed very easy.

A fine, clean, and polite isvostchik drove him past fine, clean, polite
policemen, along the fine, clean, watered streets, past fine, clean
houses to the house in which Mariette lived. At the front door stood
a pair of English horses, with English harness, and an English-looking
coachman on the box, with the lower part of his face shaved, proudly
holding a whip. The doorkeeper, dressed in a wonderfully clean livery,
opened the door into the hall, where in still cleaner livery with gold
cords stood the footman with his splendid whiskers well combed out,
and the orderly on duty in a brand-new uniform. "The general does not
receive, and the generaless does not receive either. She is just going
to drive out."

Nekhludoff took out Katerina Ivanovna's letter, and going up to a table
on which lay a visitors' book, began to write that he was sorry not to
have been able to see any one; when the footman went up the staircase
the doorkeeper went out and shouted to the coachman, and the orderly
stood up rigid with his arms at his sides following with his eyes a
little, slight lady, who was coming down the stairs with rapid steps not
in keeping with all the grandeur.

Mariette had a large hat on, with feathers, a black dress and cape, and
new black gloves. Her face was covered by a veil.

When she saw Nekhludoff she lifted the veil off a very pretty face with
bright eyes that looked inquiringly at him.

"Ah, Prince Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff," she said, with a soft,
pleasant voice. "I should have known--"

"What! you even remember my name?"

"I should think so. Why, I and my sisters have even been in love with
you," she said, in French. "But, dear me, how you have altered. Oh, what
a pity I have to go out. But let us go up again," she said and stopped
hesitatingly. Then she looked at the clock. "No, I can't. I am going to
Kamenskaya's to attend a mass for the dead. She is terribly afflicted."

"Who is this Kamenskaya?"

"Have you not heard? Her son was killed in a duel. He fought Posen. He
was the only son. Terrible I The mother is very much afflicted."

"Yes. I have heard of it."

"No, I had better go, and you must come again, to-night or to-morrow,"
she said, and went to the door with quick, light steps.

"I cannot come to-night," he said, going out after her; "but I have
a request to make you," and he looked at the pair of bays that were
drawing up to the front door.

"What is this?"

"This is a letter from aunt to you," said Nekhludoff, handing her
a narrow envelope, with a large crest. "You'll find all about it in
there."

"I know Countess Katerina Ivanovna thinks I have some influence with my
husband in business matters. She is mistaken. I can do nothing and do
not like to interfere. But, of course, for you I am willing to be false
to my principle. What is this business about?" she said, searching in
vain for her pocket with her little black gloved hand.

"There is a girl imprisoned in the fortress, and she is ill and
innocent."

"What is her name?"

"Lydia Shoustova. It's in the note."

"All right; I'll see what I can do," she said, and lightly jumped into
her little, softly upholstered, open carriage, its brightly-varnished
splash-guards glistening in the sunshine, and opened her parasol. The
footman got on the box and gave the coachman a sign. The carriage moved,
but at that moment she touched the coachman with her parasol and the
slim-legged beauties, the bay mares, stopped, bending their beautiful
necks and stepping from foot to foot.

"But you must come, only, please, without interested motives," and she
looked at him with a smile, the force of which she well knew, and, as if
the performance over and she were drawing the curtain, she dropped
the veil over her face again. "All right," and she again touched the
coachman.

Nekhludoff raised his hat, and the well-bred bays, slightly snorting,
set off, their shoes clattering on the pavement, and the carriage rolled
quickly and smoothly on its new rubber tyres, giving a jump only now and
then over some unevenness of the road.



CHAPTER XVI.

AN UP-TO-DATE SENATOR.

When Nekhludoff remembered the smiles that had passed between him and
Mariette, he shook his head.

"You have hardly time to turn round before you are again drawn into
this life," he thought, feeling that discord and those doubts which the
necessity to curry favour from people he did not esteem caused.

After considering where to go first, so as not to have to retrace his
steps, Nekhludoff set off for the Senate. There he was shown into the
office where he found a great many very polite and very clean officials
in the midst of a magnificent apartment. Maslova's petition was received
and handed on to that Wolf, to whom Nekhludoff had a letter from his
uncle, to be examined and reported on.

"There will be a meeting of the Senate this week," the official said to
Nekhludoff, "but Maslova's case will hardly come before that meeting."

"It might come before the meeting on Wednesday, by special request," one
of the officials remarked.

During the time Nekhludoff waited in the office, while some information
was being taken, he heard that the conversation in the Senate was all
about the duel, and he heard a detailed account of how a young man,
Kaminski, had been killed. It was here he first heard all the facts of
the case which was exciting the interest of all Petersburg. The story
was this: Some officers were eating oysters and, as usual, drinking very
much, when one of them said something ill-natured about the regiment to
which Kaminski belonged, and Kaminski called him a liar. The other hit
Kaminski. The next day they fought. Kaminski was wounded in the stomach
and died two hours later. The murderer and the seconds were arrested,
but it was said that though they were arrested and in the guardhouse
they would be set free in a fortnight.

From the Senate Nekhludoff drove to see an influential member of the
petition Committee, Baron Vorobioff, who lived in a splendid house
belonging to the Crown. The doorkeeper told Nekhludoff in a severe tone
that the Baron could not be seen except on his reception days; that he
was with His Majesty the Emperor to-day, and the next day he would again
have to deliver a report. Nekhludoff left his uncle's letter with the
doorkeeper and went on to see the Senator Wolf. Wolf had just had his
lunch, and was as usual helping digestion by smoking a cigar and pacing
up and down the room, when Nekhludoff came in. Vladimir Vasilievitch
Wolf was certainly _un homme tres comme il faut_, and prized this
quality very highly, and from that elevation he looked down at everybody
else. He could not but esteem this quality of his very highly, because
it was thanks to it alone that he had made a brilliant career, the very
career he desired, i.e., by marriage he obtained a fortune which brought
him in 18,000 roubles a year, and by his own exertions the post of a
senator. He considered himself not only _un homme tres comme il faut_,
but also a man of knightly honour. By honour he understood not accepting
secret bribes from private persons. But he did not consider it dishonest
to beg money for payment of fares and all sorts of travelling expenses
from the Crown, and to do anything the Government might require of him
in return. To ruin hundreds of innocent people, to cause them to be
imprisoned, to be exiled because of their love for their people and the
religion of their fathers, as he had done in one of the governments of
Poland when he was governor there. He did not consider it dishonourable,
but even thought it a noble, manly and patriotic action. Nor did he
consider it dishonest to rob his wife and sister-in-law, as he had
done, but thought it a wise way of arranging his family life. His family
consisted of his commonplace wife, his sister-in-law, whose fortune
he had appropriated by selling her estate and putting the money to his
account, and his meek, frightened, plain daughter, who lived a lonely,
weary life, from which she had lately begun to look for relaxation in
evangelicism, attending meetings at Aline's, and the Countess Katerina
Ivanovna. Wolf's son, who had grown a beard at the age of 15, and had at
that age begun to drink and lead a depraved life, which he continued to
do till the age of 20, when he was turned out by his father because
he never finished his studies, moved in a low set and made debts which
committed the father. The father had once paid a debt of 250 roubles for
his son, then another of 600 roubles, but warned the son that he did it
for the last time, and that if the son did not reform he would be turned
out of the house and all further intercourse between him and his family
would he put a stop to. The son did not reform, but made a debt of a
thousand roubles, and took the liberty of telling his father that life
at home was a torment anyhow. Then Wolf declared to his son that he
might go where he pleased--that he was no son of his any longer. Since
then Wolf pretended he had no son, and no one at home dared speak to him
about his son, and Vladimir Vasilievitch Wolf was firmly convinced that
he had arranged his family life in the best way. Wolf stopped pacing
up and down his study, and greeted Nekhludoff with a friendly though
slightly ironical smile. This was his way of showing how comme il faut
he was, and how superior to the majority of men. He read the note which
Nekhludoff handed to him.

"Please take a seat, and excuse me if I continue to walk up and down,
with your permission," he said, putting his hands into his coat pockets,
and began again to walk with light, soft steps across his large, quietly
and stylishly furnished study. "Very pleased to make your acquaintance
and of course very glad to do anything that Count Ivan Michaelovitch
wishes," he said, blowing the fragrant blue smoke out of his mouth and
removing his cigar carefully so as not to drop the ash.

"I should only like to ask that the case might come on soon, so that
if the prisoner has to go to Siberia she might set off early," said
Nekhludoff.

"Yes, yes, with one of the first steamers from Nijni. I know," said
Wolf, with his patronising smile, always knowing in advance whatever one
wanted to tell him.

"What is the prisoner's name?"

"Maslova."

Wolf went up to the table and looked at a paper that lay on a piece of
cardboard among other business papers.

"Yes, yes. Maslova. All right, I will ask the others. We shall hear the
case on Wednesday."

"Then may I telegraph to the advocate?"

"The advocate! What's that for? But if you like, why not?"

"The causes for appeal may be insufficient," said Nekhludoff, "but
I think the case will show that the sentence was passed owing to a
misunderstanding."

"Yes, yes; it may be so, but the Senate cannot decide the case on its
merits," said Wolf, looking seriously at the ash of his cigar. "The
Senate only considers the exactness of the application of the laws and
their right interpretation."

"But this seems to me to be an exceptional case."

"I know, I know! All cases are exceptional. We shall do our duty. That's
all." The ash was still holding on, but had began breaking, and was in
danger of falling.

"Do you often come to Petersburg?" said Wolf, holding his cigar so that
the ash should not fall. But the ash began to shake, and Wolf carefully
carried it to the ashpan, into which it fell.

"What a terrible thing this is with regard to Kaminski," he said. "A
splendid young man. The only son. Especially the mother's position," he
went on, repeating almost word for word what every one in Petersburg
was at that time saying about Kaminski. Wolf spoke a little about the
Countess Katerina Ivanovna and her enthusiasm for the new religious
teaching, which he neither approved nor disapproved of, but which was
evidently needless to him who was so comme il faut, and then rang the
bell.

Nekhludoff bowed.

"If it is convenient, come and dine on Wednesday, and I will give you a
decisive answer," said Wolf, extending his hand.

It was late, and Nekhludoff returned to his aunt's.



CHAPTER XVII.

COUNTESS KATERINA IVANOVNA'S DINNER PARTY.

Countess Katerina Ivanovna's dinner hour was half-past seven, and the
dinner was served in a new manner that Nekhludoff had not yet seen
anywhere. After they had placed the dishes on the table the waiters left
the room and the diners helped themselves. The men would not let the
ladies take the trouble of moving, and, as befitted the stronger sex,
they manfully took on themselves the burden of putting the food on
the ladies' plates and of filling their glasses. When one course was
finished, the Countess pressed the button of an electric bell fitted
to the table and the waiters stepped in noiselessly and quickly carried
away the dishes, changed the plates, and brought in the next course.
The dinner was very refined, the wines very costly. A French chef was
working in the large, light kitchens, with two white-clad assistants.
There were six persons at dinner, the Count and Countess, their son
(a surly officer in the Guards who sat with his elbows on the table),
Nekhludoff, a French lady reader, and the Count's chief steward, who
had come up from the country. Here, too, the conversation was about the
duel, and opinions were given as to how the Emperor regarded the case.
It was known that the Emperor was very much grieved for the mother's
sake, and all were grieved for her, and as it was also known that the
Emperor did not mean to be very severe to the murderer, who defended
the honour of his uniform, all were also lenient to the officer who had
defended the honour of his uniform. Only the Countess Katerina Ivanovna,
with her free thoughtlessness, expressed her disapproval.

"They get drunk, and kill unobjectionable young men. I should not
forgive them on any account," she said.

"Now, that's a thing I cannot understand," said the Count.

"I know that you never can understand what I say," the Countess began,
and turning to Nekhludoff, she added:

"Everybody understands except my husband. I say I am sorry for the
mother, and I do not wish him to be contented, having killed a man."
Then her son, who had been silent up to then, took the murderer's part,
and rudely attacked his mother, arguing that an officer could not behave
in any other way, because his fellow-officers would condemn him and turn
him out of the regiment. Nekhludoff listened to the conversation without
joining in. Having been an officer himself, he understood, though he
did not agree with, young Tcharsky's arguments, and at the same time
he could not help contrasting the fate of the officer with that of a
beautiful young convict whom he had seen in the prison, and who was
condemned to the mines for having killed another in a fight. Both had
turned murderers through drunkenness. The peasant had killed a man in
a moment of irritation, and he was parted from his wife and family, had
chains on his legs, and his head shaved, and was going to hard labour in
Siberia, while the officer was sitting in a fine room in the guardhouse,
eating a good dinner, drinking good wine, and reading books, and would
be set free in a day or two to live as he had done before, having only
become more interesting by the affair. Nekhludoff said what he had been
thinking, and at first his aunt, Katerina Ivanovna, seemed to agree with
him, but at last she became silent as the rest had done, and Nekhludoff
felt that he had committed something akin to an impropriety. In the
evening, soon after dinner, the large hall, with high-backed carved
chairs arranged in rows as for a meeting, and an armchair next to a
little table, with a bottle of water for the speaker, began to fill
with people come to hear the foreigner, Kiesewetter, preach. Elegant
equipages stopped at the front entrance. In the hall sat richly-dressed
ladies in silks and velvets and lace, with false hair and false busts
and drawn-in waists, and among them men in uniform and evening dress,
and about five persons of the common class, i.e., two men-servants, a
shop-keeper, a footman, and a coachman. Kiesewetter, a thick-set, grisly
man, spoke English, and a thin young girl, with a pince-nez, translated
it into Russian promptly and well. He was saying that our sins were so
great, the punishment for them so great and so unavoidable, that it was
impossible to live anticipating such punishment. "Beloved brothers and
sisters, let us for a moment consider what we are doing, how we are
living, how we have offended against the all-loving Lord, and how
we make Christ suffer, and we cannot but understand that there is no
forgiveness possible for us, no escape possible, that we are all doomed
to perish. A terrible fate awaits us---everlasting torment," he said,
with tears in his trembling voice. "Oh, how can we be saved, brothers?
How can we be saved from this terrible, unquenchable fire? The house is
in flames; there is no escape."

He was silent for a while, and real tears flowed down his cheeks. It
was for about eight years that each time when he got to this part of his
speech, which he himself liked so well, he felt a choking in his throat
and an irritation in his nose, and the tears came in his eyes, and these
tears touched him still more. Sobs were heard in the room. The Countess
Katerina Ivanovna sat with her elbows on an inlaid table, leaning her
head on her hands, and her shoulders were shaking. The coachman looked
with fear and surprise at the foreigner, feeling as if he was about to
run him down with the pole of his carriage and the foreigner would
not move out of his way. All sat in positions similar to that Katerina
Ivanovna had assumed. Wolf's daughter, a thin, fashionably-dressed girl,
very like her father, knelt with her face in her hands.

The orator suddenly uncovered his face, and smiled a very real-looking
smile, such as actors express joy with, and began again with a sweet,
gentle voice:

"Yet there is a way to be saved. Here it is--a joyful, easy way. The
salvation is the blood shed for us by the only son of God, who gave
himself up to torments for our sake. His sufferings, His blood, will
save us. Brothers and sisters," he said, again with tears in his voice,
"let us praise the Lord, who has given His only begotten son for the
redemption of mankind. His holy blood . . ."

Nekhludoff felt so deeply disgusted that he rose silently, and frowning
and keeping back a groan of shame, he left on tiptoe, and went to his
room.



CHAPTER XVIII.

OFFICIALDOM.

Hardly had Nekhludoff finished dressing the next morning, just as he
was about to go down, the footman brought him a card from the Moscow
advocate. The advocate had come to St. Petersburg on business of his
own, and was going to be present when Maslova's case was examined in the
Senate, if that would be soon. The telegram sent by Nekhludoff crossed
him on the way. Having found out from Nekhludoff when the case was going
to be heard, and which senators were to be present, he smiled. "Exactly,
all the three types of senators," he said. "Wolf is a Petersburg
official; Skovorodnikoff is a theoretical, and Bay a practical lawyer,
and therefore the most alive of them all," said the advocate. "There is
most hope of him. Well, and how about the Petition Committee?"

"Oh, I'm going to Baron Vorobioff to-day. I could not get an audience
with him yesterday."

"Do you know why he is _Baron_ Vorobioff?" said the advocate, noticing
the slightly ironical stress that Nekhludoff put on this foreign title,
followed by so very Russian a surname.

"That was because the Emperor Paul rewarded the grandfather--I think he
was one of the Court footmen--by giving him this title. He managed to
please him in some way, so he made him a baron. 'It's my wish, so don't
gainsay me!' And so there's a _Baron_ Vorobioff, and very proud of the
title. He is a dreadful old humbug."

"Well, I'm going to see him," said Nekhludoff.

"That's good; we can go together. I shall give you a lift."

As they were going to start, a footman met Nekhludoff in the ante-room,
and handed him a note from Mariette:

_Pour vous faire plaisir, f'ai agi tout a fait contre mes principes et
j'ai intercede aupres de mon mari pour votre protegee. Il se trouve
que cette personne pout etre relaxee immediatement. Mon mari a ecrit au
commandant. Venez donc disinterestedly. Je vous attends._

                          _M._

"Just fancy!" said Nekhludoff to the advocate. "Is this not dreadful?
A woman whom they are keeping in solitary confinement for seven months
turns out to be quite innocent, and only a word was needed to get her
released."

"That's always so. Well, anyhow, you have succeeded in getting what you
wanted."

"Yes, but this success grieves me. Just think what must be going on
there. Why have they been keeping her?"

"Oh, it's best not to look too deeply into it. Well, then, I shall give
you a lift, if I may," said the advocate, as they left the house, and
a fine carriage that the advocate had hired drove up to the door. "It's
Baron Vorobioff you are going to see?"

The advocate gave the driver his directions, and the two good horses
quickly brought Nekhludoff to the house in which the Baron lived. The
Baron was at home. A young official in uniform, with a long, thin neck,
a much protruding Adam's apple, and an extremely light walk, and two
ladies were in the first room.

"Your name, please?" the young man with the Adam's apple asked, stepping
with extreme lightness and grace across from the ladies to Nekhludoff.

Nekhludoff gave his name.

"The Baron was just mentioning you," said the young man, the Baron's
adjutant, and went out through an inner door. He returned, leading a
weeping lady dressed in mourning. With her bony fingers the lady was
trying to pull her tangled veil over her face in order to hide her
tears.

"Come in, please," said the young man to Nekhludoff, lightly stepping up
to the door of the study and holding it open. When Nekhludoff came in,
he saw before him a thick-set man of medium height, with short hair,
in a frock coat, who was sitting in an armchair opposite a large
writing-table, and looking gaily in front of himself. The kindly, rosy
red face, striking by its contrast with the white hair, moustaches, and
beard, turned towards Nekhludoff with a friendly smile.

"Very glad to see you. Your mother and I were old acquaintances and
friends. I have seen you as a boy, and later on as an officer. Sit
down and tell me what I can do for you. Yes, yes," he said, shaking his
cropped white head, while Nekhludoff was telling him Theodosia's story.
"Go on, go on. I quite understand. It is certainly very touching. And
have you handed in the petition?"

"I have got the petition ready," Nekhludoff said, getting it out of his
pocket; "but I thought of speaking to you first in hopes that the case
would then get special attention paid to it."

"You have done very well. I shall certainly report it myself," said the
Baron, unsuccessfully trying to put an expression of pity on his merry
face. "Very touching! It is clear she was but a child; the husband
treated her roughly, this repelled her, but as time went on they fell in
love with each other. Yes I will report the case."

"Count Ivan Michaelovitch was also going to speak about it."

Nekhludoff had hardly got these words out when the Baron's face changed.

"You had better hand in the petition into the office, after all, and I
shall do what I can," he said.

At this moment the young official again entered the room, evidently
showing off his elegant manner of walking.

"That lady is asking if she may say a few words more."

"Well, ask her in. Ah, mon cher, how many tears we have to see shed! If
only we could dry them all. One does all that lies within one's power."

The lady entered.

"I forgot to ask you that he should not be allowed to give up the
daughter, because he is ready . . ."

"But I have already told you that I should do all I can."

"Baron, for the love of God! You will save the mother?"

She seized his hand, and began kissing it.

"Everything shall be done."

When the lady went out Nekhludoff also began to take leave.

"We shall do what we can. I shall speak about it at the Ministry of
Justice, and when we get their answer we shall do what we can."

Nekhludoff left the study, and went into the office again. Just as in
the Senate office, he saw, in a splendid apartment, a number of very
elegant officials, clean, polite, severely correct and distinguished in
dress and in speech.

"How many there are of them; how very many and how well fed they all
look! And what clean shirts and hands they all have, and how well all
their boots are polished! Who does it for them? How comfortable they
all are, as compared not only with the prisoners, but even with the
peasants!" These thoughts again involuntarily came to Nekhludoff's mind.



CHAPTER XIX.

AN OLD GENERAL OF REPUTE.

The man on whom depended the easing of the fate of the Petersburg
prisoners was an old General of repute--a baron of German descent,
who, as it was said of him, had outlived his wits. He had received a
profusion of orders, but only wore one of them, the Order of the White
Cross. He had received this order, which he greatly valued, while
serving in the Caucasus, because a number of Russian peasants, with
their hair cropped, and dressed in uniform and armed with guns and
bayonets, had killed at his command more than a thousand men who were
defending their liberty, their homes, and their families. Later on
he served in Poland, and there also made Russian peasants commit many
different crimes, and got more orders and decorations for his uniform.
Then he served somewhere else, and now that he was a weak, old man
he had this position, which insured him a good house, an income and
respect. He strictly observed all the regulations which were prescribed
"from above," and was very zealous in the fulfilment of these
regulations, to which he ascribed a special importance, considering that
everything else in the world might be changed except the regulations
prescribed "from above." His duty was to keep political prisoners,
men and women, in solitary confinement in such a way that half of them
perished in 10 years' time, some going out of their minds, some dying
of consumption, some committing suicide by starving themselves to death,
cutting their veins with bits of glass, hanging, or burning themselves
to death.

The old General was not ignorant of this; it all happened within his
knowledge; but these cases no more touched his conscience than accidents
brought on by thunderstorms, floods, etc. These cases occurred as a
consequence of the fulfilment of regulations prescribed "from above" by
His Imperial Majesty. These regulations had to be carried out
without fail, and therefore it was absolutely useless to think of the
consequences of their fulfilment. The old General did not even allow
himself to think of such things, counting it his patriotic duty as a
soldier not to think of them for fear of getting weak in the carrying
out of these, according to his opinion, very important obligations. Once
a week the old General made the round of the cells, one of the duties of
his position, and asked the prisoners if they had any requests to make.
The prisoners had all sorts of requests. He listened to them quietly, in
impenetrable silence, and never fulfilled any of their requests, because
they were all in disaccord with the regulations. Just as Nekhludoff
drove up to the old General's house, the high notes of the bells on the
belfry clock chimed "Great is the Lord," and then struck two. The sound
of these chimes brought back to Nekhludoff's mind what he had read
in the notes of the Decembrists [the Decembrists were a group who
attempted, but failed, to put an end to absolutism in Russia at the time
of the accession of Nicholas the First] about the way this sweet music
repeated every hour re-echoes in the hearts of those imprisoned for
life.

Meanwhile the old General was sitting in his darkened drawing-room at
an inlaid table, turning a saucer on a piece of paper with the aid of
a young artist, the brother of one of his subordinates. The thin,
weak, moist fingers of the artist were pressed against the wrinkled and
stiff-jointed fingers of the old General, and the hands joined in this
manner were moving together with the saucer over a paper that had all
the letters of the alphabet written on it. The saucer was answering the
questions put by the General as to how souls will recognise each other
after death.

When Nekhludoff sent in his card by an orderly acting as footman, the
soul of Joan of Arc was speaking by the aid of the saucer. The soul of
Joan of Arc had already spelt letter by letter the words: "They well
knew each other," and these words had been written down. When the
orderly came in the saucer had stopped first on b, then on y, and began
jerking hither and thither. This jerking was caused by the General's
opinion that the next letter should be b, i.e., Joan of Arc ought to
say that the souls will know each other by being cleansed of all that
is earthly, or something of the kind, clashing with the opinion of the
artist, who thought the next letter should be l, i.e., that the souls
should know each other by light emanating from their astral bodies. The
General, with his bushy grey eyebrows gravely contracted, sat gazing at
the hands on the saucer, and, imagining that it was moving of its own
accord, kept pulling the saucer towards b. The pale-faced young artist,
with his thin hair combed back behind his cars, was looking with his
lifeless blue eyes into a dark corner of the drawing-room, nervously
moving his lips and pulling the saucer towards l.

The General made a wry face at the interruption, but after a moment's
pause he took the card, put on his pince-nez, and, uttering a groan,
rose, in spite of the pain in his back, to his full height, rubbing his
numb fingers.

"Ask him into the study."

"With your excellency's permission I will finish it alone," said the
artist, rising. "I feel the presence."

"All right, finish alone," the General said, severely and decidedly, and
stepped quickly, with big, firm and measured strides, into his study.

"Very pleased to see you," said the General to Nekhludoff, uttering the
friendly words in a gruff tone, and pointing to an armchair by the side
of the writing-table. "Have you been in Petersburg long?"

Nekhludoff replied that he had only lately arrived.

"Is the Princess, your mother, well?"

"My mother is dead."

"Forgive me; I am very sorry. My son told me he had met you."

The General's son was making the same kind of career for himself that
the father had done, and, having passed the Military Academy, was now
serving in the Inquiry Office, and was very proud of his duties there.
His occupation was the management of Government spies.

"Why, I served with your father. We were friends--comrades. And you; are
you also in the Service?"

"No, I am not."

The General bent his head disapprovingly.

"I have a request to make, General."

"Very pleased. In what way can I be of service to you?"

"If my request is out of place pray pardon me. But I am obliged to make
it."

"What is it?"

"There is a certain Gourkevitch imprisoned in the fortress; his mother
asks for an interview with him, or at least to be allowed to send him
some books."

The General expressed neither satisfaction nor dissatisfaction at
Nekhludoff's request, but bending his head on one side he closed his
eyes as if considering. In reality he was not considering anything, and
was not even interested in Nekhludoff's questions, well knowing that he
would answer them according to the law. He was simply resting mentally
and not thinking at all.

"You see," he said at last, "this does not depend on me. There is a
regulation, confirmed by His Majesty, concerning interviews; and as to
books, we have a library, and they may have what is permitted."

"Yes, but he wants scientific books; he wishes to study."

"Don't you believe it," growled the General. "It's not study he wants;
it is just only restlessness."

"But what is to be done? They must occupy their time somehow in their
hard condition," said Nekhludoff.

"They are always complaining," said the General. "We know them."

He spoke of them in a general way, as if they were all a specially bad
race of men. "They have conveniences here which can be found in few
places of confinement," said the General, and he began to enumerate the
comforts the prisoners enjoyed, as if the aim of the institution was to
give the people imprisoned there a comfortable home.

"It is true it used to be rather rough, but now they are very well kept
here," he continued. "They have three courses for dinner--and one of
them meat--cutlets, or rissoles; and on Sundays they get a fourth--a
sweet dish. God grant every Russian may eat as well as they do."

Like all old people, the General, having once got on to a familiar
topic, enumerated the various proofs he had often given before of the
prisoners being exacting and ungrateful.

"They get books on spiritual subjects and old journals. We have a
library. Only they rarely read. At first they seem interested, later on
the new books remain uncut, and the old ones with their leaves unturned.
We tried them," said the old General, with the dim likeness of a smile.
"We put bits of paper in on purpose, which remained just as they had
been placed. Writing is also not forbidden," he continued. "A slate is
provided, and a slate pencil, so that they can write as a pastime. They
can wipe the slate and write again. But they don't write, either. Oh,
they very soon get quite tranquil. At first they seem restless, but
later on they even grow fat and become very quiet." Thus spoke the
General, never suspecting the terrible meaning of his words.

Nekhludoff listened to the hoarse old voice, looked at the stiff limbs,
the swollen eyelids under the grey brows, at the old, clean-shaved,
flabby jaw, supported by the collar of the military uniform, at the
white cross that this man was so proud of, chiefly because he had gained
it by exceptionally cruel and extensive slaughter, and knew that it was
useless to reply to the old man or to explain the meaning of his own
words to him.

He made another effort, and asked about the prisoner Shoustova, for
whose release, as he had been informed that morning, orders were given.

"Shoustova--Shoustova? I cannot remember all their names, there are so
many of them," he said, as if reproaching them because there were so
many. He rang, and ordered the secretary to be called. While waiting for
the latter, he began persuading Nekhludoff to serve, saying that "honest
noblemen," counting himself among the number, "were particularly needed
by the Tsar and--the country," he added, evidently only to round off
his sentence. "I am old, yet I am serving still, as well as my strength
allows."

The secretary, a dry, emaciated man, with restless, intelligent eyes,
came in and reported that Shoustova was imprisoned in some queer,
fortified place, and that he had received no orders concerning her.

"When we get the order we shall let her out the same day. We do not keep
them; we do not value their visits much," said the General, with another
attempt at a playful smile, which only distorted his old face.

Nekhludoff rose, trying to keep from expressing the mixed feelings of
repugnance and pity which he felt towards this terrible old man. The
old man on his part considered that he should not be too severe on the
thoughtless and evidently misguided son of his old comrade, and should
not leave him without advice.

"Good-bye, my dear fellow; do not take it amiss. It is my affection that
makes me say it. Do not keep company with such people as we have at our
place here. There are no innocent ones among them. All these people
are most immoral. We know them," he said, in a tone that admitted no
possibility of doubt. And he did not doubt, not because the thing was
so, but because if it was not so, he would have to admit himself to
be not a noble hero living out the last days of a good life, but a
scoundrel, who sold, and still continued in his old age to sell, his
conscience.

"Best of all, go and serve," he continued; "the Tsar needs honest
men--and the country," he added. "Well, supposing I and the others
refused to serve, as you are doing? Who would be left? Here we are,
finding fault with the order of things, and yet not wishing to help the
Government."

With a deep sigh Nekhludoff made a low bow, shook the large, bony hand
condescendingly stretched out to him and left the room.

The General shook his head reprovingly, and rubbing his back, he again
went into the drawing-room where the artist was waiting for him. He had
already written down the answer given by the soul of Joan of Arc. The
General put on his pince-nez and read, "Will know one another by light
emanating from their astral bodies."

"Ah," said the General, with approval, and closed his eyes. "But how is
one to know if the light of all is alike?" he asked, and again crossed
fingers with the artist on the saucer.

The isvostchik drove Nekhludoff out of the gate.

It is dull here, sir, he said, turning to Nekhludoff. "I almost wished
to drive off without waiting for you."

Nekhludoff agreed. "Yes, it is dull," and he took a deep breath, and
looked up with a sense of relief at the grey clouds that were floating
in the sky, and at the glistening ripples made by the boats and steamers
on the Neva.



CHAPTER XX.

MASLOVA'S APPEAL.

The next day Maslova's case was to be examined at the Senate, and
Nekhludoff and the advocate met at the majestic portal of the building,
where several carriages were waiting. Ascending the magnificent and
imposing staircase to the first floor, the advocate, who knew all the
ins and outs of the place, turned to the left and entered through a door
which had the date of the introduction of the Code of Laws above it.

After taking off his overcoat in the first narrow room, he found out
from the attendant that the Senators had all arrived, and that the last
had just come in. Fanarin, in his swallow-tail coat, a white tie above
the white shirt-front, and a self-confident smile on his lips, passed
into the next room. In this room there were to the right a large
cupboard and a table, and to the left a winding staircase, which an
elegant official in uniform was descending with a portfolio under his
arm. In this room an old man with long, white hair and a patriarchal
appearance attracted every one's attention. He wore a short coat and
grey trousers. Two attendants stood respectfully beside him. The old man
with white hair entered the cupboard and shut himself in.

Fanarin noticed a fellow-advocate dressed in the same way as himself,
with a white tie and dress coat, and at once entered into an animated
conversation with him.

Nekhludoff was meanwhile examining the people in the room. The public
consisted of about 15 persons, of whom two were ladies--a young one with
a pince-nez, and an old, grey-haired one.

A case of libel was to be heard that day, and therefore the public were
more numerous than usual--chiefly persons belonging to the journalistic
world.

The usher, a red-cheeked, handsome man in a fine uniform, came up to
Fanarin and asked him what his business was. When he heard that it was
the case of Maslova, he noted something down and walked away. Then the
cupboard door opened and the old man with the patriarchal appearance
stepped out, no longer in a short coat but in a gold-trimmed attire,
which made him look like a bird, and with metal plates on his
breast. This funny costume seemed to make the old man himself feel
uncomfortable, and, walking faster than his wont, he hurried out of the
door opposite the entrance.

"That is Bay, a most estimable man," Fanarin said to Nekhludoff, and
then having introduced him to his colleague, he explained the case that
was about to be heard, which he considered very interesting.

The hearing of the case soon commenced, and Nekhludoff, with the
public, entered the left side of the Senate Chamber. They all, including
Fanarin, took their places behind a grating. Only the Petersburg
advocate went up to a desk in front of the grating.

The Senate Chamber was not so big as the Criminal Court; and was more
simply furnished, only the table in front of the senators was covered
with crimson, gold-trimmed velvet, instead of green cloth; but the
attributes of all places of judgment, i.e., the mirror of justice, the
icon, the emblem of hypocrisy, and the Emperor's portrait, the emblem of
servility, were there.

The usher announced, in the same solemn manner: "The Court is coming."
Every one rose in the same way, and the senators entered in their
uniforms and sat down on highbacked chairs and leant on the table,
trying to appear natural, just in the same way as the judges in the
Court of Law. There were four senators present--Nikitin, who took the
chair, a clean-shaved man with a narrow face and steely eyes; Wolf, with
significantly compressed lips, and little white hands, with which he
kept turning over the pages of the business papers; Skovorodnikoff,
a heavy, fat, pockmarked man--the learned lawyer; and Bay, the
patriarchal-looking man who had arrived last.

With the advocates entered the chief secretary and public prosecutor, a
lean, clean-shaven young man of medium height, a very dark complexion,
and sad, black eyes. Nekhludoff knew him at once, in spite of his
curious uniform and the fact that he had not seen him for six years. He
had been one of his best friends in Nekhludoff's student days.

"The public prosecutor Selenin?" Nekhludoff asked, turning to the
advocate.

"Yes. Why?"

"I know him well. He is a fine fellow."

"And a good public prosecutor; business-like. Now he is the man you
should have interested."

"He will act according to his conscience in any case," said Nekhludoff,
recalling the intimate relations and friendship between himself and
Selenin, and the attractive qualities of the latter--purity, honesty,
and good breeding in its best sense.

"Yes, there is no time now," whispered Fanarin, who was listening to the
report of the case that had commenced.

The Court of Justice was accused of having left a decision of the Court
of Law unaltered.

Nekhludoff listened and tried to make out the meaning of what was going
on; but, just as in the Criminal Court, his chief difficulty was
that not the evidently chief point, but some side issues, were being
discussed. The case was that of a newspaper which had published the
account of a swindle arranged by a director of a limited liability
company. It seemed that the only important question was whether the
director of the company really abused his trust, and how to stop him
from doing it. But the questions under consideration were whether the
editor had a right to publish this article of his contributor, and what
he had been guilty of in publishing it: slander or libel, and in what
way slander included libel, or libel included slander, and something
rather incomprehensible to ordinary people about all sorts of statutes
and resolutions passed by some General Department.

The only thing clear to Nekhludoff was that, in spite of what Wolf had
so strenuously insisted on, the day before, i.e., that the Senate could
not try a case on its merits, in this case he was evidently strongly
in favour of repealing the decision of the Court of Justice, and that
Selenin, in spite of his characteristic reticence, stated the opposite
opinion with quite unexpected warmth. The warmth, which surprised
Nekhludoff, evinced by the usually self-controlled Selenin, was due to
his knowledge of the director's shabbiness in money matters, and the
fact, which had accidentally come to his cars, that Wolf had been to a
swell dinner party at the swindler's house only a few days before.

Now that Wolf spoke on the case, guardedly enough, but with evident
bias, Selenin became excited, and expressed his opinion with too much
nervous irritation for an ordinary business transaction.

It was clear that Selenin's speech had offended Wolf. He grew red, moved
in his chair, made silent gestures of surprise, and at last rose, with
a very dignified and injured look, together with the other senators, and
went out into the debating-room.

"What particular case have you come about?" the usher asked again,
addressing Fanarin.

"I have already told you: Maslova's case."

"Yes, quite so. It is to be heard to-day, but--"

"But what?" the advocate asked.

"Well, you see, this case was to be examined without taking sides,
so that the senators will hardly come out again after passing the
resolution. But I will inform them."

"What do you mean?"

"I'll inform them; I'll inform them." And the usher again put something
down on his paper.

The Senators really meant to pronounce their decision concerning the
libel case, and then to finish the other business, Maslova's case among
it, over their tea and cigarettes, without leaving the debating-room.



CHAPTER XXI.

THE APPEAL DISMISSED.

As soon as the Senators were seated round the table in the
debating-room, Wolf began to bring forward with great animation all the
motives in favour of a repeal. The chairman, an ill-natured man at
best, was in a particularly bad humour that day. His thoughts were
concentrated on the words he had written down in his memoranda on the
occasion when not he but Viglanoff was appointed to the important post
he had long coveted. It was the chairman, Nikitin's, honest conviction
that his opinions of the officials of the two upper classes with which
he was in connection would furnish valuable material for the historians.
He had written a chapter the day before in which the officials of the
upper classes got it hot for preventing him, as he expressed it, from
averting the ruin towards which the present rulers of Russia were
driving it, which simply meant that they had prevented his getting a
better salary. And now he was considering what a new light to posterity
this chapter would shed on events.

"Yes, certainly," he said, in reply to the words addressed to him by
Wolf, without listening to them.

Bay was listening to Wolf with a sad face and drawing a garland on the
paper that lay before him. Bay was a Liberal of the very first water. He
held sacred the Liberal traditions of the sixth decade of this century,
and if he ever overstepped the limits of strict neutrality it was always
in the direction of Liberalism. So in this case; beside the fact that
the swindling director, who was prosecuting for libel, was a bad lot,
the prosecution of a journalist for libel in itself tending, as it did,
to restrict the freedom of the press, inclined Bay to reject the appeal.

When Wolf concluded his arguments Bay stopped drawing his garland and
began in a sad and gentle voice (he was sad because he was obliged to
demonstrate such truisms) concisely, simply and convincingly to show
how unfounded the accusation was, and then, bending his white head, he
continued drawing his garland.

Skovorodnikoff, who sat opposite Wolf, and, with his fat fingers, kept
shoving his beard and moustaches into his mouth, stopped chewing his
beard as soon as Bay was silent, and said with a loud, grating voice,
that, notwithstanding the fact of the director being a terrible
scoundrel, he would have been for the repeal of the sentence if there
were any legal reasons for it; but, as there were none, he was of Bay's
opinion. He was glad to put this spoke in Wolf's wheel.

The chairman agreed with Skovorodnikoff, and the appeal was rejected.

Wolf was dissatisfied, especially because it was like being caught
acting with dishonest partiality; so he pretended to be indifferent,
and, unfolding the document which contained Maslova's case, he became
engrossed in it. Meanwhile the Senators rang and ordered tea, and began
talking about the event that, together with the duel, was occupying the
Petersburgers.

It was the case of the chief of a Government department, who was accused
of the crime provided for in Statute 995.

"What nastiness," said Bay, with disgust.

"Why; where is the harm of it? I can show you a Russian book containing
the project of a German writer, who openly proposes that it should not
be considered a crime," said Skovorodnikoff, drawing in greedily the
fumes of the crumpled cigarette, which he held between his fingers close
to the palm, and he laughed boisterously.

"Impossible!" said Bay.

"I shall show it you," said Skovorodnikoff, giving the full title of the
book, and even its date and the name of its editor.

"I hear he has been appointed governor to some town in Siberia."

"That's fine. The archdeacon will meet him with a crucifix. They ought
to appoint an archdeacon of the same sort," said Skovorodnikoff. "I
could recommend them one," and he threw the end of his cigarette into
his saucer, and again shoved as much of his beard and moustaches as he
could into his mouth and began chewing them.

The usher came in and reported the advocate's and Nekhludoff's desire to
be present at the examination of Maslova's case.

"This case," Wolf said, "is quite romantic," and he told them what he
knew about Nekhludoff's relations with Maslova. When they had spoken
a little about it and finished their tea and cigarettes, the Senators
returned into the Senate Chamber and proclaimed their decision in the
libel case, and began to hear Maslova's case.

Wolf, in his thin voice, reported Maslova's appeal very fully, but
again not without some bias and an evident wish for the repeal of the
sentence.

"Have you anything to add?" the chairman said, turning to Fanarin.
Fanarin rose, and standing with his broad white chest expanded, proved
point by point, with wonderful exactness and persuasiveness, how the
Court had in six points strayed from the exact meaning of the law; and
besides this he touched, though briefly, on the merits of the case, and
on the crying injustice of the sentence. The tone of his speech was one
of apology to the Senators, who, with their penetration and judicial
wisdom, could not help seeing and understanding it all better than he
could. He was obliged to speak only because the duty he had undertaken
forced him to do so.

After Fanarin's speech one might have thought that there could not
remain the least doubt that the Senate ought to repeal the decision of
the Court. When he had finished his speech, Fanarin looked round with a
smile of triumph, seeing which Nekhludoff felt certain that the case was
won. But when he looked at the Senators he saw that Fanarin smiled and
triumphed all alone. The Senators and the Public Prosecutor did not
smile nor triumph, but looked like people wearied, and who were thinking
"We have often heard the like of you; it is all in vain," and were only
too glad when he stopped and ceased uselessly detaining them there.
Immediately after the end of the advocate's speech the chairman turned
to the Public Prosecutor. Selenin briefly and clearly expressed
himself in favour of leaving the decision of the Court unaltered, as
he considered all the reasons for appealing inadequate. After this the
Senators went out into the debating-room. They were divided in their
opinions. Wolf was in favour of altering the decision. Bay, when he
had understood the case, took up the same side with fervour, vividly
presenting the scene at the court to his companions as he clearly saw it
himself. Nikitin, who always was on the side of severity and formality,
took up the other side. All depended on Skovorodnikoff's vote, and he
voted for rejecting the appeal, because Nekhludoff's determination to
marry the woman on moral grounds was extremely repugnant to him.

Skovorodnikoff was a materialist, a Darwinian, and counted every
manifestation of abstract morality, or, worse still, religion, not only
as a despicable folly, but as a personal affront to himself. All this
bother about a prostitute, and the presence of a celebrated advocate and
Nekhludoff in the Senate were in the highest degree repugnant to him.
So he shoved his beard into his mouth and made faces, and very skilfully
pretended to know nothing of this case, excepting that the reasons for
an appeal were insufficient, and that he, therefore, agreed with the
chairman to leave the decision of the Court unaltered.

So the sentence remained unrepealed.



CHAPTER XXII.

AN OLD FRIEND.

"Terrible," said Nekhludoff, as he went out into the waiting-room with
the advocate, who was arranging the papers in his portfolio. "In a
matter which is perfectly clear they attach all the importance to the
form and reject the appeal. Terrible!"

"The case was spoiled in the Criminal Court," said the advocate.

"And Selenin, too, was in favour of the rejection. Terrible! terrible!"
Nekhludoff repeated. "What is to be done now?"

"We will appeal to His Majesty, and you can hand in the petition
yourself while you are here. I will write it for you."

At this moment little Wolf, with his stars and uniform, came out into
the waiting-room and approached Nekhludoff. "It could not be helped,
dear Prince. The reasons for an appeal were not sufficient," he said,
shrugging his narrow shoulders and closing his eyes, and then he went
his way.

After Wolf, Selenin came out too, having heard from the Senators that
his old friend Nekhludoff was there.

"Well, I never expected to see you here," he said, coming up to
Nekhludoff, and smiling only with his lips while his eyes remained sad.
"I did not know you were in Petersburg."

"And I did not know you were Public Prosecutor-in-Chief."

"How is it you are in the Senate?" asked Selenin. "I had heard, by the
way, that you were in Petersburg. But what are you doing here?"

"Here? I am here because I hoped to find justice and save a woman
innocently condemned."

"What woman?"

"The one whose case has just been decided."

"Oh! Maslova's case," said Selenin, suddenly remembering it. "The appeal
had no grounds whatever."

"It is not the appeal; it's the woman who is innocent, and is being
punished."

Selenin sighed. "That may well be, but----"

"Not _may be_, but is."

"How do you know?"

"Because I was on the jury. I know how we made the mistake."

Selenin became thoughtful. "You should have made a statement at the
time," he said.

"I did make the statement."

"It should have been put down in an official report. If this had been
added to the petition for the appeal--"

"Yes, but still, as it is, the verdict is evidently absurd."

"The Senate has no right to say so. If the Senate took upon itself to
repeal the decision of the law courts according to its own views as
to the justice of the decisions in themselves, the verdict of the jury
would lose all its meaning, not to mention that the Senate would have
no basis to go upon, and would run the risk of infringing justice rather
than upholding it," said Selenin, calling to mind the case that had just
been heard.

"All I know is that this woman is quite innocent, and that the last
hope of saving her from an unmerited punishment is gone. The grossest
injustice has been confirmed by the highest court."

"It has not been confirmed. The Senate did not and cannot enter into
the merits of the case in itself," said Selenin. Always busy and rarely
going out into society, he had evidently heard nothing of Nekhludoff's
romance. Nekhludoff noticed it, and made up his mind that it was best to
say nothing about his special relations with Maslova.

"You are probably staying with your aunt," Selenin remarked, apparently
wishing to change the subject. "She told me you were here yesterday, and
she invited me to meet you in the evening, when some foreign preacher
was to lecture," and Selenin again smiled only with his lips.

"Yes, I was there, but left in disgust," said Nekhludoff angrily, vexed
that Selenin had changed the subject.

"Why with disgust? After all, it is a manifestation of religious
feeling, though one-sided and sectarian," said Selenin.

"Why, it's only some kind of whimsical folly."

"Oh, dear, no. The curious thing is that we know the teaching of our
church so little that we see some new kind of revelation in what are,
after all, our own fundamental dogmas," said Selenin, as if hurrying to
let his old friend know his new views.

Nekhludoff looked at Selenin scrutinisingly and with surprise, and
Selenin dropped his eyes, in which appeared an expression not only of
sadness but also of ill-will.

"Do you, then, believe in the dogmas of the church?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Of course I do," replied Selenin, gazing straight into Nekhludoff's
eyes with a lifeless look.

Nekhludoff sighed. "It is strange," he said.

"However, we shall have a talk some other time," said Selenin. "I
am coming," he added, in answer to the usher, who had respectfully
approached him. "Yes, we must meet again," he went on with a sigh. "But
will it be possible for me to find you? You will always find me in at
seven o'clock. My address is Nadejdinskaya," and he gave the number.
"Ah, time does not stand still," and he turned to go, smiling only with
his lips.

"I will come if I can," said Nekhludoff, feeling that a man once
near and dear to him had, by this brief conversation, suddenly become
strange, distant, and incomprehensible, if not hostile to him.



CHAPTER XXIII.

THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR.

When Nekhludoff knew Selenin as a student, he was a good son, a true
friend, and for his years an educated man of the world, with much tact;
elegant, handsome, and at the same time truthful and honest. He learned
well, without much exertion and with no pedantry, receiving gold medals
for his essays. He considered the service of mankind, not only in words
but in acts, to be the aim of his young life. He saw no other way of
being useful to humanity than by serving the State. Therefore, as soon
as he had completed his studies, he systematically examined all the
activities to which he might devote his life, and decided to enter the
Second Department of the Chancellerie, where the laws are drawn up, and
he did so. But, in spite of the most scrupulous and exact discharge of
the duties demanded of him, this service gave no satisfaction to his
desire of being useful, nor could he awake in himself the consciousness
that he was doing "the right thing."

This dissatisfaction was so much increased by the friction with his very
small-minded and vain fellow officials that he left the Chancellerie and
entered the Senate. It was better there, but the same dissatisfaction
still pursued him; he felt it to be very different from what he had
expected, and from what ought to be.

And now that he was in the Senate his relatives obtained for him the
post of Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and he had to go in a carriage,
dressed in an embroidered uniform and a white linen apron, to thank
all sorts of people for having placed him in the position of a lackey.
However much he tried he could find no reasonable explanation for the
existence of this post, and felt, more than in the Senate, that it
was not "the right thing," and yet he could not refuse it for fear of
hurting those who felt sure they were giving him much pleasure by this
appointment, and because it flattered the lowest part of his nature. It
pleased him to see himself in a mirror in his gold-embroidered uniform,
and to accept the deference paid him by some people because of his
position.

Something of the same kind happened when he married. A very brilliant
match, from a worldly point of view, was arranged for him, and he
married chiefly because by refusing he would have had to hurt the
young lady who wished to be married to him, and those who arranged the
marriage, and also because a marriage with a nice young girl of noble
birth flattered his vanity and gave him pleasure. But this marriage
very soon proved to be even less "the right thing" than the Government
service and his position at Court.

After the birth of her first child the wife decided to have no more,
and began leading that luxurious worldly life in which he now had to
participate whether he liked or not.

She was not particularly handsome, and was faithful to him, and she
seemed, in spite of all the efforts it cost her, to derive nothing but
weariness from the life she led, yet she perseveringly continued to live
it, though it was poisoning her husband's life. And all his efforts
to alter this life was shattered, as against a stone wall, by her
conviction, which all her friends and relatives supported, that all was
as it should be.

The child, a little girl with bare legs and long golden curls, was a
being perfectly foreign to him, chiefly because she was trained quite
otherwise than he wished her to be. There sprung up between the husband
and wife the usual misunderstanding, without even the wish to understand
each other, and then a silent warfare, hidden from outsiders and
tempered by decorum. All this made his life at home a burden, and became
even less "the right thing" than his service and his post.

But it was above all his attitude towards religion which was not "the
right thing." Like every one of his set and his time, by the growth of
his reason he broke without the least effort the nets of the religious
superstitions in which he was brought up, and did not himself exactly
know when it was that he freed himself of them. Being earnest and
upright, he did not, during his youth and intimacy with Nekhludoff as a
student, conceal his rejection of the State religion. But as years
went on and he rose in the service, and especially at the time of the
reaction towards conservatism in society, his spiritual freedom stood in
his way.

At home, when his father died, he had to be present at the masses
said for his soul, and his mother wished him to go to confession or to
communion, and it was in a way expected, by public opinion, but above
all, Government service demanded that he should be present at all sorts
of services, consecrations, thanksgivings, and the like. Hardly a day
passed without some outward religious form having to be observed.

When present at these services he had to pretend that he believed in
something which he did not believe in, and being truthful he could not
do this. The alternative was, having made up his mind that all these
outward signs were deceitful, to alter his life in such a way that he
would not have to be present at such ceremonials. But to do what
seemed so simple would have cost a great deal. Besides encountering the
perpetual hostility of all those who were near to him, he would have to
give up the service and his position, and sacrifice his hopes of being
useful to humanity by his service, now and in the future. To make such a
sacrifice one would have to be firmly convinced of being right.

And he was firmly convinced he was right, as no educated man of our
time can help being convinced who knows a little history and how the
religions, and especially Church Christianity, originated.

But under the stress of his daily life he, a truthful man, allowed a
little falsehood to creep in. He said that in order to do justice to
an unreasonable thing one had to study the unreasonable thing. It was a
little falsehood, but it sunk him into the big falsehood in which he was
now caught.

Before putting to himself the question whether the orthodoxy in which
he was born and bred, and which every one expected him to accept, and
without which he could not continue his useful occupation, contained the
truth, he had already decided the answer. And to clear up the question
he did not read Voltaire, Schopenhauer, Herbert Spencer, or Comte, but
the philosophical works of Hegel and the religious works of Vinet and
Khomyakoff, and naturally found in them what he wanted, i.e., something
like peace of mind and a vindication of that religious teaching in which
he was educated, which his reason had long ceased to accept, but without
which his whole life was filled with unpleasantness which could all be
removed by accepting the teaching.

And so he adopted all the usual sophistries which go to prove that
a single human reason cannot know the truth, that the truth is only
revealed to an association of men, and can only be known by revelation,
that revelation is kept by the church, etc. And so he managed to be
present at prayers, masses for the dead, to confess, make signs of the
cross in front of icons, with a quiet mind, without being conscious of
the lie, and to continue in the service which gave him the feeling of
being useful and some comfort in his joyless family life. Although he
believed this, he felt with his entire being that this religion of his,
more than all else, was not "the right thing," and that is why his eyes
always looked sad.

And seeing Nekhludoff, whom he had known before all these lies had
rooted themselves within him, reminded him of what he then was. It was
especially after he had hurried to hint at his religious views that he
had most strongly felt all this "not the right thing," and had become
painfully sad. Nekhludoff felt it also after the first joy of meeting
his old friend had passed, and therefore, though they promised each
other to meet, they did not take any steps towards an interview, and did
not again see each other during this stay of Nekhludoff's in Petersburg.



CHAPTER XXIV.

MARIETTE TEMPTS NEKHLUDOFF.

When they left the Senate, Nekhludoff and the advocate walked on
together, the advocate having given the driver of his carriage orders
to follow them. The advocate told Nekhludoff the story of the chief of a
Government department, about whom the Senators had been talking: how the
thing was found out, and how the man, who according to law should
have been sent to the mines, had been appointed Governor of a town
in Siberia. Then he related with particular pleasure how several
high-placed persons stole a lot of money collected for the erection of
the still unfinished monument which they had passed that morning; also,
how the mistress of So-and-so got a lot of money at the Stock Exchange,
and how So-and-so agreed with So-and-so to sell him his wife. The
advocate began another story about a swindle, and all sorts of crimes
committed by persons in high places, who, instead of being in prison,
sat on presidential chairs in all sorts of Government institutions.
These tales, of which the advocate seemed to have an unending supply,
gave him much pleasure, showing as they did, with perfect clearness,
that his means of getting money were quite just and innocent compared
to the means which the highest officials in Petersburg made use of.
The advocate was therefore surprised when Nekhludoff took an isvostchik
before hearing the end of the story, said good-bye, and left him.
Nekhludoff felt very sad. It was chiefly the rejection of the appeal by
the Senate, confirming the senseless torments that the innocent Maslova
was enduring, that saddened him, and also the fact that this rejection
made it still harder for him to unite his fate with hers. The stories
about existing evils, which the advocate recounted with such relish,
heightened his sadness, and so did the cold, unkind look that the
once sweet-natured, frank, noble Selenin had given him, and which kept
recurring to his mind.

On his return the doorkeeper handed him a note, and said, rather
scornfully, that some kind of woman had written it in the hall. It was
a note from Shoustova's mother. She wrote that she had come to thank
her daughter's benefactor and saviour, and to implore him to come to see
them on the Vasilievsky, 5th Line, house No. --. This was very necessary
because of Vera Doukhova. He need not be afraid that they would weary
him with expressions of gratitude. They would not speak their gratitude,
but be simply glad to see him. Would he not come next morning, if he
could?

There was another note from Bogotyreff, a former fellow-officer,
aide-de-camp to the Emperor, whom Nekhludoff had asked to hand
personally to the Emperor his petition on behalf of the sectarians.
Bogotyreff wrote, in his large, firm hand, that he would put the
petition into the Emperor's own hands, as he had promised; but that it
had occurred to him that it might be better for Nekhludoff first to go
and see the person on whom the matter depended.

After the impressions received during the last few days, Nekhludoff felt
perfectly hopeless of getting anything done. The plans he had formed
in Moscow seemed now something like the dreams of youth, which are
inevitably followed by disillusion when life comes to be faced. Still,
being now in Petersburg, he considered it his duty to do all he had
intended, and he resolved next day, after consulting Bogotyreff, to
act on his advice and see the person on whom the case of the sectarians
depended.

He got out the sectarians' petition from his portfolio, and began
reading it over, when there was a knock at his door, and a footman came
in with a message from the Countess Katerina Ivanovna, who asked him to
come up and have a cup of tea with her.

Nekhludoff said he would come at once, and having put the papers back
into the portfolio, he went up to his aunt's. He looked out of a window
on his way, and saw Mariette's pair of bays standing in front of the
house, and he suddenly brightened and felt inclined to smile.

Mariette, with a hat on her head, not in black but with a light dress
of many shades, sat with a cup in her hand beside the Countess's easy
chair, prattling about something while her beautiful, laughing
eyes glistened. She had said something funny--something indecently
funny--just as Nekhludoff entered the room. He knew it by the way she
laughed, and by the way the good-natured Countess Katerina Ivanovna's
fat body was shaking with laughter; while Mariette, her smiling mouth
slightly drawn to one side, her head a little bent, a peculiarly
mischievous expression in her merry, energetic face, sat silently
looking at her companion. From a few words which he overheard,
Nekhludoff guessed that they were talking of the second piece of
Petersburg news, the episode of the Siberian Governor, and that it was
in reference to this subject that Mariette had said something so funny
that the Countess could not control herself for a long time.

"You will kill me," she said, coughing.

After saying "How d'you do?" Nekhludoff sat down. He was about to
censure Mariette in his mind for her levity when, noticing the serious
and even slightly dissatisfied look in his eyes, she suddenly, to please
him, changed not only the expression of her face, but also the attitude
of her mind; for she felt the wish to please him as soon as she looked
at him. She suddenly turned serious, dissatisfied with her life, as if
seeking and striving after something; it was not that she pretended, but
she really reproduced in herself the very same state of mind that he was
in, although it would have been impossible for her to express in words
what was the state of Nekhludoff's mind at that moment.

She asked him how he had accomplished his tasks. He told her about his
failure in the Senate and his meeting Selenin.

"Oh, what a pure soul! He is, indeed, a chevalier sans peur et sans
reproche. A pure soul!" said both ladies, using the epithet commonly
applied to Selenin in Petersburg society.

"What is his wife like?" Nekhludoff asked.

"His wife? Well, I do not wish to judge, but she does not understand
him."

"Is it possible that he, too, was for rejecting the appeal?" Mariette
asked with real sympathy. "It is dreadful. How sorry I am for her," she
added with a sigh.

He frowned, and in order to change the subject began to speak about
Shoustova, who had been imprisoned in the fortress and was now set free
through the influence of Mariette's husband. He thanked her for her
trouble, and was going on to say how dreadful he thought it, that this
woman and the whole of her family had suffered merely, because no one
had reminded the authorities about them, but Mariette interrupted him
and expressed her own indignation.

"Say nothing about it to me," she said. "When my husband told me she
could be set free, it was this that struck me, 'What was she kept in
prison for if she is innocent?'" She went on expressing what Nekhludoff
was about to say.

"It is revolting--revolting."

Countess Katerina Ivanovna noticed that Mariette was coquetting with her
nephew, and this amused her. "What do you think?" she said, when they
were silent. "Supposing you come to Aline's to-morrow night. Kiesewetter
will be there. And you, too," she said, turning to Mariette. "_Il vous a
remarque_," she went on to her nephew. "He told me that what you say (I
repeated it all to him) is a very good sign, and that you will certainly
come to Christ. You must come absolutely. Tell him to, Mariette, and
come yourself."

"Countess, in the first place, I have no right whatever to give any kind
of advice to the Prince," said Mariette, and gave Nekhludoff a look that
somehow established a full comprehension between them of their attitude
in relation to the Countess's words and evangelicalism in general.
"Secondly, I do not much care, you know."

"Yes, I know you always do things the wrong way round, and according to
your own ideas."

"My own ideas? I have faith like the most simple peasant woman," said
Mariette with a smile. "And, thirdly, I am going to the French Theatre
to-morrow night."

"Ah! And have you seen that--What's her name?" asked Countess Katerina
Ivanovna. Mariette gave the name of a celebrated French actress.

"You must go, most decidedly; she is wonderful."

"Whom am I to see first, ma tante--the actress or the preacher?"
Nekhludoff said with a smile.

"Please don't catch at my words."

"I should think the preacher first and then the actress, or else the
desire for the sermon might vanish altogether," said Nekhludoff.

"No; better begin with the French Theatre, and do penance afterwards."

"Now, then, you are not to hold me up for ridicule. The preacher is the
preacher and the theatre is the theatre. One need not weep in order to
be saved. One must have faith, and then one is sure to be gay."

"You, ma tante, preach better than any preacher."

"Do you know what?" said Mariette. "Come into my box to-morrow."

"I am afraid I shall not be able to."

The footman interrupted the conversation by announcing a visitor. It
was the secretary of a philanthropic society of which the Countess was
president.

"Oh, that is the dullest of men. I think I shall receive him out there,
and return to you later on. Mariette, give him his tea," said the
Countess, and left the room, with her quick, wriggling walk.

Mariette took the glove off her firm, rather flat hand, the fourth
finger of which was covered with rings.

"Want any?" she said, taking hold of the silver teapot, under which a
spirit lamp was burning, and extending her little finger curiously. Her
face looked sad and serious.

"It is always terribly painful to me to notice that people whose opinion
I value confound me with the position I am placed in." She seemed ready
to cry as she said these last words. And though these words had no
meaning, or at any rate a very indefinite meaning, they seemed to be of
exceptional depth, meaning, or goodness to Nekhludoff, so much was he
attracted by the look of the bright eyes which accompanied the words of
this young, beautiful, and well-dressed woman.

Nekhludoff looked at her in silence, and could not take his eyes from
her face.

"You think I do not understand you and all that goes on in you. Why,
everybody knows what you are doing. _C'est le secret de polichinelle_.
And I am delighted with your work, and think highly of you."

"Really, there is nothing to be delighted with; and I have done so
little as Yet."

"No matter. I understand your feelings, and I understand her. All
right, all right. I will say nothing more about it," she said, noticing
displeasure on his face. "But I also understand that after seeing all
the suffering and the horror in the prisons," Mariette went on, her only
desire that of attracting him, and guessing with her woman's instinct
what was dear and important to him, "you wish to help the sufferers,
those who are made to suffer so terribly by other men, and their cruelty
and indifference. I understand the willingness to give one's life, and
could give mine in such a cause, but we each have our own fate."

"Are you, then, dissatisfied with your fate?"

"I?" she asked, as if struck with surprise that such a question could
be put to her. "I have to be satisfied, and am satisfied. But there is a
worm that wakes up--"

"And he must not be allowed to fall asleep again. It is a voice that
must be obeyed," Nekhludoff said, falling into the trap.

Many a time later on Nekhludoff remembered with shame his talk with her.
He remembered her words, which were not so much lies as imitations of
his own, and her face, which seemed looking at him with sympathetic
attention when he told her about the terrors of the prison and of his
impressions in the country.

When the Countess returned they were talking not merely like old, but
like exclusive friends who alone understood one another. They were
talking about the injustice of power, of the sufferings of the
unfortunate, the poverty of the people, yet in reality in the midst of
the sound of their talk their eyes, gazing at each other, kept asking,
"Can you love me?" and answering, "I can," and the sex-feeling, taking
the most unexpected and brightest forms, drew them to each other. As she
was going away she told him that she would always be willing to serve
him in any way she could, and asked him to come and see her, if only for
a moment, in the theatre next day, as she had a very important thing to
tell him about.

"Yes, and when shall I see you again?" she added, with a sigh, carefully
drawing the glove over her jewelled hand.

"Say you will come."

Nekhludoff promised.

That night, when Nekhludoff was alone in his room, and lay down after
putting out his candle, he could not sleep. He thought of Maslova, of
the decision of the Senate, of his resolve to follow her in any case, of
his having given up the land. The face of Mariette appeared to him as if
in answer to those thoughts--her look, her sigh, her words, "When shall
I see you again?" and her smile seemed vivid as if he really saw her,
and he also smiled. "Shall I be doing right in going to Siberia? And
have I done right in divesting myself of my wealth?" And the answers to
the questions on this Petersburg night, on which the daylight streamed
into the window from under the blind, were quite indefinite. All seemed
mixed in his head. He recalled his former state of mind, and the former
sequence of his thoughts, but they had no longer their former power or
validity.

"And supposing I have invented all this, and am unable to live it
through--supposing I repent of having acted right," he thought; and
unable to answer he was seized with such anguish and despair as he had
long not felt. Unable to free himself from his perplexity, he fell into
a heavy sleep, such as he had slept after a heavy loss at cards.



CHAPTER XXV.

LYDIA SHOUSTOVA'S HOME.

Nekhludoff awoke next morning feeling as if he had been guilty of some
iniquity the day before. He began considering. He could not remember
having done anything wrong; he had committed no evil act, but he had had
evil thoughts. He had thought that all his present resolutions to marry
Katusha and to give up his land were unachievable dreams; that he should
be unable to bear it; that it was artificial, unnatural; and that he
would have to go on living as he lived.

He had committed no evil action, but, what was far worse than an
evil action, he had entertained evil thoughts whence all evil actions
proceed. An evil action may not be repeated, and can be repented of; but
evil thoughts generate all evil actions.

An evil action only smooths the path for other evil acts; evil thoughts
uncontrollably drag one along that path.

When Nekhludoff repeated in his mind the thoughts of the day before, he
was surprised that he could for a moment have believed these thoughts.
However new and difficult that which he had decided to do might be, he
knew that it was the only possible way of life for him now, and however
easy and natural it might have been to return to his former state, he
knew that state to be death.

Yesterday's temptation seemed like the feeling when one awakes from deep
sleep, and, without feeling sleepy, wants to lie comfortably in bed a
little longer, yet knows that it is time to rise and commence the glad
and important work that awaits one.

On that, his last day in Petersburg, he went in the morning to the
Vasilievski Ostrov to see Shoustova. Shoustova lived on the second
floor, and having been shown the back stairs, Nekhludoff entered
straight into the hot kitchen, which smelt strongly of food. An elderly
woman, with turned-up sleeves, with an apron and spectacles, stood by
the fire stirring something in a steaming pan.

"Whom do you want?" she asked severely, looking at him over her
spectacles.

Before Nekhludoff had time to answer, an expression of fright and joy
appeared on her face.

"Oh, Prince!" she exclaimed, wiping her hands on her apron. "But why
have you come the back way? Our Benefactor! I am her mother. They have
nearly killed my little girl. You have saved us," she said, catching
hold of Nekhludoff's hand and trying to kiss it.

"I went to see you yesterday. My sister asked me to. She is here. This
way, this way, please," said Shoustova's mother, as she led the way
through a narrow door, and a dark passage, arranging her hair and
pulling at her tucked-up skirt. "My sister's name is Kornilova. You must
have heard of her," she added, stopping before a closed door. "She was
mixed up in a political affair. An extremely clever woman!"

Shoustova's mother opened the door and showed Nekhludoff into a little
room where on a sofa with a table before it sat a plump, short girl with
fair hair that curled round her pale, round face, which was very like
her mother's. She had a striped cotton blouse on.

Opposite her, in an armchair, leaning forward, so that he was nearly
bent double, sat a young fellow with a slight, black beard and
moustaches.

"Lydia, Prince Nekhludoff!" he said.

The pale girl jumped up, nervously pushing back a lock of hair behind
her ear, and gazing at the newcomer with a frightened look in her large,
grey eyes.

"So you are that dangerous woman whom Vera Doukhova wished me to
intercede for?" Nekhludoff asked, with a smile.

"Yes, I am," said Lydia Shoustova, her broad, kind, child-like smile
disclosing a row of beautiful teeth. "It was aunt who was so anxious to
see you. Aunt!" she called out, in a pleasant, tender voice through a
door.

"Your imprisonment grieved Vera Doukhova very much," said Nekhludoff.

"Take a seat here, or better here," said Shoustova, pointing to the
battered easy-chair from which the young man had just risen.

"My cousin, Zakharov," she said, noticing that Nekhludoff looked at the
young man.

The young man greeted the visitor with a smile as kindly as Shoustova's,
and when Nekhludoff sat down he brought himself another chair, and sat
by his side. A fair-haired schoolboy of about 10 also came into the room
and silently sat down on the window-sill.

"Vera Doukhova is a great friend of my aunt's, but I hardly know her,"
said Shoustova.

Then a woman with a very pleasant face, with a white blouse and leather
belt, came in from the next room.

"How do you do? Thanks for coming," she began as soon as she had taken
the place next Shoustova's on the sofa.

"Well, and how is Vera. You have seen her? How does she bear her fate?"

"She does not complain," said Nekhludoff. "She says she feels perfectly
happy."'

"Ah, that's like Vera. I know her," said the aunt, smiling and shaking
her head. "One must know her. She has a fine character. Everything for
others; nothing for herself."

"No, she asked nothing for herself, but only seemed concerned about your
niece. What seemed to trouble her most was, as she said, that your niece
was imprisoned for nothing."

"Yes, that's true," said the aunt. "It is a dreadful business. She
suffered, in reality, because of me."

"Not at all, aunt. I should have taken the papers without you all the
same."

"Allow me to know better," said the aunt. "You see," she went on to
Nekhludoff, "it all happened because a certain person asked me to keep
his papers for a time, and I, having no house at the time, brought them
to her. And that very night the police searched her room and took her
and the papers, and have kept her up to now, demanding that she should
say from whom she had them."

"But I never told them," said Shoustova quickly, pulling nervously at a
lock that was not even out of place.

"I never said you did," answered the aunt.

"If they took Mitin up it was certainly not through me," said Shoustova,
blushing, and looking round uneasily.

"Don't speak about it, Lydia dear," said her mother.

"Why not? I should like to relate it," said Shoustova, no longer smiling
nor pulling her lock, but twisting it round her finger and getting
redder.

"Don't forget what happened yesterday when you began talking about it."

"Not at all---Leave me alone, mamma. I did not tell, I only kept quiet.
When he examined me about Mitin and about aunt, I said nothing, and told
him I would not answer."

"Then this--Petrov--"

"Petrov is a spy, a gendarme, and a blackguard," put in the aunt, to
explain her niece's words to Nekhludoff.

"Then he began persuading," continued Shoustova, excitedly and
hurriedly. "'Anything you tell me,' he said, 'can harm no one; on the
contrary, if you tell me, we may be able to set free innocent people
whom we may be uselessly tormenting.' Well, I still said I would not
tell. Then he said, 'All right, don't tell, but do not deny what I am
going to say.' And he named Mitin."

"Don't talk about it," said the aunt.

"Oh, aunt, don't interrupt," and she went on pulling the lock of hair
and looking round. "And then, only fancy, the next day I hear--they let
me know by knocking at the wall--that Mitin is arrested. Well, I think
I have betrayed him, and this tormented me so--it tormented me so that I
nearly went mad."

"And it turned out that it was not at all because of you he was taken
up?"

"Yes, but I didn't know. I think, 'There, now, I have betrayed him.' I
walk and walk up and down from wall to wall, and cannot help thinking.
I think, 'I have betrayed him.' I lie down and cover myself up, and hear
something whispering, 'Betrayed! betrayed Mitin! Mitin betrayed!' I
know it is an hallucination, but cannot help listening. I wish to
fall asleep, I cannot. I wish not to think, and cannot cease. That is
terrible!" and as Shoustova spoke she got more and more excited, and
twisted and untwisted the lock of hair round her finger.

"Lydia, dear, be calm," the mother said, touching her shoulder.

But Shoustova could not stop herself.

"It is all the more terrible--" she began again, but did not finish, and
jumping up with a cry rushed out of the room.

Her mother turned to follow her.

"They ought to be hanged, the rascals!" said the schoolboy who was
sitting on the window-sill.

"What's that?" said the mother.

"I only said--Oh, it's nothing," the schoolboy answered, and taking a
cigarette that lay on the table, he began to smoke.



CHAPTER XXVI.

LYDIA'S AUNT.

"Yes, that solitary confinement is terrible for the young," said the
aunt, shaking her head and also lighting a cigarette.

"I should say for every one," Nekhludoff replied.

"No, not for all," answered the aunt. "For the real revolutionists, I
have been told, it is rest and quiet. A man who is wanted by the police
lives in continual anxiety, material want, and fear for himself and
others, and for his cause, and at last, when he is taken up and it is
all over, and all responsibility is off his shoulders, he can sit and
rest. I have been told they actually feel joyful when taken up. But the
young and innocent (they always first arrest the innocent, like Lydia),
for them the first shock is terrible. It is not that they deprive you of
freedom; and the bad food and bad air--all that is nothing. Three times
as many privations would be easily borne if it were not for the moral
shock when one is first taken."

"Have you experienced it?"

"I? I was twice in prison," she answered, with a sad, gentle smile.
"When I was arrested for the first time I had done nothing. I was 22,
had a child, and was expecting another. Though the loss of freedom and
the parting with my child and husband were hard, they were nothing when
compared with what I felt when I found out that I had ceased being a
human creature and had become a thing. I wished to say good-bye to my
little daughter. I was told to go and get into the trap. I asked where I
was being taken to. The answer was that I should know when I got there.
I asked what I was accused of, but got no reply. After I had been
examined, and after they had undressed me and put numbered prison
clothes on me, they led me to a vault, opened a door, pushed me in, and
left me alone; a sentinel, with a loaded gun, paced up and down in front
of my door, and every now and then looked in through a crack--I felt
terribly depressed. What struck me most at the time was that the
gendarme officer who examined me offered me a cigarette. So he knew that
people liked smoking, and must know that they liked freedom and light;
and that mothers love their children, and children their mothers. Then
how could they tear me pitilessly from all that was dear to me, and
lock me up in prison like a wild animal? That sort of thing could not
be borne without evil effects. Any one who believes in God and men, and
believes that men love one another, will cease to believe it after all
that. I have ceased to believe in humanity since then, and have grown
embittered," she finished, with a smile.

Shoustova's mother came in at the door through which her daughter had
gone out, and said that Lydia was very much upset, and would not come in
again.

"And what has this young life been ruined for?" said the aunt. "What is
especially painful to me is that I am the involuntary cause of it."

"She will recover in the country, with God's help," said the mother. "We
shall send her to her father."

"Yes, if it were not for you she would have perished altogether," said
the aunt. "Thank you. But what I wished to see you for is this: I wished
to ask you to take a letter to Vera Doukhova," and she got the letter
out of her pocket.

"The letter is not closed; you may read and tear it up, or hand it to
her, according to how far it coincides with your principles," she said.
"It contains nothing compromising."

Nekhludoff took the letter, and, having promised to give it to Vera
Doukhova, he took his leave and went away. He sealed the letter without
reading it, meaning to take it to its destination.



CHAPTER XXVII.

THE STATE CHURCH AND THE PEOPLE.

The last thing that kept Nekhludoff in Petersburg was the case of the
sectarians, whose petition he intended to get his former fellow-officer,
Aide-de-camp Bogatyreff, to hand to the Tsar. He came to Bogatyreff in
the morning, and found him about to go out, though still at breakfast.
Bogatyreff was not tall, but firmly built and wonderfully strong (he
could bend a horseshoe), a kind, honest, straight, and even liberal man.
In spite of these qualities, he was intimate at Court, and very fond of
the Tsar and his family, and by some strange method he managed, while
living in that highest circle, to see nothing but the good in it and to
take no part in the evil and corruption. He never condemned anybody
nor any measure, and either kept silent or spoke in a bold, loud voice,
almost shouting what he had to say, and often laughing in the same
boisterous manner. And he did not do it for diplomatic reasons, but
because such was his character.

"Ah, that's right that you have come. Would you like some breakfast?
Sit down, the beefsteaks are fine! I always begin with something
substantial--begin and finish, too. Ha! ha! ha! Well, then, have a glass
of wine," he shouted, pointing to a decanter of claret. "I have been
thinking of you. I will hand on the petition. I shall put it into his
own hands. You may count on that, only it occurred to me that it would
be best for you to call on Toporoff."

Nekhludoff made a wry face at the mention of Toporoff.

"It all depends on him. He will be consulted, anyhow. And perhaps he may
himself meet your wishes."

"If you advise it I shall go."

"That's right. Well, and how does Petersburg agree with you?" shouted
Bogatyreff. "Tell me. Eh?"

"I feel myself getting hypnotised," replied Nekhludoff.

"Hypnotised!" Bogatyreff repeated, and burst out laughing. "You won't
have anything? Well, just as you please," and he wiped his moustaches
with his napkin. "Then you'll go? Eh? If he does not do it, give the
petition to me, and I shall hand it on to-morrow." Shouting these words,
he rose, crossed himself just as naturally as he had wiped his mouth,
and began buckling on his sword.

"And now good-bye; I must go. We are both going out," said Nekhludoff,
and shaking Bogatyreff's strong, broad hand, and with the sense of
pleasure which the impression of something healthy and unconsciously
fresh always gave him, Nekhludoff parted from Bogatyreff on the
door-steps.

Though he expected no good result from his visit, still Nekhludoff,
following Bogatyreff's advice, went to see Toporoff, on whom the
sectarians' fate depended.

The position occupied by Toporoff, involving as it did an incongruity of
purpose, could only be held by a dull man devoid of moral sensibility.
Toporoff possessed both these negative qualities. The incongruity of the
position he occupied was this. It was his duty to keep up and to defend,
by external measures, not excluding violence, that Church which, by its
own declaration, was established by God Himself and could not be shaken
by the gates of hell nor by anything human. This divine and immutable
God-established institution had to be sustained and defended by a human
institution--the Holy Synod, managed by Toporoff and his officials.
Toporoff did not see this contradiction, nor did he wish to see it, and
he was therefore much concerned lest some Romish priest, some pastor, or
some sectarian should destroy that Church which the gates of hell could
not conquer.

Toporoff, like all those who are quite destitute of the fundamental
religious feeling that recognises the equality and brotherhood of men,
was fully convinced that the common people were creatures entirely
different from himself, and that the people needed what he could very
well do without, for at the bottom of his heart he believed in nothing,
and found such a state very convenient and pleasant. Yet he feared lest
the people might also come to such a state, and looked upon it as his
sacred duty, as he called it, to save the people therefrom.

A certain cookery book declares that some crabs like to be boiled alive.
In the same way he thought and spoke as if the people liked being kept
in superstition; only he meant this in a literal sense, whereas the
cookery book did not mean its words literally.

His feelings towards the religion he was keeping up were the same as
those of the poultry-keeper towards the carrion he fed his fowls on.
Carrion was very disgusting, but the fowls liked it; therefore it was
right to feed the fowls on carrion. Of course all this worship of the
images of the Iberian, Kasan and Smolensk Mothers of God was a gross
superstition, but the people liked it and believed in it, and therefore
the superstition must be kept up.

Thus thought Toporoff, not considering that the people only liked
superstition because there always have been, and still are, men like
himself who, being enlightened, instead of using their light to help
others to struggle out of their dark ignorance, use it to plunge them
still deeper into it.

When Nekhludoff entered the reception-room Toporoff was in his study
talking with an abbess, a lively and aristocratic lady, who was
spreading the Greek orthodox faith in Western Russia among the Uniates
(who acknowledge the Pope of Rome), and who have the Greek religion
enforced on them. An official who was in the reception-room inquired
what Nekhludoff wanted, and when he heard that Nekhludoff meant to
hand in a petition to the Emperor, he asked him if he would allow the
petition to be read first. Nekhludoff gave it him, and the official took
it into the study. The abbess, with her hood and flowing veil and her
long train trailing behind, left the study and went out, her white hands
(with their well-tended nails) holding a topaz rosary. Nekhludoff was
not immediately asked to come in. Toporoff was reading the petition
and shaking his head. He was unpleasantly surprised by the clear and
emphatic wording of it.

"If it gets into the hands of the Emperor it may cause
misunderstandings, and unpleasant questions may be asked," he thought
as he read. Then he put the petition on the table, rang, and ordered
Nekhludoff to be asked in.

He remembered the case of the sectarians; he had had a petition from
them before. The case was this: These Christians, fallen away from the
Greek Orthodox Church, were first exhorted and then tried by law, but
were acquitted. Then the Archdeacon and the Governor arranged, on the
plea that their marriages were illegal, to exile these sectarians,
separating the husbands, wives, and children. These fathers and
wives were now petitioning that they should not be parted. Toporoff
recollected the first time the case came to his notice: he had at that
time hesitated whether he had not better put a stop to it. But then
he thought no harm could result from his confirming the decision to
separate and exile the different members of the sectarian families,
whereas allowing the peasant sect to remain where it was might have a
bad effect on the rest of the inhabitants of the place and cause them
to fall away from Orthodoxy. And then the affair also proved the zeal
of the Archdeacon, and so he let the case proceed along the lines it had
taken. But now that they had a defender such as Nekhludoff, who had some
influence in Petersburg, the case might be specially pointed out to the
Emperor as something cruel, or it might get into the foreign papers.
Therefore he at once took an unexpected decision.

"How do you do?" he said, with the air of a very busy man, receiving
Nekhludoff standing, and at once starting on the business. "I know
this case. As soon as I saw the names I recollected this unfortunate
business," he said, taking up the petition and showing it to Nekhludoff.
"And I am much indebted to you for reminding me of it. It is the
over-zealousness of the provincial authorities."

Nekhludoff stood silent, looking with no kindly feelings at the
immovable, pale mask of a face before him.

"And I shall give orders that these measures should be revoked and the
people reinstated in their homes."

"So that I need not make use of this petition?"

"I promise you most assuredly," answered Toporoff, laying a stress on
the word I, as if quite convinced that his honesty, his word was the
best guarantee. "It will be best if I write at once. Take a seat,
please."

He went up to the table and began to write. As Nekhludoff sat down he
looked at the narrow, bald skull, at the fat, blue-veined hand that was
swiftly guiding the pen, and wondered why this evidently indifferent man
was doing what he did and why he was doing it with such care.

"Well, here you are," said Toporoff, sealing the envelope; "you may let
your clients know," and he stretched his lips to imitate a smile.

"Then what did these people suffer for?" Nekhludoff asked, as he took
the envelope.

Toporoff raised his head and smiled, as if Nekhludoff's question gave
him pleasure. "That I cannot tell. All I can say is that the interests
of the people guarded by us are so important that too great a zeal
in matters of religion is not so dangerous or so harmful as the
indifference which is now spreading--"

"But how is it that in the name of religion the very first demands of
righteousness are violated--families are separated?"

Toporoff continued to smile patronisingly, evidently thinking what
Nekhludoff said very pretty. Anything that Nekhludoff could say he would
have considered very pretty and very one-sided, from the height of what
he considered his far-reaching office in the State.

"It may seem so from the point of view of a private individual," he
said, "but from an administrative point of view it appears in a rather
different light. However, I must bid you good-bye, now," said Toporoff,
bowing his head and holding out his hand, which Nekhludoff pressed.

"The interests of the people! Your interests is what you mean!" thought
Nekhludoff as he went out. And he ran over in his mind the people in
whom is manifested the activity of the institutions that uphold religion
and educate the people. He began with the woman punished for the
illicit sale of spirits, the boy for theft, the tramp for tramping, the
incendiary for setting a house on fire, the banker for fraud, and that
unfortunate Lydia Shoustova imprisoned only because they hoped to get
such information as they required from her. Then he thought of the
sectarians punished for violating Orthodoxy, and Gourkevitch for wanting
constitutional government, and Nekhludoff clearly saw that all these
people were arrested, locked up, exiled, not really because they
transgressed against justice or behaved unlawfully, but only because
they were an obstacle hindering the officials and the rich from enjoying
the property they had taken away from the people. And the woman who sold
wine without having a license, and the thief knocking about the town,
and Lydia Shoustova hiding proclamations, and the sectarians upsetting
superstitions, and Gourkevitch desiring a constitution, were a real
hindrance. It seemed perfectly clear to Nekhludoff that all these
officials, beginning with his aunt's husband, the Senators, and
Toporoff, down to those clean and correct gentlemen who sat at the
tables in the Ministry Office, were not at all troubled by the fact that
that in such a state of things the innocent had to suffer, but were only
concerned how to get rid of the really dangerous, so that the rule
that ten guilty should escape rather than that one innocent should
be condemned was not observed, but, on the contrary, for the sake of
getting rid of one really dangerous person, ten who seemed dangerous
were punished, as, when cutting a rotten piece out of anything, one has
to cut away some that is good.

This explanation seemed very simple and clear to Nekhludoff; but its
very simplicity and clearness made him hesitate to accept it. Was it
possible that so complicated a phenomenon could have so simple and
terrible an explanation? Was it possible that all these words about
justice, law, religion, and God, and so on, were mere words, hiding the
coarsest cupidity and cruelty?



CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE MEANING OF MARIETTE'S ATTRACTION.

Nekhludoff would have left Petersburg on the evening of the same day,
but he had promised Mariette to meet her at the theatre, and though he
knew that he ought not to keep that promise, he deceived himself into
the belief that it would not be right to break his word.

"Am I capable of withstanding these temptations?" he asked himself not
quite honestly. "I shall try for the last time."

He dressed in his evening clothes, and arrived at the theatre during the
second act of the eternal Dame aux Camelias, in which a foreign actress
once again, and in a novel manner, showed how women die of consumption.

The theatre was quite full. Mariette's box was at once, and with great
deference, shown to Nekhludoff at his request. A liveried servant stood
in the corridor outside; he bowed to Nekhludoff as to one whom he knew,
and opened the door of the box.

All the people who sat and stood in the boxes on the opposite side,
those who sat near and those who were in the parterre, with their grey,
grizzly, bald, or curly heads--all were absorbed in watching the thin,
bony actress who, dressed in silks and laces, was wriggling before them,
and speaking in an unnatural voice.

Some one called "Hush!" when the door opened, and two streams, one of
cool, the other of hot, air touched Nekhludoff's face.

Mariette and a lady whom he did not know, with a red cape and a big,
heavy head-dress, were in the box, and two men also, Mariette's
husband, the General, a tall, handsome man with a severe, inscrutable
countenance, a Roman nose, and a uniform padded round the chest, and a
fair man, with a bit of shaved chin between pompous whiskers.

Mariette, graceful, slight, elegant, her low-necked dress showing her
firm, shapely, slanting shoulders, with a little black mole where they
joined her neck, immediately turned, and pointed with her face to a
chair behind her in an engaging manner, and smiled a smile that seemed
full of meaning to Nekhludoff.

The husband looked at him in the quiet way in which he did everything,
and bowed. In the look he exchanged with his wife, the master, the owner
of a beautiful woman, was to be seen at once.

When the monologue was over the theatre resounded with the clapping of
hands. Mariette rose, and holding up her rustling silk skirt, went into
the back of the box and introduced Nekhludoff to her husband.

The General, without ceasing to smile with his eyes, said he was very
pleased, and then sat inscrutably silent.

"I ought to have left to-day, had I not promised," said Nekhludoff to
Mariette.

"If you do not care to see me," said Mariette, in answer to what his
words implied, "you will see a wonderful actress. Was she not splendid
in the last scene?" she asked, turning to her husband.

The husband bowed his head.

"This sort of thing does not touch me," said Nekhludoff. "I have seen so
much real suffering lately that--"

"Yes, sit down and tell me."

The husband listened, his eyes smiling more and more ironically. "I have
been to see that woman whom they have set free, and who has been kept in
prison for so long; she is quite broken down."

"That is the woman I spoke to you about," Mariette said to her husband.

"Oh, yes, I was very pleased that she could be set free," said the
husband quietly, nodding and smiling under his moustache with evident
irony, so it seemed to Nekhludoff. "I shall go and have a smoke."

Nekhludoff sat waiting to hear what the something was that Mariette had
to tell him. She said nothing, and did not even try to say anything, but
joked and spoke about the performance, which she thought ought to touch
Nekhludoff. Nekhludoff saw that she had nothing to tell, but only wished
to show herself to him in all the splendour of her evening toilet, with
her shoulders and little mole; and this was pleasant and yet repulsive
to him.

The charm that had veiled all this sort of thing from Nekhludoff was
not removed, but it was as if he could see what lay beneath. Looking at
Mariette, he admired her, and yet he knew that she was a liar, living
with a husband who was making his career by means of the tears and lives
of hundreds and hundreds of people, and that she was quite indifferent
about it, and that all she had said the day before was untrue. What she
wanted--neither he nor she knew why--was to make him fall in love with
her. This both attracted and disgusted him. Several times, on the point
of going away, he took up his hat, and then stayed on.

But at last, when the husband returned with a strong smell of tobacco
in his thick moustache, and looked at Nekhludoff with a patronising,
contemptuous air, as if not recognising him, Nekhludoff left the box
before the door was closed again, found his overcoat, and went out of
the theatre. As he was walking home along the Nevski, he could not help
noticing a well-shaped and aggressively finely-dressed woman, who was
quietly walking in front of him along the broad asphalt pavement. The
consciousness of her detestable power was noticeable in her face and
the whole of her figure. All who met or passed that woman looked at her.
Nekhludoff walked faster than she did and, involuntarily, also looked
her in the face. The face, which was probably painted, was handsome,
and the woman looked at him with a smile and her eyes sparkled. And,
curiously enough, Nekhludoff was suddenly reminded of Mariette, because
he again felt both attracted and disgusted just as when in the theatre.

Having hurriedly passed her, Nekhludoff turned off on to the Morskaya,
and passed on to the embankment, where, to the surprise of a policeman,
he began pacing up and down the pavement.

"The other one gave me just such a smile when I entered the theatre," he
thought, "and the meaning of the smile was the same. The only difference
is, that this one said plainly, 'If you want me, take me; if not, go
your way,' and the other one pretended that she was not thinking of
this, but living in some high and refined state, while this was really
at the root. Besides, this one was driven to it by necessity, while
the other amused herself by playing with that enchanting, disgusting,
frightful passion. This woman of the street was like stagnant, smelling
water offered to those whose thirst was greater than their disgust; that
other one in the theatre was like the poison which, unnoticed, poisons
everything it gets into."

Nekhludoff recalled his liaison with the Marechal's wife, and shameful
memories rose before him.

"The animalism of the brute nature in man is disgusting," thought he,
"but as long as it remains in its naked form we observe it from the
height of our spiritual life and despise it; and--whether one has
fallen or resisted--one remains what one was before. But when that
same animalism hides under a cloak of poetry and aesthetic feeling and
demands our worship--then we are swallowed up by it completely, and
worship animalism, no longer distinguishing good from evil. Then it is
awful."

Nekhludoff perceived all this now as clearly as he saw the palace, the
sentinels, the fortress, the river, the boats, and the Stock Exchange.
And just as on this northern summer night there was no restful darkness
on the earth, but only a dismal, dull light coming from an invisible
source, so in Nekhludoff's soul there was no longer the restful
darkness, ignorance. Everything seemed clear. It was clear that
everything considered important and good was insignificant and
repulsive, and that all the glamour and luxury hid the old, well-known
crimes, which not only remained unpunished but were adorned with all the
splendour which men were capable of inventing.

Nekhludoff wished to forget all this, not to see it, but he could no
longer help seeing it. Though he could not see the source of the light
which revealed it to him any more than he could see the source of the
light which lay over Petersburg; and though the light appeared to
him dull, dismal, and unnatural, yet he could not help seeing what it
revealed, and he felt both joyful and anxious.



CHAPTER XXIX.

FOR HER SAKE AND FOR GOD'S.

On his return to Moscow Nekhludoff went at once to the prison hospital
to bring Maslova the sad news that the Senate had confirmed the decision
of the Court, and that she must prepare to go to Siberia. He had little
hope of the success of his petition to the Emperor, which the advocate
had written for him, and which he now brought with him for Maslova to
sign. And, strange to say, he did not at present even wish to succeed;
he had got used to the thought of going to Siberia and living among the
exiled and the convicts, and he could not easily picture to himself how
his life and Maslova's would shape if she were acquitted. He remembered
the thought of the American writer, Thoreau, who at the time when
slavery existed in America said that "under a government that
imprisons any unjustly the true place for a just man is also a prison."
Nekhludoff, especially after his visit to Petersburg and all he
discovered there, thought in the same way.

"Yes, the only place befitting an honest man in Russia at the present
time is a prison," he thought, and even felt that this applied to him
personally, when he drove up to the prison and entered its walls.

The doorkeeper recognised Nekhludoff, and told him at once that Maslova
was no longer there.

"Where is she, then?"

"In the cell again."

"Why has she been removed?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Oh, your excellency, what are such people?" said the doorkeeper,
contemptuously. "She's been carrying on with the medical assistant, so
the head doctor ordered her back."

Nekhludoff had had no idea how near Maslova and the state of her mind
were to him. He was stunned by the news.

He felt as one feels at the news of a great and unforeseen misfortune,
and his pain was very severe. His first feeling was one of shame. He,
with his joyful idea of the change that he imagined was going on in her
soul, now seemed ridiculous in his own eyes. He thought that all her
pretence of not wishing to accept his sacrifice, all the reproaches and
tears, were only the devices of a depraved woman, who wished to use
him to the best advantage. He seemed to remember having seen signs of
obduracy at his last interview with her. All this flashed through his
mind as he instinctively put on his hat and left the hospital.

"What am I to do now? Am I still bound to her? Has this action of hers
not set me free?" And as he put these questions to himself he knew at
once that if he considered himself free, and threw her up, he would be
punishing himself, and not her, which was what he wished to do, and he
was seized with fear.

"No, what has happened cannot alter--it can only strengthen my resolve.
Let her do what flows from the state her mind is in. If it is carrying
on with the medical assistant, let her carry on with the medical
assistant; that is her business. I must do what my conscience demands of
me. And my conscience expects me to sacrifice my freedom. My resolution
to marry her, if only in form, and to follow wherever she may be sent,
remains unalterable." Nekhludoff said all this to himself with vicious
obstinacy as he left the hospital and walked with resolute steps towards
the big gates of the prison. He asked the warder on duty at the gate
to inform the inspector that he wished to see Maslova. The warder knew
Nekhludoff, and told him of an important change that had taken place
in the prison. The old inspector had been discharged, and a new, very
severe official appointed in his place.

"They are so strict nowadays, it's just awful," said the jailer. "He is
in here; they will let him know directly."

The new inspector was in the prison and soon came to Nekhludoff. He was
a tall, angular man, with high cheek bones, morose, and very slow in his
movements.

"Interviews are allowed in the visiting room on the appointed days," he
said, without looking at Nekhludoff.

"But I have a petition to the Emperor, which I want signed."

"You can give it to me."

"I must see the prisoner myself. I was always allowed to before."

"That was so, before," said the inspector, with a furtive glance at
Nekhludoff.

"I have a permission from the governor," insisted Nekhludoff, and took
out his pocket-book.

"Allow me," said the inspector, taking the paper from Nekhludoff with
his long, dry, white fingers, on the first of which was a gold ring,
still without looking him in the eyes. He read the paper slowly. "Step
into the office, please."

This time the office was empty. The inspector sat down by the table
and began sorting some papers that lay on it, evidently intending to be
present at the interview.

When Nekhludoff asked whether he might see the political prisoner,
Doukhova, the inspector answered, shortly, that he could not.
"Interviews with political prisoners are not permitted," he said, and
again fixed his attention on his papers. With a letter to Doukhova in
his pocket, Nekhludoff felt as if he had committed some offence, and his
plans had been discovered and frustrated.

When Maslova entered the room the inspector raised his head, and,
without looking at either her or Nekhludoff, remarked: "You may talk,"
and went on sorting his papers. Maslova had again the white jacket,
petticoat and kerchief on. When she came up to Nekhludoff and saw his
cold, hard look, she blushed scarlet, and crumbling the hem of her
jacket with her hand, she cast down her eyes. Her confusion, so it
seemed to Nekhludoff, confirmed the hospital doorkeeper's words.

Nekhludoff had meant to treat her in the same way as before, but could
not bring himself to shake hands with her, so disgusting was she to him
now.

"I have brought you bad news," he said, in a monotonous voice, without
looking at her or taking her hand. "The Senate has refused."

"I knew it would," she said, in a strange tone, as if she were gasping
for breath.

Formerly Nekhludoff would have asked why she said she knew it would;
now he only looked at her. Her eyes were full of tears. But this did not
soften him; it roused his irritation against her even more.

The inspector rose and began pacing up and down the room.

In spite of the disgust Nekhludoff was feeling at the moment, he
considered it right to express his regret at the Senate's decision.

"You must not despair," he said. "The petition to the Emperor may meet
with success, and I hope---"

"I'm not thinking of that," she said, looking piteously at him with her
wet, squinting eyes.

"What is it, then?"

"You have been to the hospital, and they have most likely told you about
me--"

"What of that? That is your affair," said Nekhludoff coldly, and
frowned. The cruel feeling of wounded pride that had quieted down rose
with renewed force when she mentioned the hospital.

"He, a man of the world, whom any girl of the best families would think
it happiness to marry, offered himself as a husband to this woman,
and she could not even wait, but began intriguing with the medical
assistant," thought he, with a look of hatred.

"Here, sign this petition," he said, taking a large envelope from his
pocket, and laying the paper on the table. She wiped the tears with a
corner of her kerchief, and asked what to write and where.

He showed her, and she sat down and arranged the cuff of her right
sleeve with her left hand; he stood behind her, and silently looked
at her back, which shook with suppressed emotion, and evil and good
feelings were fighting in his breast--feelings of wounded pride and of
pity for her who was suffering--and the last feeling was victorious.

He could not remember which came first; did the pity for her first enter
his heart, or did he first remember his own sins--his own repulsive
actions, the very same for which he was condemning her? Anyhow, he both
felt himself guilty and pitied her.

Having signed the petition and wiped her inky finger on her petticoat,
she got up and looked at him.

"Whatever happens, whatever comes of it, my resolve remains unchanged,"
said Nekhludoff. The thought that he had forgiven her heightened his
feeling of pity and tenderness for her, and he wished to comfort her. "I
will do what I have said; wherever they take you I shall be with you."

"What's the use?" she interrupted hurriedly, though her whole face
lighted up.

"Think what you will want on the way--"

"I don't know of anything in particular, thank you."

The inspector came up, and without waiting for a remark from him
Nekhludoff took leave, and went out with peace, joy, and love towards
everybody in his heart such as he had never felt before. The certainty
that no action of Maslova could change his love for her filled him with
joy and raised him to a level which he had never before attained. Let
her intrigue with the medical assistant; that was her business. He loved
her not for his own but for her sake and for God's.

And this intrigue, for which Maslova was turned out of the hospital,
and of which Nekhludoff believed she was really guilty, consisted of the
following:

Maslova was sent by the head nurse to get some herb tea from the
dispensary at the end of the corridor, and there, all alone, she found
the medical assistant, a tall man, with a blotchy face, who had for a
long time been bothering her. In trying to get away from him Maslova
gave him such a push that he knocked his head against a shelf, from
which two bottles fell and broke. The head doctor, who was passing at
that moment, heard the sound of breaking glass, and saw Maslova run out,
quite red, and shouted to her:

"Ah, my good woman, if you start intriguing here, I'll send you about
your business. What is the meaning of it?" he went on, addressing the
medical assistant, and looking at him over his spectacles.

The assistant smiled, and began to justify himself. The doctor gave no
heed to him, but, lifting his head so that he now looked through his
spectacles, he entered the ward. He told the inspector the same day to
send another more sedate assistant-nurse in Maslova's place. And this
was her "intrigue" with the medical assistant.

Being turned out for a love intrigue was particularly painful to
Maslova, because the relations with men, which had long been repulsive
to her, had become specially disgusting after meeting Nekhludoff. The
thought that, judging her by her past and present position, every man,
the blotchy assistant among them, considered he had a right to offend
her, and was surprised at her refusal, hurt her deeply, and made her
pity herself and brought tears to her eyes.

When she went out to Nekhludoff this time she wished to clear herself of
the false charge which she knew he would certainly have heard about. But
when she began to justify herself she felt he did not believe her, and
that her excuses would only strengthen his suspicions; tears choked her,
and she was silent.

Maslova still thought and continued to persuade herself that she had
never forgiven him, and hated him, as she told him at their second
interview, but in reality she loved him again, and loved him so that she
did all he wished her to do; left off drinking, smoking, coquetting, and
entered the hospital because she knew he wished it. And if every time he
reminded her of it, she refused so decidedly to accept his sacrifice and
marry him, it was because she liked repeating the proud words she had
once uttered, and because she knew that a marriage with her would be a
misfortune for him.

She had resolutely made up her mind that she would not accept his
sacrifice, and yet the thought that he despised her and believed that
she still was what she had been, and did not notice the change that had
taken place in her, was very painful. That he could still think she had
done wrong while in the hospital tormented her more than the news that
her sentence was confirmed.



CHAPTER XXX.

THE ASTONISHING INSTITUTION CALLED CRIMINAL LAW.

Maslova might be sent off with the first gang of prisoners, therefore
Nekhludoff got ready for his departure. But there was so much to be done
that he felt that he could not finish it, however much time he might
have. It was quite different now from what it had been. Formerly he used
to be obliged to look for an occupation, the interest of which always
centred in one person, i.e., Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff, and
yet, though every interest of his life was thus centred, all these
occupations were very wearisome. Now all his occupations related to
other people and not to Dmitri Ivanovitch, and they were all interesting
and attractive, and there was no end to them. Nor was this all. Formerly
Dmitri Ivanovitch Nekhludoff's occupations always made him feel vexed
and irritable; now they produced a joyful state of mind. The business at
present occupying Nekhludoff could be divided under three headings.
He himself, with his usual pedantry, divided it in that way, and
accordingly kept the papers referring to it in three different
portfolios. The first referred to Maslova, and was chiefly that of
taking steps to get her petition to the Emperor attended to, and
preparing for her probable journey to Siberia.

The second was about his estates. In Panovo he had given the land to
the peasants on condition of their paying rent to be put to their own
communal use. But he had to confirm this transaction by a legal deed,
and to make his will, in accordance with it. In Kousminski the state of
things was still as he had first arranged it, i.e., he was to receive
the rent; but the terms had to be fixed, and also how much of the money
he would use to live on, and how much he would leave for the peasants'
use. As he did not know what his journey to Siberia would cost him, he
could not decide to lose this revenue altogether, though he reduced the
income from it by half.

The third part of his business was to help the convicts, who applied
more and more often to him. At first when he came in contact with
the prisoners, and they appealed to him for help, he at once began
interceding for them, hoping to lighten their fate, but he soon had so
many applications that he felt the impossibility of attending to all of
them, and that naturally led him to take up another piece of work, which
at last roused his interest even more than the three first. This new
part of his business was finding an answer to the following questions:
What was this astonishing institution called criminal law, of which the
results were that in the prison, with some of the inmates of which
he had lately become acquainted, and in all those other places of
confinement, from the Peter and Paul Fortress in Petersburg to the
island of Sakhalin, hundreds and thousands of victims were pining? What
did this strange criminal law exist for? How had it originated?

From his personal relations with the prisoners, from notes by some of
those in confinement, and by questioning the advocate and the prison
priest, Nekhludoff came to the conclusion that the convicts, the
so-called criminals, could be divided into five classes. The first were
quite innocent people, condemned by judicial blunder. Such were the
Menshoffs, supposed to be incendiaries, Maslova, and others. There
were not many of these; according to the priest's words, only seven per
cent., but their condition excited particular interest.

To the second class belong persons condemned for actions done under
peculiar circumstances, i.e., in a fit of passion, jealousy, or
drunkenness, circumstances under which those who judged them would
surely have committed the same actions.

The third class consisted of people punished for having committed
actions which, according to their understanding, were quite natural,
and even good, but which those other people, the men who made the laws,
considered to be crimes. Such were the persons who sold spirits without
a license, smugglers, those who gathered grass and wood on large estates
and in the forests belonging to the Crown; the thieving miners; and
those unbelieving people who robbed churches.

To the fourth class belonged those who were imprisoned only because they
stood morally higher than the average level of society. Such were the
Sectarians, the Poles, the Circassians rebelling in order to regain
their independence, the political prisoners, the Socialists, the
strikers condemned for withstanding the authorities. There was,
according to Nekhludoff's observations, a very large percentage
belonging to this class; among them some of the best of men.

The fifth class consisted of persons who had been far more sinned
against by society than they had sinned against it. These were
castaways, stupefied by continual oppression and temptation, such as the
boy who had stolen the rugs, and hundreds of others whom Nekhludoff had
seen in the prison and out of it. The conditions under which they lived
seemed to lead on systematically to those actions which are termed
crimes. A great many thieves and murderers with whom he had lately come
in contact, according to Nekhludoff's estimate, belonged to this class.
To this class Nekhludoff also reckoned those depraved, demoralised
creatures whom the new school of criminology classify as the criminal
type, and the existence of which is considered to be the chief proof
of the necessity of criminal law and punishment. This demoralised,
depraved, abnormal type was, according to Nekhludoff, exactly the same
as that against whom society had sinned, only here society had sinned
not directly against them, but against their parents and forefathers.

Among this latter class Nekhludoff was specially struck by one Okhotin,
an inveterate thief, the illegitimate son of a prostitute, brought up
in a doss-house, who, up to the age of 30, had apparently never met with
any one whose morality was above that of a policeman, and who had
got into a band of thieves when quite young. He was gifted with an
extraordinary sense of humour, by means of which he made himself very
attractive. He asked Nekhludoff for protection, at the same time making
fun of himself, the lawyers, the prison, and laws human and divine.

Another was the handsome Fedoroff, who, with a band of robbers, of
whom he was the chief, had robbed and murdered an old man, an official.
Fedoroff was a peasant, whose father had been unlawfully deprived of his
house, and who, later on, when serving as a soldier, had suffered much
because he had fallen in love with an officer's mistress. He had a
fascinating, passionate nature, that longed for enjoyment at any cost.
He had never met anybody who restrained himself for any cause whatever,
and had never heard a word about any aim in life other than enjoyment.

Nekhludoff distinctly saw that both these men were richly endowed by
nature, but had been neglected and crippled like uncared-for plants.

He had also met a tramp and a woman who had repelled him by their
dulness and seeming cruelty, but even in them he could find no trace of
the criminal type written about by the Italian school, but only saw in
them people who were repulsive to him personally, just in the same way
as some he had met outside the prison, in swallow-tail coats wearing
epaulettes, or bedecked with lace. And so the investigation of the
reasons why all these very different persons were put in prison, while
others just like them were going about free and even judging them,
formed a fourth task for Nekhludoff.

He hoped to find an answer to this question in books, and bought all
that referred to it. He got the works of Lombroso, Garofalo, Ferry,
List, Maudsley, Tard, and read them carefully. But as he read he became
more and more disappointed. It happened to him as it always happens
to those who turn to science not in order to play a part in it, nor
to write, nor to dispute, nor to teach, but simply for an answer to an
every-day question of life. Science answered thousands of different very
subtle and ingenious questions touching criminal law, but not the one
he was trying to solve. He asked a very simple question: "Why, and
with what right, do some people lock up, torment, exile, flog, and kill
others, while they are themselves just like those whom they torment,
flog, and kill?" And in answer he got deliberations as to whether human
beings had free will or not. Whether signs of criminality could be
detected by measuring the skulls or not. What part heredity played in
crime. Whether immorality could be inherited. What madness is, what
degeneration is, and what temperament is. How climate, food, ignorance,
imitativeness, hypnotism, or passion act. What society is. What are its
duties, etc., etc.

These disquisitions reminded him of the answer he once got from a little
boy whom he met coming home from school. Nekhludoff asked him if he had
learned his spelling.

"I have," answered the boy.

"Well, then, tell me, how do you spell 'leg'?"

"A dog's leg, or what kind of leg?" the boy answered, with a sly look.

Answers in the form of new questions, like the boy's, was all Nekhludoff
got in reply to his one primary question. He found much that was clever,
learned much that was interesting, but what he did not find was an
answer to the principal question: By what right some people punish
others?

Not only did he not find any answer, but all the arguments were brought
forward in order to explain and vindicate punishment, the necessity of
which was taken as an axiom.

Nekhludoff read much, but only in snatches, and putting down his failure
to this superficial way of reading, hoped to find the answer later on.
He would not allow himself to believe in the truth of the answer which
began, more and more often, to present itself to him.



CHAPTER XXXI.

NEKHLUDOFF'S SISTER AND HER HUSBAND.

The gang of prisoners, with Maslova among them, was to start on the 5th
July. Nekhludoff arranged to start on the same day.

The day before, Nekhludoff's sister and her husband came to town to see
him.

Nekhludoff's sister, Nathalie Ivanovna Rogozhinsky, was 10 years older
than her brother. She had been very fond of him when he was a boy, and
later on, just before her marriage, they grew very close to each other,
as if they were equals, she being a young woman of 25, he a lad of 15.
At that time she was in love with his friend, Nikolenka Irtenieff, since
dead. They both loved Nikolenka, and loved in him and in themselves that
which is good, and which unites all men. Since then they had both been
depraved, he by military service and a vicious life, she by marriage
with a man whom she loved with a sensual love, who did not care for the
things that had once been so dear and holy to her and to her brother,
nor even understand the meaning of those aspirations towards moral
perfection and the service of mankind, which once constituted her life,
and put them down to ambition and the wish to show off; that being the
only explanation comprehensible to him.

Nathalie's husband had been a man without a name and without means, but
cleverly steering towards Liberalism or Conservatism, according to which
best suited his purpose, he managed to make a comparatively brilliant
judicial career. Some peculiarity which made him attractive to women
assisted him when he was no longer in his first youth. While travelling
abroad he made Nekhludoff's acquaintance, and managed to make Nathalie,
who was also no longer a girl, fall in love with him, rather against her
mother's wishes who considered a marriage with him to be a misalliance
for her daughter. Nekhludoff, though he tried to hide it from himself,
though he fought against it, hated his brother-in-law.

Nekhludoff had a strong antipathy towards him because of the vulgarity
of his feelings, his assurance and narrowness, but chiefly because of
Nathalie, who managed to love him in spite of the narrowness of his
nature, and loved him so selfishly, so sensually, and stifled for his
sake all the good that had been in her.

It always hurt Nekhludoff to think of Nathalie as the wife of that
hairy, self-assured man with the shiny, bald patch on his head. He could
not even master a feeling of revulsion towards their children, and when
he heard that she was again going to have a baby, he felt something like
sorrow that she had once more been infected with something bad by this
man who was so foreign to him. The Rogozhinskys had come to Moscow
alone, having left their two children--a boy and a girl--at home, and
stopped in the best rooms of the best hotel. Nathalie at once went to
her mother's old house, but hearing from Agraphena Petrovna that her
brother had left, and was living in a lodging-house, she drove there.
The dirty servant met her in the stuffy passage, dark but for a lamp
which burnt there all day. He told her that the Prince was not in.

Nathalie asked to be shown into his rooms, as she wished to leave a note
for him, and the man took her up.

Nathalie carefully examined her brother's two little rooms. She noticed
in everything the love of cleanliness and order she knew so well in
him, and was struck by the novel simplicity of the surroundings. On his
writing-table she saw the paper-weight with the bronze dog on the top
which she remembered; the tidy way in which his different portfolios and
writing utensils were placed on the table was also familiar, and so was
the large, crooked ivory paper knife which marked the place in a French
book by Tard, which lay with other volumes on punishment and a book
in English by Henry George. She sat down at the table and wrote a note
asking him to be sure to come that same day, and shaking her head in
surprise at what she saw, she returned to her hotel.

Two questions regarding her brother now interested Nathalie: his
marriage with Katusha, which she had heard spoken about in their
town--for everybody was speaking about it--and his giving away the land
to the peasants, which was also known, and struck many as something of
a political nature, and dangerous. The marriage with Katusha pleased
her in a way. She admired that resoluteness which was so like him and
herself as they used to be in those happy times before her marriage. And
yet she was horrified when she thought her brother was going to marry
such a dreadful woman. The latter was the stronger feeling of the two,
and she decided to use all her influence to prevent him from doing it,
though she knew how difficult this would be.

The other matter, the giving up of the land to the peasants, did not
touch her so nearly, but her husband was very indignant about it, and
expected her to influence her brother against it.

Rogozhinsky said that such an action was the height of inconsistency,
flightiness, and pride, the only possible explanation of which was the
desire to appear original, to brag, to make one's self talked about.

"What sense could there be in letting the land to the peasants, on
condition that they pay the rent to themselves?" he said. "If he was
resolved to do such a thing, why not sell the land to them through the
Peasants' Bank? There might have been some sense in that. In fact, this
act verges on insanity."

And Rogozhinsky began seriously thinking about putting Nekhludoff under
guardianship, and demanded of his wife that she should speak seriously
to her brother about his curious intention.



CHAPTER XXXII.

NEKHLUDOFF'S ANARCHISM.

As soon as Nekhludoff returned that evening and saw his sister's note
on the table he started to go and see her. He found Nathalie alone,
her husband having gone to take a rest in the next room. She wore a
tightly-fitting black silk dress, with a red bow in front. Her black
hair was crimped and arranged according to the latest fashion.

The pains she took to appear young, for the sake of her husband, whose
equal she was in years, were very obvious.

When she saw her brother she jumped up and hurried towards him, with her
silk dress rustling. They kissed, and looked smilingly at each other.
There passed between them that mysterious exchange of looks, full of
meaning, in which all was true, and which cannot be expressed in words.
Then came words which were not true. They had not met since their
mother's death.

"You have grown stouter and younger," he said, and her lips puckered up
with pleasure.

"And you have grown thinner."

"Well, and how is your husband?" Nekhludoff asked.

"He is taking a rest; he did not sleep all night." There was much to
say, but it was not said in words; only their looks expressed what their
words failed to say.

"I went to see you."

"Yes, I know. I moved because the house is too big for me. I was lonely
there, and dull. I want nothing of all that is there, so that you had
better take it all--the furniture, I mean, and things."

"Yes, Agraphena Petrovna told me. I went there. Thanks, very much.
But--"

At this moment the hotel waiter brought in a silver tea-set. While he
set the table they were silent. Then Nathalie sat down at the table and
made the tea, still in silence. Nekhludoff also said nothing.

At last Nathalie began resolutely. "Well, Dmitri, I know all about it."
And she looked at him.

"What of that? l am glad you know."

"How can you hope to reform her after the life she has led?" she asked.

He sat quite straight on a small chair, and listened attentively, trying
to understand her and to answer rightly. The state of mind called forth
in him by his last interview with Maslova still filled his soul with
quiet joy and good will to all men.

"It is not her but myself I wish to reform," he replied.

Nathalie sighed.

"There are other means besides marriage to do that."

"But I think it is the best. Besides, it leads me into that world in
which I can be of use."

"I cannot believe you will be happy," said Nathalie.

"It's not my happiness that is the point."

"Of course, but if she has a heart she cannot be happy--cannot even wish
it."

"She does not wish it."

"I understand; but life--"

"Yes--life?"

"Demands something different."

"It demands nothing but that we should do what is right," said
Nekhludoff, looking into her face, still handsome, though slightly
wrinkled round eyes and mouth.

"I do not understand," she said, and sighed.

"Poor darling; how could she change so?" he thought, calling back to his
mind Nathalie as she had been before her marriage, and feeling towards
her a tenderness woven out of innumerable memories of childhood. At that
moment Rogozhinsky entered the room, with head thrown back and expanded
chest, and stepping lightly and softly in his usual manner, his
spectacles, his bald patch, and his black beard all glistening.

"How do you do? How do you do?" he said, laying an unnatural and
intentional stress on his words. (Though, soon after the marriage,
they had tried to be more familiar with each other, they had never
succeeded.)

They shook hands, and Rogozhinsky sank softly into an easy-chair.

"Am I not interrupting your conversation?"

"No, I do not wish to hide what I am saying or doing from any one."

As soon as Nekhludoff saw the hairy hands, and heard the patronising,
self-assured tones, his meekness left him in a moment.

"Yes, we were talking about his intentions," said Nathalie. "Shall I
give you a cup of tea?" she added, taking the teapot.

"Yes, please. What particular intentions do you mean?"

"That of going to Siberia with the gang of prisoners, among whom is the
woman I consider myself to have wronged," uttered Nekhludoff.

"I hear not only to accompany her, but more than that."

"Yes, and to marry her if she wishes it."

"Dear me! But if you do not object I should like to ask you to explain
your motives. I do not understand them."

"My motives are that this woman--that this woman's first step on her way
to degradation--" Nekhludoff got angry with himself, and was unable to
find the right expression. "My motives are that I am the guilty one, and
she gets the punishment."

"If she is being punished she cannot be innocent, either."

"She is quite innocent." And Nekhludoff related the whole incident with
unnecessary warmth.

"Yes, that was a case of carelessness on the part of the president, the
result of which was a thoughtless answer on the part of the jury; but
there is the Senate for cases like that."

"The Senate has rejected the appeal."

"Well, if the Senate has rejected it, there cannot have been sufficient
reasons for an appeal," said Rogozhinsky, evidently sharing the
prevailing opinion that truth is the product of judicial decrees. "The
Senate cannot enter into the question on its merits. If there is a real
mistake, the Emperor should be petitioned."

"That has been done, but there is no probability of success. They will
apply to the Department of the Ministry, the Department will consult the
Senate, the Senate will repeat its decision, and, as usual, the innocent
will get punished."

"In the first place, the Department of the Ministry won't consult the
Senate," said Rogozhinsky, with a condescending smile; "it will give
orders for the original deeds to be sent from the Law Court, and if
it discovers a mistake it will decide accordingly. And, secondly, the
innocent are never punished, or at least in very rare, exceptional
cases. It is the guilty who are punished," Rogozhinsky said
deliberately, and smiled self-complacently.

"And I have become fully convinced that most of those condemned by law
are innocent."

"How's that?"

"Innocent in the literal sense. Just as this woman is innocent of
poisoning any one; as innocent as a peasant I have just come to know, of
the murder he never committed; as a mother and son who were on the point
of being condemned for incendiarism, which was committed by the owner of
the house that was set on fire."

"Well, of course there always have been and always will be judicial
errors. Human institutions cannot be perfect."

"And, besides, there are a great many people convicted who are innocent
of doing anything considered wrong by the society they have grown up
in."

"Excuse me, this is not so; every thief knows that stealing is wrong,
and that we should not steal; that it is immoral," said Rogozhinsky,
with his quiet, self-assured, slightly contemptuous smile, which
specially irritated Nekhludoff.

"No, he does not know it; they say to him 'don't steal,' and he knows
that the master of the factory steals his labour by keeping back his
wages; that the Government, with its officials, robs him continually by
taxation."

"Why, this is anarchism," Rogozhinsky said, quietly defining his
brother-in-law's words.

"I don't know what it is; I am only telling you the truth," Nekhludoff
continued. "He knows that the Government is robbing him, knows that we
landed proprietors have robbed him long since, robbed him of the land
which should be the common property of all, and then, if he picks up dry
wood to light his fire on that land stolen from him, we put him in jail,
and try to persuade him that he is a thief. Of course he knows that not
he but those who robbed him of the land are thieves, and that to get any
restitution of what has been robbed is his duty towards his family."

"I don't understand, or if I do I cannot agree with it. The land must
be somebody's property," began Rogozhinsky quietly, and, convinced that
Nekhludoff was a Socialist, and that Socialism demands that all the land
should be divided equally, that such a division would be very foolish,
and that he could easily prove it to be so, he said. "If you divided
it equally to-day, it would to-morrow be again in the hands of the most
industrious and clever."

"Nobody is thinking of dividing the land equally. The land must not
be anybody's property; must not be a thing to be bought and sold or
rented."

"The rights of property are inborn in man; without them the cultivation
of land would present no interest. Destroy the rights of property and
we lapse into barbarism." Rogozhinsky uttered this authoritatively,
repeating the usual argument in favour of private ownership of land
which is supposed to be irrefutable, based on the assumption that
people's desire to possess land proves that they need it.

"On the contrary, only when the land is nobody's property will it cease
to lie idle, as it does now, while the landlords, like dogs in the
manger, unable themselves to put it to use, will not let those use it
who are able."

"But, Dmitri Ivanovitch, what you are saying is sheer madness. Is it
possible to abolish property in land in our age? I know it is your old
hobby. But allow me to tell you straight," and Rogozhinsky grew pale,
and his voice trembled. It was evident that this question touched him
very nearly. "I should advise you to consider this question well before
attempting to solve it practically."

"Are you speaking of my personal affairs?"

"Yes, I hold that we who are placed in special circumstances should
bear the responsibilities which spring from those circumstances, should
uphold the conditions in which we were born, and which we have
inherited from our predecessors, and which we ought to pass on to our
descendants."

"I consider it my duty--"

"Wait a bit," said Rogozhinsky, not permitting the interruption. "I am
not speaking for myself or my children. The position of my children is
assured, and I earn enough for us to live comfortably, and I expect my
children will live so too, so that my interest in your action--which,
if you will allow me to say so, is not well considered--is not based
on personal motives; it is on principle that I cannot agree with you. I
should advise you to think it well over, to read---?"

"Please allow me to settle my affairs, and to choose what to read and
what not to read, myself," said Nekhludoff, turning pale. Feeling
his hands grow cold, and that he was no longer master of himself, he
stopped, and began drinking his tea.



CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE AIM OF THE LAW.

"Well, and how are the children?" Nekhludoff asked his sister when he
was calmer. The sister told him about the children. She said they were
staying with their grandmother (their father's mother), and, pleased
that his dispute with her husband had come to an end, she began telling
him how her children played that they were travelling, just as he used
to do with his three dolls, one of them a negro and another which he
called the French lady.

"Can you really remember it all?" said Nekhludoff, smiling.

"Yes, and just fancy, they play in the very same way."

The unpleasant conversation had been brought to an end, and Nathalie was
quieter, but she did not care to talk in her husband's presence of what
could be comprehensible only to her brother, so, wishing to start a
general conversation, she began talking about the sorrow of Kamenski's
mother at losing her only son, who had fallen in a duel, for this
Petersburg topic of the day had now reached Moscow. Rogozhinsky
expressed disapproval at the state of things that excluded murder in a
duel from the ordinary criminal offences. This remark evoked a rejoinder
from Nekhludoff, and a new dispute arose on the subject. Nothing was
fully explained, neither of the antagonists expressed all he had in
his mind, each keeping to his conviction, which condemned the other.
Rogozhinsky felt that Nekhludoff condemned him and despised his
activity, and he wished to show him the injustice of his opinions.

Nekhludoff, on the other hand, felt provoked by his brother-in-law's
interference in his affairs concerning the land. And knowing in his
heart of hearts that his sister, her husband, and their children, as his
heirs, had a right to do so, was indignant that this narrow-minded
man persisted with calm assurance to regard as just and lawful what
Nekhludoff no longer doubted was folly and crime.

This man's arrogance annoyed Nekhludoff.

"What could the law do?" he asked.

"It could sentence one of the two duellists to the mines like an
ordinary murderer."

Nekhludoff's hands grew cold.

"Well, and what good would that be?" he asked, hotly.

"It would be just."

"As if justice were the aim of the law," said Nekhludoff.

"What else?"

"The upholding of class interests! I think the law is only an instrument
for upholding the existing order of things beneficial to our class."

"This is a perfectly new view," said Rogozhinsky with a quiet smile;
"the law is generally supposed to have a totally different aim."

"Yes, so it has in theory but not in practice, as I have found out. The
law aims only at preserving the present state of things, and therefore
it persecutes and executes those who stand above the ordinary level and
wish to raise it--the so-called political prisoners, as well as those
who are below the average--the so-called criminal types."

"I do not agree with you. In the first place, I cannot admit that the
criminals classed as political are punished because they are above the
average. In most cases they are the refuse of society, just as much
perverted, though in a different way, as the criminal types whom you
consider below the average."

"But I happen to know men who are morally far above their judges; all
the sectarians are moral, from--"

But Rogozhinsky, a man not accustomed to be interrupted when he spoke,
did not listen to Nekhludoff, but went on talking at the same time,
thereby irritating him still more.

"Nor can I admit that the object of the law is the upholding of the
present state of things. The law aims at reforming--"

"A nice kind of reform, in a prison!" Nekhludoff put in.

"Or removing," Rogozhinsky went on, persistently, "the perverted and
brutalised persons that threaten society."

"That's just what it doesn't do. Society has not the means of doing
either the one thing or the other."

"How is that? I don't understand," said Rogozhinsky with a forced smile.

"I mean that only two reasonable kinds of punishment exist. Those used
in the old days: corporal and capital punishment, which, as human nature
gradually softens, come more and more into disuse," said Nekhludoff.

"There, now, this is quite new and very strange to hear from your lips."

"Yes, it is reasonable to hurt a man so that he should not do in future
what he is hurt for doing, and it is also quite reasonable to cut a
man's head off when he is injurious or dangerous to society. These
punishments have a reasonable meaning. But what sense is there in
locking up in a prison a man perverted by want of occupation and bad
example; to place him in a position where he is provided for, where
laziness is imposed on him, and where he is in company with the most
perverted of men? What reason is there to take a man at public cost (it
comes to more than 500 roubles per head) from the Toula to the Irkoatsk
government, or from Koursk--"

"Yes, but all the same, people are afraid of those journeys at public
cost, and if it were not for such journeys and the prisons, you and I
would not be sitting here as we are."

"The prisons cannot insure our safety, because these people do not
stay there for ever, but are set free again. On the contrary, in those
establishments men are brought to the greatest vice and degradation, so
that the danger is increased."

"You mean to say that the penitentiary system should be improved."

"It cannot be improved. Improved prisons would cost more than all that
is being now spent on the people's education, and would lay a still
heavier burden on the people."

"The shortcomings of the penitentiary system in nowise invalidate
the law itself," Rogozhinsky continued again, without heeding his
brother-in-law.

"There is no remedy for these shortcomings," said Nekhludoff, raising
his voice.

"What of that? Shall we therefore go and kill, or, as a certain
statesman proposed, go putting out people's eyes?" Rogozhinsky remarked.

"Yes; that would be cruel, but it would be effective. What is done
now is cruel, and not only ineffective, but so stupid that one cannot
understand how people in their senses can take part in so absurd and
cruel a business as criminal law."

"But I happen to take part in it," said Rogozhinsky, growing pale.

"That is your business. But to me it is incomprehensible."

"I think there are a good many things incomprehensible to you," said
Rogozhinsky, with a trembling voice.

"I have seen how one public prosecutor did his very best to get an
unfortunate boy condemned, who could have evoked nothing but sympathy in
an unperverted mind. I know how another cross-examined a sectarian and
put down the reading of the Gospels as a criminal offence; in fact, the
whole business of the Law Courts consists in senseless and cruel actions
of that sort."

"I should not serve if I thought so," said Rogozhinsky, rising.

Nekhludoff noticed a peculiar glitter under his brother-in-law's
spectacles. "Can it be tears?" he thought. And they were really tears
of injured pride. Rogozhinsky went up to the window, got out his
handkerchief, coughed and rubbed his spectacles, took them off, and
wiped his eyes.

When he returned to the sofa he lit a cigar, and did not speak any more.

Nekhludoff felt pained and ashamed of having offended his brother-in-law
and his sister to such a degree, especially as he was going away the
next day.

He parted with them in confusion, and drove home.

"All I have said may be true--anyhow he did not reply. But it was not
said in the right way. How little I must have changed if I could be
carried away by ill-feeling to such an extent as to hurt and wound poor
Nathalie in such a way!" he thought.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE PRISONERS START FOR SIBERIA.

The gang of prisoners, among whom was Maslova, was to leave Moscow by
rail at 3 p.m.; therefore, in order to see the gang start, and walk
to the station with the prisoners Nekhludoff meant to reach the prison
before 12 o'clock.

The night before, as he was packing up and sorting his papers, he came
upon his diary, and read some bits here and there. The last bit written
before he left for Petersburg ran thus: "Katusha does not wish to accept
my sacrifice; she wishes to make a sacrifice herself. She has conquered,
and so have I. She makes me happy by the inner change, which seems
to me, though I fear to believe it, to be going on in her. I fear to
believe it, yet she seems to be coming back to life." Then further on
he read. "I have lived through something very hard and very joyful. I
learnt that she has behaved very badly in the hospital, and I suddenly
felt great pain. I never expected that it could be so painful. I spoke
to her with loathing and hatred, then all of a sudden I called to mind
how many times I have been, and even still am, though but in thought,
guilty of the thing that I hated her for, and immediately I became
disgusting to myself, and pitied her and felt happy again. If only we
could manage to see the beam in our own eye in time, how kind we
should be." Then he wrote: "I have been to see Nathalie, and again
self-satisfaction made me unkind and spiteful, and a heavy feeling
remains. Well, what is to be done? Tomorrow a new life will begin. A
final good-bye to the old! Many new impressions have accumulated, but I
cannot yet bring them to unity."

When he awoke the next morning Nekhludoff's first feeling was regret
about the affair between him and his brother-in-law.

"I cannot go away like this," he thought. "I must go and make it up with
them." But when he looked at his watch he saw that he had not time to
go, but must hurry so as not to be too late for the departure of the
gang. He hastily got everything ready, and sent the things to the
station with a servant and Taras, Theodosia's husband, who was going
with them. Then he took the first isvostchik he could find and drove off
to the prison.

The prisoners' train started two hours before the train by which he was
going, so Nekhludoff paid his bill in the lodgings and left for good.

It was July, and the weather was unbearably hot. From the stones, the
walls, the iron of the roofs, which the sultry night had not cooled, the
heat streamed into the motionless air. When at rare intervals a slight
breeze did arise, it brought but a whiff of hot air filled with dust and
smelling of oil paint.

There were few people in the streets, and those who were out tried to
keep on the shady side. Only the sunburnt peasants, with their bronzed
faces and bark shoes on their feet, who were mending the road, sat
hammering the stones into the burning sand in the sun; while the
policemen, in their holland blouses, with revolvers fastened with
orange cords, stood melancholy and depressed in the middle of the road,
changing from foot to foot; and the tramcars, the horses of which wore
holland hoods on their heads, with slits for the ears, kept passing up
and down the sunny road with ringing bells.

When Nekhludoff drove up to the prison the gang had not left the yard.
The work of delivering and receiving the prisoners that had commenced
at 4 A.M. was still going on. The gang was to consist of 623 men and 64
women; they had all to be received according to the registry lists.
The sick and the weak to be sorted out, and all to be delivered to the
convoy. The new inspector, with two assistants, the doctor and medical
assistant, the officer of the convoy, and the clerk, were sitting in the
prison yard at a table covered with writing materials and papers, which
was placed in the shade of a wall. They called the prisoners one by one,
examined and questioned them, and took notes. The rays of the sun had
gradually reached the table, and it was growing very hot and oppressive
for want of air and because of the breathing crowd of prisoners that
stood close by.

"Good gracious, will this never come to an end!" the convoy officer,
a tall, fat, red-faced man with high shoulders, who kept puffing the
smoke, of his cigarette into his thick moustache, asked, as he drew in
a long puff. "You are killing me. From where have you got them all? Are
there many more?" the clerk inquired.

"Twenty-four men and the women."

"What are you standing there for? Come on," shouted the convoy officer
to the prisoners who had not yet passed the revision, and who stood
crowded one behind the other. The prisoners had been standing there more
than three hours, packed in rows in the full sunlight, waiting their
turns.

While this was going on in the prison yard, outside the gate, besides
the sentinel who stood there as usual with a gun, were drawn up about 20
carts, to carry the luggage of the prisoners and such prisoners as were
too weak to walk, and a group of relatives and friends waiting to see
the prisoners as they came out and to exchange a few words if a chance
presented itself and to give them a few things. Nekhludoff took his
place among the group. He had stood there about an hour when the
clanking of chains, the noise of footsteps, authoritative voices, the
sound of coughing, and the low murmur of a large crowd became audible.

This continued for about five minutes, during which several jailers went
in and out of the gateway. At last the word of command was given. The
gate opened with a thundering noise, the clattering of the chains became
louder, and the convoy soldiers, dressed in white blouses and carrying
guns, came out into the street and took their places in a large, exact
circle in front of the gate; this was evidently a usual, often-practised
manoeuvre. Then another command was given, and the prisoners began
coming out in couples, with flat, pancake-shaped caps on their shaved
heads and sacks over their shoulders, dragging their chained legs and
swinging one arm, while the other held up a sack.

First came the men condemned to hard labour, all dressed alike in grey
trousers and cloaks with marks on the back. All of them--young and old,
thin and fat, pale and red, dark and bearded and beardless, Russians,
Tartars, and Jews--came out, clattering with their chains and briskly
swinging their arms as if prepared to go a long distance, but stopped
after having taken ten steps, and obediently took their places behind
each other, four abreast. Then without interval streamed out more shaved
men, dressed in the same manner but with chains only on their legs.
These were condemned to exile. They came out as briskly and stopped as
suddenly, taking their places four in a row. Then came those exiled by
their Communes. Then the women in the same order, first those condemned
to hard labour, with grey cloaks and kerchiefs; then the exiled women,
and those following their husbands of their own free will, dressed in
their own town or village clothing. Some of the women were carrying
babies wrapped in the fronts of their grey cloaks.

With the women came the children, boys and girls, who, like colts in a
herd of horses, pressed in among the prisoners.

The men took their places silently, only coughing now and then, or
making short remarks.

The women talked without intermission. Nekhludoff thought he saw Maslova
as they were coming out, but she was at once lost in the large crowd,
and he could only see grey creatures, seemingly devoid of all that was
human, or at any rate of all that was womanly, with sacks on their backs
and children round them, taking their places behind the men.

Though all the prisoners had been counted inside the prison walls, the
convoy counted them again, comparing the numbers with the list. This
took very long, especially as some of the prisoners moved and changed
places, which confused the convoy.

The convoy soldiers shouted and pushed the prisoners (who complied
obediently, but angrily) and counted them over again. When all had
been counted, the convoy officer gave a command, and the crowd became
agitated. The weak men and women and children rushed, racing each
other, towards the carts, and began placing their bags on the carts
and climbing up themselves. Women with crying babies, merry children
quarrelling for places, and dull, careworn prisoners got into the carts.

Several of the prisoners took off their caps and came up to the convoy
officer with some request. Nekhludoff found out later that they were
asking for places on the carts. Nekhludoff saw how the officer, without
looking at the prisoners, drew in a whiff from his cigarette, and then
suddenly waved his short arm in front of one of the prisoners, who
quickly drew his shaved head back between his shoulders as if afraid of
a blow, and sprang back.

"I will give you a lift such that you'll remember. You'll get there on
foot right enough," shouted the officer. Only one of the men was granted
his request--an old man with chains on his legs; and Nekhludoff saw the
old man take off his pancake-shaped cap, and go up to the cart crossing
himself. He could not manage to get up on the cart because of the chains
that prevented his lifting his old legs, and a woman who was sitting in
the cart at last pulled him in by the arm.

When all the sacks were in the carts, and those who were allowed to get
in were seated, the officer took off his cap, wiped his forehead, his
bald head and fat, red neck, and crossed himself.

"March," commanded the officer. The soldiers' guns gave a click; the
prisoners took off their caps and crossed themselves, those who were
seeing them off shouted something, the prisoners shouted in answer, a
row arose among the women, and the gang, surrounded by the soldiers in
their white blouses, moved forward, raising the dust with their chained
feet. The soldiers went in front; then came the convicts condemned to
hard labour, clattering with their chains; then the exiled and those
exiled by the Communes, chained in couples by their wrists; then the
women. After them, on the carts loaded with sacks, came the weak. High
up on one of the carts sat a woman closely wrapped up, and she kept
shrieking and sobbing.



CHAPTER XXXV.

NOT MEN BUT STRANGE AND TERRIBLE CREATURES?

The procession was such a long one that the carts with the luggage and
the weak started only when those in front were already out of sight.
When the last of the carts moved, Nekhludoff got into the trap that
stood waiting for him and told the isvostchik to catch up the prisoners
in front, so that he could see if he knew any of the men in the gang,
and then try and find out Maslova among the women and ask her if she had
received the things he sent.

It was very hot, and a cloud of dust that was raised by a thousand
tramping feet stood all the time over the gang that was moving down
the middle of the street. The prisoners were walking quickly, and the
slow-going isvostchik's horse was some time in catching them up. Row
upon row they passed, those strange and terrible-looking creatures, none
of whom Nekhludoff knew.

On they went, all dressed alike, moving a thousand feet all shod alike,
swinging their free arms as if to keep up their spirits. There were so
many of them, they all looked so much alike, and they were all placed in
such unusual, peculiar circumstances, that they seemed to Nekhludoff
to be not men but some sort of strange and terrible creatures. This
impression passed when he recognised in the crowd of convicts the
murderer Federoff, and among the exiles Okhotin the wit, and another
tramp who had appealed to him for assistance. Almost all the prisoners
turned and looked at the trap that was passing them and at the gentleman
inside. Federoff tossed his head backwards as a sign that he had
recognised Nekhludoff, Okhotin winked, but neither of them bowed,
considering it not the thing.

As soon as Nekhludoff came up to the women he saw Maslova; she was in
the second row. The first in the row was a short-legged, black-eyed,
hideous woman, who had her cloak tucked up in her girdle. This was
Koroshavka. The next was a pregnant woman, who dragged herself along
with difficulty. The third was Maslova; she was carrying her sack on
her shoulder, and looking straight before her. Her face looked calm
and determined. The fourth in the row was a young, lovely woman who was
walking along briskly, dressed in a short cloak, her kerchief tied in
peasant fashion. This was Theodosia.

Nekhludoff got down and approached the women, meaning to ask Maslova if
she had got the things he had sent her, and how she was feeling, but the
convoy sergeant, who was walking on that side, noticed him at once, and
ran towards him.

"You must not do that, sir. It is against the regulations to approach
the gang," shouted the sergeant as he came up.

But when he recognised Nekhludoff (every one in the prison knew
Nekhludoff) the sergeant raised his fingers to his cap, and, stopping
in front of Nekhludoff, said: "Not now; wait till we get to the railway
station; here it is not allowed. Don't lag behind; march!" he shouted to
the convicts, and putting on a brisk air, he ran back to his place at a
trot, in spite of the heat and the elegant new boots on his feet.

Nekhludoff went on to the pavement and told the isvostchik to follow
him; himself walking, so as to keep the convicts in sight. Wherever the
gang passed it attracted attention mixed with horror and compassion.
Those who drove past leaned out of the vehicles and followed the
prisoners with their eyes. Those on foot stopped and looked with fear
and surprise at the terrible sight. Some came up and gave alms to the
prisoners. The alms were received by the convoy. Some, as if they were
hypnotised, followed the gang, but then stopped, shook their heads, and
followed the prisoners only with their eyes. Everywhere the people
came out of the gates and doors, and called others to come out, too,
or leaned out of the windows looking, silent and immovable, at the
frightful procession. At a cross-road a fine carriage was stopped by the
gang. A fat coachman, with a shiny face and two rows of buttons on his
back, sat on the box; a married couple sat facing the horses, the wife,
a pale, thin woman, with a light-coloured bonnet on her head and a
bright sunshade in her hand, the husband with a top-hat and a well-cut
light-coloured overcoat. On the seat in front sat their children--a
well-dressed little girl, with loose, fair hair, and as fresh as a
flower, who also held a bright parasol, and an eight-year-old boy, with
a long, thin neck and sharp collarbones, a sailor hat with long ribbons
on his head.

The father was angrily scolding the coachman because he had not passed
in front of the gang when he had a chance, and the mother frowned and
half closed her eyes with a look of disgust, shielding herself from the
dust and the sun with her silk sunshade, which she held close to her
face.

The fat coachman frowned angrily at the unjust rebukes of his
master--who had himself given the order to drive along that street--and
with difficulty held in the glossy, black horses, foaming under their
harness and impatient to go on.

The policeman wished with all his soul to please the owner of the fine
equipage by stopping the gang, yet felt that the dismal solemnity of
the procession could not be broken even for so rich a gentleman. He only
raised his fingers to his cap to show his respect for riches, and looked
severely at the prisoners as if promising in any case to protect the
owners of the carriage from them. So the carriage had to wait till the
whole of the procession had passed, and could only move on when the last
of the carts, laden with sacks and prisoners, rattled by. The hysterical
woman who sat on one of the carts, and had grown calm, again began
shrieking and sobbing when she saw the elegant carriage. Then the
coachman tightened the reins with a slight touch, and the black
trotters, their shoes ringing against the paving stones, drew the
carriage, softly swaying on its rubber tires, towards the country
house where the husband, the wife, the girl, and the boy with the sharp
collar-bones were going to amuse themselves. Neither the father nor the
mother gave the girl and boy any explanation of what they had seen, so
that the children had themselves to find out the meaning of this curious
sight. The girl, taking the expression of her father's and mother's
faces into consideration, solved the problem by assuming that these
people were quite another kind of men and women than her father and
mother and their acquaintances, that they were bad people, and that they
had therefore to be treated in the manner they were being treated.

Therefore the girl felt nothing but fear, and was glad when she could no
longer see those people.

But the boy with the long, thin neck, who looked at the procession
of prisoners without taking his eyes off them, solved the question
differently.

He still knew, firmly and without any doubt, for he had it from God,
that these people were just the same kind of people as he was, and like
all other people, and therefore some one had done these people some
wrong, something that ought not to have been done, and he was sorry for
them, and felt no horror either of those who were shaved and chained or
of those who had shaved and chained them. And so the boy's lips pouted
more and more, and he made greater and greater efforts not to cry,
thinking it a shame to cry in such a case.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE TENDER MERCIES OF THE LORD.

Nekhludoff kept up with the quick pace of the convicts. Though lightly
clothed he felt dreadfully hot, and it was hard to breathe in the
stifling, motionless, burning air filled with dust.

When he had walked about a quarter of a mile he again got into the trap,
but it felt still hotter in the middle of the street. He tried to recall
last night's conversation with his brother-in-law, but the recollections
no longer excited him as they had done in the morning. They were dulled
by the impressions made by the starting and procession of the gang, and
chiefly by the intolerable heat.

On the pavement, in the shade of some trees overhanging a fence, he saw
two schoolboys standing over a kneeling man who sold ices. One of the
boys was already sucking a pink spoon and enjoying his ices, the other
was waiting for a glass that was being filled with something yellowish.

"Where could I get a drink?" Nekhludoff asked his isvostchik, feeling an
insurmountable desire for some refreshment.

"There is a good eating-house close by," the isvostchik answered, and
turning a corner, drove up to a door with a large signboard. The plump
clerk in a Russian shirt, who stood behind the counter, and the waiters
in their once white clothing who sat at the tables (there being hardly
any customers) looked with curiosity at the unusual visitor and offered
him their services. Nekhludoff asked for a bottle of seltzer water and
sat down some way from the window at a small table covered with a dirty
cloth. Two men sat at another table with tea-things and a white bottle
in front of them, mopping their foreheads, and calculating something in
a friendly manner. One of them was dark and bald, and had just such a
border of hair at the back as Rogozhinsky. This sight again reminded
Nekhludoff of yesterday's talk with his brother-in-law and his wish to
see him and Nathalie.

"I shall hardly be able to do it before the train starts," he thought;
"I'd better write." He asked for paper, an envelope, and a stamp, and as
he was sipping the cool, effervescent water he considered what he should
say. But his thoughts wandered, and he could not manage to compose a
letter.

"My dear Nathalie,--I cannot go away with the heavy impression that
yesterday's talk with your husband has left," he began. "What next?
Shall I ask him to forgive me what I said yesterday? But I only said
what I felt, and he will think that I am taking it back. Besides, this
interference of his in my private matters. . . . No, I cannot," and
again he felt hatred rising in his heart towards that man so foreign
to him. He folded the unfinished letter and put it in his pocket, paid,
went out, and again got into the trap to catch up the gang. It had grown
still hotter. The stones and the walls seemed to be breathing out hot
air. The pavement seemed to scorch the feet, and Nekhludoff felt a
burning sensation in his hand when he touched the lacquered splashguard
of his trap.

The horse was jogging along at a weary trot, beating the uneven, dusty
road monotonously with its hoofs, the isvostchik kept falling into a
doze, Nekhludoff sat without thinking of anything.

At the bottom of a street, in front of a large house, a group of people
had collected, and a convoy soldier stood by.

"What has happened?" Nekhludoff asked of a porter.

"Something the matter with a convict."

Nekhludoff got down and came up to the group. On the rough stones,
where the pavement slanted down to the gutter, lay a broadly-built,
red-bearded, elderly convict, with his head lower than his feet, and
very red in the face. He had a grey cloak and grey trousers on, and lay
on his back with the palms of his freckled hands downwards, and at
long intervals his broad, high chest heaved, and he groaned, while
his bloodshot eyes were fixed on the sky. By him stood a cross-looking
policeman, a pedlar, a postman, a clerk, an old woman with a parasol,
and a short-haired boy with an empty basket.

"They are weak. Having been locked up in prison they've got weak, and
then they lead them through the most broiling heat," said the clerk,
addressing Nekhludoff, who had just come up.

"He'll die, most likely," said the woman with the parasol, in a doleful
tone.

"His shirt should be untied," said the postman.

The policeman began, with his thick, trembling fingers, clumsily to
untie the tapes that fastened the shirt round the red, sinewy neck. He
was evidently excited and confused, but still thought it necessary to
address the crowd.

"What have you collected here for? It is hot enough without your keeping
the wind off."

"They should have been examined by a doctor, and the weak ones left
behind," said the clerk, showing off his knowledge of the law.

The policeman, having undone the tapes of the shirt, rose and looked
round.

"Move on, I tell you. It is not your business, is it? What's there
to stare at?" he said, and turned to Nekhludoff for sympathy, but not
finding any in his face he turned to the convoy soldier.

But the soldier stood aside, examining the trodden-down heel of his
boot, and was quite indifferent to the policeman's perplexity.

"Those whose business it is don't care. Is it right to do men to death
like this? A convict is a convict, but still he is a man," different
voices were heard saying in the crowd.

"Put his head up higher, and give him some water," said Nekhludoff.

"Water has been sent for," said the policeman, and taking the prisoner
under the arms he with difficulty pulled his body a little higher up.

"What's this gathering here?" said a decided, authoritative voice, and
a police officer, with a wonderfully clean, shiny blouse, and still more
shiny top-boots, came up to the assembled crowd.

"Move on. No standing about here," he shouted to the crowd, before he
knew what had attracted it.

When he came near and saw the dying convict, he made a sign of approval
with his head, just as if he had quite expected it, and, turning to the
policeman, said, "How is this?"

The policeman said that, as a gang of prisoners was passing, one of the
convicts had fallen down, and the convoy officer had ordered him to be
left behind.

"Well, that's all right. He must be taken to the police station. Call an
isvostchik."

"A porter has gone for one," said the policeman, with his fingers raised
to his cap.

The shopman began something about the heat.

"Is it your business, eh? Move on," said the police officer, and looked
so severely at him that the clerk was silenced.

"He ought to have a little water," said Nekhludoff. The police officer
looked severely at Nekhludoff also, but said nothing. When the porter
brought a mug full of water, he told the policeman to offer some to the
convict. The policeman raised the drooping head, and tried to pour a
little water down the mouth; but the prisoner could not swallow it, and
it ran down his beard, wetting his jacket and his coarse, dirty linen
shirt.

"Pour it on his head," ordered the officer; and the policeman took off
the pancake-shaped cap and poured the water over the red curls and bald
part of the prisoner's head. His eyes opened wide as if in fear, but his
position remained unchanged.

Streams of dirt trickled down his dusty face, but the mouth continued to
gasp in the same regular way, and his whole body shook.

"And what's this? Take this one," said the police officer, pointing to
Nekhludoff's isvostchik. "You, there, drive up."

"I am engaged," said the isvostchik, dismally, and without looking up.

"It is my isvostchik; but take him. I will pay you," said Nekhludoff,
turning to the isvostchik.

"Well, what are you waiting for?" shouted the officer. "Catch hold."

The policeman, the porter, and the convoy soldier lifted the dying man
and carried him to the trap, and put him on the seat. But he could not
sit up; his head fell back, and the whole of his body glided off the
seat.

"Make him lie down," ordered the officer.

"It's all right, your honour; I'll manage him like this," said the
policeman, sitting down by the dying man, and clasping his strong,
right arm round the body under the arms. The convoy soldier lifted the
stockingless feet, in prison shoes, and put them into the trap.

The police officer looked around, and noticing the pancake-shaped hat of
the convict lifted it up and put it on the wet, drooping head.

"Go on," he ordered.

The isvostchik looked angrily round, shook his head, and, accompanied
by the convoy soldier, drove back to the police station. The policeman,
sitting beside the convict, kept dragging up the body that was
continually sliding down from the seat, while the head swung from side
to side.

The convoy soldier, who was walking by the side of the trap, kept
putting the legs in their place. Nekhludoff followed the trap.



CHAPTER XXXVII.

SPILLED LIKE WATER ON THE GROUND.

The trap passed the fireman who stood sentinel at the entrance, [the
headquarters of the fire brigade and the police stations are generally
together in Moscow] drove into the yard of the police station, and
stopped at one of the doors. In the yard several firemen with their
sleeves tucked up were washing some kind of cart and talking loudly.
When the trap stopped, several policemen surrounded it, and taking the
lifeless body of the convict under the arms, took him out of the trap,
which creaked under him. The policeman who had brought the body got
down, shook his numbed arm, took off his cap, and crossed himself.
The body was carried through the door and up the stairs. Nekhludoff
followed. In the small, dirty room where the body was taken there stood
four beds. On two of them sat a couple of sick men in dressing-gowns,
one with a crooked mouth, whose neck was bandaged, the other one in
consumption. Two of the beds were empty; the convict was laid on one of
them. A little man, with glistening eyes and continually moving brows,
with only his underclothes and stockings on, came up with quick, soft
steps, looked at the convict and then at Nekhludoff, and burst into loud
laughter. This was a madman who was being kept in the police hospital.

"They wish to frighten me, but no, they won't succeed," he said.

The policemen who carried the corpse were followed by a police officer
and a medical assistant. The medical assistant came up to the body and
touched the freckled hand, already growing cold, which, though still
soft, was deadly pale. He held it for a moment, and then let it go. It
fell lifelessly on the stomach of the dead man.

"He's ready," said the medical assistant, but, evidently to be quite in
order, he undid the wet, brown shirt, and tossing back the curls from
his ear, put it to the yellowish, broad, immovable chest of the convict.
All were silent. The medical assistant raised himself again, shook his
head, and touched with his fingers first one and then the other lid over
the open, fixed blue eyes.

"I'm not frightened, I'm not frightened." The madman kept repeating
these words, and spitting in the direction of the medical assistant.

"Well?" asked the police officer.

"Well! He must be put into the mortuary."

"Are you sure? Mind," said the police officer.

"It's time I should know," said the medical assistant, drawing the shirt
over the body's chest. "However, I will send for Mathew Ivanovitch. Let
him have a look. Petrov, call him," and the medical assistant stepped
away from the body.

"Take him to the mortuary," said the police officer. "And then you must
come into the office and sign," he added to the convoy soldier, who had
not left the convict for a moment.

"Yes, sir," said the soldier.

The policemen lifted the body and carried it down again. Nekhludoff
wished to follow, but the madman kept him back.

"You are not in the plot! Well, then, give me a cigarette," he said.
Nekhludoff got out his cigarette case and gave him one.

The madman, quickly moving his brows all the time, began relating how
they tormented him by thought suggestion.

"Why, they are all against me, and torment and torture me through their
mediums."

"I beg your pardon," said Nekhludoff, and without listening any further
he left the room and went out into the yard, wishing to know where the
body would be put.

The policemen with their burden had already crossed the yard, and were
coming to the door of a cellar. Nekhludoff wished to go up to them, but
the police officer stopped him.

"What do you want?"

"Nothing."

"Nothing? Then go away."

Nekhludoff obeyed, and went back to his isvostchik, who was dozing. He
awoke him, and they drove back towards the railway station.

They had not made a hundred steps when they met a cart accompanied by
a convoy soldier with a gun. On the cart lay another convict, who was
already dead. The convict lay on his back in the cart, his shaved head,
from which the pancake-shaped cap had slid over the black-bearded face
down to the nose, shaking and thumping at every jolt. The driver, in
his heavy boots, walked by the side of the cart, holding the reins;
a policeman followed on foot. Nekhludoff touched his isvostchik's
shoulder.

"Just look what they are doing," said the isvostchik, stopping his
horse.

Nekhludoff got down and, following the cart, again passed the sentinel
and entered the gate of the police station. By this time the firemen had
finished washing the cart, and a tall, bony man, the chief of the fire
brigade, with a coloured band round his cap, stood in their place, and,
with his hands in his pockets, was severely looking at a fat-necked,
well-fed, bay stallion that was being led up and down before him by a
fireman. The stallion was lame on one of his fore feet, and the chief of
the firemen was angrily saying something to a veterinary who stood by.

The police officer was also present. When he saw the cart he went up to
the convoy soldier.

"Where did you bring him from?" he asked, shaking his head
disapprovingly.

"From the Gorbatovskaya," answered the policeman.

"A prisoner?" asked the chief of the fire brigade.

"Yes. It's the second to-day."

"Well, I must say they've got some queer arrangements. Though of course
it's a broiling day," said the chief of the fire brigade; then, turning
to the fireman who was leading the lame stallion, he shouted: "Put him
into the corner stall. And as to you, you hound, I'll teach you how to
cripple horses which are worth more than you are, you scoundrel."

The dead man was taken from the cart by the policemen just in the same
way as the first had been, and carried upstairs into the hospital.
Nekhludoff followed them as if he were hypnotised.

"What do you want?" asked one of the policemen. But Nekhludoff did
not answer, and followed where the body was being carried. The madman,
sitting on a bed, was smoking greedily the cigarette Nekhludoff had
given him.

"Ah, you've come back," he said, and laughed. When he saw the body he
made a face, and said, "Again! I am sick of it. I am not a boy, am I,
eh?" and he turned to Nekhludoff with a questioning smile.

Nekhludoff was looking at the dead man, whose face, which had been
hidden by his cap, was now visible. This convict was as handsome in face
and body as the other was hideous. He was a man in the full bloom of
life. Notwithstanding that he was disfigured by the half of his head
being shaved, the straight, rather low forehead, raised a bit over the
black, lifeless eyes, was very fine, and so was the nose above the
thin, black moustaches. There was a smile on the lips that were already
growing blue, a small beard outlined the lower part of the face, and on
the shaved side of the head a firm, well-shaped ear was visible.

One could see what possibilities of a higher life had been destroyed
in this man. The fine bones of his hands and shackled feet, the strong
muscles of all his well-proportioned limbs, showed what a beautiful,
strong, agile human animal this had been. As an animal merely he had
been a far more perfect one of his kind than the bay stallion, about the
laming of which the fireman was so angry.

Yet he had been done to death, and no one was sorry for him as a man,
nor was any one sorry that so fine a working animal had perished. The
only feeling evinced was that of annoyance because of the bother caused
by the necessity of getting this body, threatening putrefaction, out of
the way. The doctor and his assistant entered the hospital, accompanied
by the inspector of the police station. The doctor was a thick-set man,
dressed in pongee silk coat and trousers of the same material, closely
fitting his muscular thighs. The inspector was a little fat fellow, with
a red face, round as a ball, which he made still broader by a habit he
had of filling his cheeks with air, and slowly letting it out again. The
doctor sat down on the bed by the side of the dead man, and touched
the hands in the same way as his assistant had done, put his ear to the
heart, rose, and pulled his trousers straight. "Could not be more dead,"
he said.

The inspector filled his mouth with air and slowly blew it out again.

"Which prison is he from?" he asked the convoy soldier.

The soldier told him, and reminded him of the chains on the dead man's
feet.

"I'll have them taken off; we have got a smith about, the Lord be
thanked," said the inspector, and blew up his cheeks again; he went
towards the door, slowly letting out the air.

"Why has this happened?" Nekhludoff asked the doctor.

The doctor looked at him through his spectacles.

"Why has what happened? Why they die of sunstroke, you mean? This is
why: They sit all through the winter without exercise and without light,
and suddenly they are taken out into the sunshine, and on a day like
this, and they march in a crowd so that they get no air, and sunstroke
is the result."

"Then why are they sent out?"

"Oh, as to that, go and ask those who send them. But may I ask who are
you?"

"I am a stranger."

"Ah, well, good-afternoon; I have no time." The doctor was vexed; he
gave his trousers a downward pull, and went towards the beds of the
sick.

"Well, how are you getting on?" he asked the pale man with the crooked
mouth and bandaged neck.

Meanwhile the madman sat on a bed, and having finished his cigarette,
kept spitting in the direction of the doctor.

Nekhludoff went down into the yard and out of the gate past the
firemen's horses and the hens and the sentinel in his brass helmet, and
got into the trap, the driver of which had again fallen asleep.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE CONVICT TRAIN.

When Nekhludoff came to the station, the prisoners were all seated in
railway carriages with grated windows. Several persons, come to see
them off, stood on the platform, but were not allowed to come up to the
carriages.

The convoy was much troubled that day. On the way from the prison to the
station, besides the two Nekhludoff had seen, three other prisoners
had fallen and died of sunstroke. One was taken to the nearest police
station like the first two, and the other two died at the railway
station. [In Moscow, in the beginning of the eighth decade of this
century, five convicts died of sunstroke in one day on their way from
the Boutyrki prison to the Nijni railway station.] The convoy men were
not troubled because five men who might have been alive died while in
their charge. This did not trouble them, but they were concerned lest
anything that the law required in such cases should be omitted. To
convey the bodies to the places appointed, to deliver up their papers,
to take them off the lists of those to be conveyed to Nijni--all this
was very troublesome, especially on so hot a day.

It was this that occupied the convoy men, and before it could all be
accomplished Nekhludoff and the others who asked for leave to go up to
the carriages were not allowed to do so. Nekhludoff, however, was soon
allowed to go up, because he tipped the convoy sergeant. The sergeant
let Nekhludoff pass, but asked him to be quick and get his talk over
before any of the authorities noticed. There were 15 carriages in all,
and except one carriage for the officials, they were full of prisoners.
As Nekhludoff passed the carriages he listened to what was going on in
them. In all the carriages was heard the clanging of chains, the sound
of bustle, mixed with loud and senseless language, but not a word was
being said about their dead fellow-prisoners. The talk was all about
sacks, drinking water, and the choice of seats.

Looking into one of the carriages, Nekhludoff saw convoy soldiers taking
the manacles off the hands of the prisoners. The prisoners held out
their arms, and one of the soldiers unlocked the manacles with a key and
took them off; the other collected them.

After he had passed all the other carriages, Nekhludoff came up to the
women's carriages. From the second of these he heard a woman's groans:
"Oh, oh, oh! O God! Oh, oh! O God!"

Nekhludoff passed this carriage and went up to a window of the third
carriage, which a soldier pointed out to him. When he approached his
face to the window, he felt the hot air, filled with the smell of
perspiration, coming out of it, and heard distinctly the shrill sound
of women's voices. All the seats were filled with red, perspiring,
loudly-talking women, dressed in prison cloaks and white jackets.
Nekhludoff's face at the window attracted their attention. Those nearest
ceased talking and drew closer. Maslova, in her white jacket and her
head uncovered, sat by the opposite window. The white-skinned, smiling
Theodosia sat a little nearer. When she recognised Nekhludoff, she
nudged Maslova and pointed to the window. Maslova rose hurriedly, threw
her kerchief over her black hair, and with a smile on her hot, red face
came up to the window and took hold of one of the bars.

"Well, it is hot," she said, with a glad smile.

"Did you get the things?"

"Yes, thank you."

"Is there anything more you want?" asked Nekhludoff, while the air came
out of the hot carriage as out of an oven.

"I want nothing, thank you."

"If we could get a drink?" said Theodosia.

"Yes, if we could get a drink," repeated Maslova.

"Why, have you not got any water?"

"They put some in, but it is all gone."

"Directly, I will ask one of the convoy men. Now we shall not see each
other till we get to Nijni."

"Why? Are you going?" said Maslova, as if she did not know it, and
looked joyfully at Nekhludoff.

"I am going by the next train."

Maslova said nothing, but only sighed deeply.

"Is it true, sir, that 12 convicts have been done to death?" said a
severe-looking old prisoner with a deep voice like a man's.

It was Korableva.

"I did not hear of 12; I have seen two," said Nekhludoff.

"They say there were 12 they killed. And will nothing be done to them?
Only think! The fiends!"

"And have none of the women fallen ill?" Nekhludoff asked.

"Women are stronger," said another of the prisoners--a short little
woman, and laughed; "only there's one that has taken it into her head to
be delivered. There she goes," she said, pointing to the next carriage,
whence proceeded the groans.

"You ask if we want anything," said Maslova, trying to keep the smile
of joy from her lips; "could not this woman be left behind, suffering as
she is? There, now, if you would tell the authorities."

"Yes, I will."

"And one thing more; could she not see her husband, Taras?" she added,
pointing with her eyes to the smiling Theodosia.

"He is going with you, is he not?"

"Sir, you must not talk," said a convoy sergeant, not the one who had
let Nekhludoff come up. Nekhludoff left the carriage and went in search
of an official to whom he might speak for the woman in travail and about
Taras, but could not find him, nor get an answer from any of the convoy
for a long time. They were all in a bustle; some were leading a prisoner
somewhere or other, others running to get themselves provisions, some
were placing their things in the carriages or attending on a lady
who was going to accompany the convoy officer, and they answered
Nekhludoff's questions unwillingly. Nekhludoff found the convoy officer
only after the second bell had been rung. The officer with his short
arm was wiping the moustaches that covered his mouth and shrugging his
shoulders, reproving the corporal for something or other.

"What is it you want?" he asked Nekhludoff.

"You've got a woman there who is being confined, so I thought best--"

"Well, let her be confined; we shall see later on," and briskly swinging
his short arms, he ran up to his carriage. At the moment the guard
passed with a whistle in his hand, and from the people on the platform
and from the women's carriages there arose a sound of weeping and words
of prayer.

Nekhludoff stood on the platform by the side of Taras, and looked how,
one after the other, the carriages glided past him, with the shaved
heads of the men at the grated windows. Then the first of the women's
carriages came up, with women's heads at the windows, some covered with
kerchiefs and some uncovered, then the second, whence proceeded the same
groans, then the carriage where Maslova was. She stood with the others
at the window, and looked at Nekhludoff with a pathetic smile.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

BROTHER AND SISTER.

There were still two hours before the passenger train by which
Nekhludoff was going would start. He had thought of using this interval
to see his sister again; but after the impressions of the morning he
felt much excited and so done up that, sitting down on a sofa in the
first-class refreshment-room, he suddenly grew so drowsy that he turned
over on to his side, and, laying his face on his hand, fell asleep at
once. A waiter in a dress coat with a napkin in his hand woke him.

"Sir, sir, are you not Prince Nekhludoff? There's a lady looking for
you."

Nekhludoff started up and recollected where he was and all that had
happened in the morning.

He saw in his imagination the procession of prisoners, the dead bodies,
the railway carriages with barred windows, and the women locked up in
them, one of whom was groaning in travail with no one to help her, and
another who was pathetically smiling at him through the bars.

The reality before his eyes was very different, i.e., a table with
vases, candlesticks and crockery, and agile waiters moving round the
table, and in the background a cupboard and a counter laden with fruit
and bottles, behind it a barman, and in front the backs of passengers
who had come up for refreshments. When Nekhludoff had risen and sat
gradually collecting his thoughts, he noticed that everybody in the
room was inquisitively looking at something that was passing by the open
doors.

He also looked, and saw a group of people carrying a chair on which sat
a lady whose head was wrapped in a kind of airy fabric.

Nekhludoff thought he knew the footman who was supporting the chair in
front. And also the man behind, and a doorkeeper with gold cord on his
cap, seemed familiar. A lady's maid with a fringe and an apron, who was
carrying a parcel, a parasol, and something round in a leather case,
was walking behind the chair. Then came Prince Korchagin, with his thick
lips, apoplectic neck, and a travelling cap on his head; behind him
Missy, her cousin Misha, and an acquaintance of Nekhludoff's--the
long-necked diplomat Osten, with his protruding Adam's apple and his
unvarying merry mood and expression. He was saying something very
emphatically, though jokingly, to the smiling Missy. The Korchagins were
moving from their estate near the city to the estate of the Princess's
sister on the Nijni railway. The procession--the men carrying the
chair, the maid, and the doctor--vanished into the ladies' waiting-room,
evoking a feeling of curiosity and respect in the onlookers. But the old
Prince remained and sat down at the table, called a waiter, and ordered
food and drink. Missy and Osten also remained in the refreshment-room
and were about to sit down, when they saw an acquaintance in the
doorway, and went up to her. It was Nathalie Rogozhinsky. Nathalie came
into the refreshment-room accompanied by Agraphena Petrovna, and both
looked round the room. Nathalie noticed at one and the same moment both
her brother and Missy. She first went up to Missy, only nodding to her
brother; but, having kissed her, at once turned to him.

"At last I have found you," she said. Nekhludoff rose to greet Missy,
Misha, and Osten, and to say a few words to them. Missy told him about
their house in the country having been burnt down, which necessitated
their moving to her aunt's. Osten began relating a funny story about a
fire. Nekhludoff paid no attention, and turned to his sister.

"How glad I am that you have come."

"I have been here a long time," she said. "Agraphena Petrovna is with
me." And she pointed to Agraphena Petrovna, who, in a waterproof and
with a bonnet on her head, stood some way off, and bowed to him with
kindly dignity and some confusion, not wishing to intrude.

"We looked for you everywhere."

"And I had fallen asleep here. How glad I am that you have come,"
repeated Nekhludoff. "I had begun to write to you."

"Really?" she said, looking frightened. "What about?"

Missy and the gentleman, noticing that an intimate conversation was
about to commence between the brother and sister, went away. Nekhludoff
and his sister sat down by the window on a velvet-covered sofa, on which
lay a plaid, a box, and a few other things.

"Yesterday, after I left you, I felt inclined to return and express my
regret, but I did not know how he would take it," said Nekhludoff. "I
spoke hastily to your husband, and this tormented me."

"I knew," said his sister, "that you did not mean to. Oh, you know!" and
the tears came to her eyes, and she touched his hand. The sentence was
not clear, but he understood it perfectly, and was touched by what it
expressed. Her words meant that, besides the love for her husband which
held her in its sway, she prized and considered important the love she
had for him, her brother, and that every misunderstanding between them
caused her deep suffering.

"Thank you, thank you. Oh! what I have seen to-day!" he said, suddenly
recalling the second of the dead convicts. "Two prisoners have been done
to death."

"Done to death? How?"

"Yes, done to death. They led them in this heat, and two died of
sunstroke."

"Impossible! What, to-day? just now?"

"Yes, just now. I have seen their bodies."

"But why done to death? Who killed them?" asked Nathalie.

"They who forced them to go killed them," said Nekhludoff, with
irritation, feeling that she looked at this, too, with her husband's
eyes.

"Oh, Lord!" said Agraphena Petrovna, who had come up to them.

"Yes, we have not the slightest idea of what is being done to these
unfortunate beings. But it ought to be known," added Nekhludoff, and
looked at old Korchagin, who sat with a napkin tied round him and a
bottle before him, and who looked round at Nekhludoff.

"Nekhludoff," he called out, "won't you join me and take some
refreshment? It is excellent before a journey."

Nekhludoff refused, and turned away.

"But what are you going to do?" Nathalie continued.

"What I can. I don't know, but I feel I must do something. And I shall
do what I am able to."

"Yes, I understand. And how about them?" she continued, with a smile and
a look towards Korchagin. "Is it possible that it is all over?"

"Completely, and I think without any regret on either side."

"It is a pity. I am sorry. I am fond of her. However, it's all right.
But why do you wish to bind yourself?" she added shyly. "Why are you
going?"

"I go because I must," answered Nekhludoff, seriously and dryly, as if
wishing to stop this conversation. But he felt ashamed of his coldness
towards his sister at once. "Why not tell her all I am thinking?" he
thought, "and let Agraphena Petrovna also hear it," he thought, with
a look at the old servant, whose presence made the wish to repeat his
decision to his sister even stronger.

"You mean my intention to marry Katusha? Well, you see, I made up my
mind to do it, but she refuses definitely and firmly," he said, and his
voice shook, as it always did when he spoke of it. "She does not wish
to accept my sacrifice, but is herself sacrificing what in her position
means much, and I cannot accept this sacrifice, if it is only a
momentary impulse. And so I am going with her, and shall be where she
is, and shall try to lighten her fate as much as I can."

Nathalie said nothing. Agraphena Petrovna looked at her with a
questioning look, and shook her head. At this moment the former
procession issued from the ladies' room. The same handsome footman
(Philip). and the doorkeeper were carrying the Princess Korchagin. She
stopped the men who were carrying her, and motioned to Nekhludoff to
approach, and, with a pitiful, languishing air, she extended her white,
ringed hand, expecting the firm pressure of his hand with a sense of
horror.

"Epouvantable!" she said, meaning the heat. "I cannot stand it! Ce
climat me tue!" And, after a short talk about the horrors of the Russian
climate, she gave the men a sign to go on.

"Be sure and come," she added, turning her long face towards Nekhludoff
as she was borne away.

The procession with the Princess turned to the right towards the
first-class carriages. Nekhludoff, with the porter who was carrying his
things, and Taras with his bag, turned to the left.

"This is my companion," said Nekhludoff to his sister, pointing to
Taras, whose story he had told her before.

"Surely not third class?" said Nathalie, when Nekhludoff stopped in
front of a third-class carriage, and Taras and the porter with the
things went in.

"Yes; it is more convenient for me to be with Taras," he said. "One
thing more," he added; "up to now I have not given the Kousminski
land to the peasants; so that, in case of my death, your children will
inherit it."

"Dmitri, don't!" said Nathalie.

"If I do give it away, all I can say is that the rest will be theirs,
as it is not likely I shall marry; and if I do marry I shall have no
children, so that--"

"Dmitri, don't talk like that!" said Nathalie. And yet Nekhludoff
noticed that she was glad to hear him say it.

Higher up, by the side of a first-class carriage, there stood a group of
people still looking at the carriage into which the Princess Korchagin
had been carried. Most of the passengers were already seated. Some of
the late comers hurriedly clattered along the boards of the platform,
the guard was closing the doors and asking the passengers to get in and
those who were seeing them off to come out.

Nekhludoff entered the hot, smelling carriage, but at once stepped out
again on to the small platform at the back of the carriage. Nathalie
stood opposite the carriage, with her fashionable bonnet and cape,
by the side of Agraphena Petrovna, and was evidently trying to find
something to say.

She could not even say ecrivez, because they had long ago laughed
at this word, habitually spoken by those about to part. The short
conversation about money matters had in a moment destroyed the tender
brotherly and sisterly feelings that had taken hold of them. They felt
estranged, so that Nathalie was glad when the train moved; and she
could only say, nodding her head with a sad and tender look, "Goodbye,
good-bye, Dmitri." But as soon as the carriage had passed her she
thought of how she should repeat her conversation with her brother to
her husband, and her face became serious and troubled.

Nekhludoff, too, though he had nothing but the kindest feelings for
his sister, and had hidden nothing from her, now felt depressed and
uncomfortable with her, and was glad to part. He felt that the Nathalie
who was once so near to him no longer existed, and in her place was only
a slave of that hairy, unpleasant husband, who was so foreign to him. He
saw it clearly when her face lit up with peculiar animation as he spoke
of what would peculiarly interest her husband, i.e., the giving up of
the land to the peasants and the inheritance.

And this made him sad.



CHAPTER XL.

THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF HUMAN LIFE.

The heat in the large third-class carriage, which had been standing in
the burning sun all day, was so great that Nekhludoff did not go in,
but stopped on the little platform behind the carriage which formed a
passage to the next one. But there was not a breath of fresh air here
either, and Nekhludoff breathed freely only when the train had passed
the buildings and the draught blew across the platform.

"Yes, killed," he repeated to himself, the words he had used to his
sister. And in his imagination in the midst of all other impressions
there arose with wonderful clearness the beautiful face of the second
dead convict, with the smile of the lips, the severe expression of the
brows, and the small, firm ear below the shaved bluish skull.

And what seemed terrible was that he had been murdered, and no one knew
who had murdered him. Yet he had been murdered. He was led out like all
the rest of the prisoners by Maslennikoff's orders. Maslennikoff had
probably given the order in the usual manner, had signed with his stupid
flourish the paper with the printed heading, and most certainly would
not consider himself guilty. Still less would the careful doctor who
examined the convicts consider himself guilty. He had performed his duty
accurately, and had separated the weak. How could he have foreseen this
terrible heat, or the fact that they would start so late in the day and
in such crowds? The prison inspector? But the inspector had only carried
into execution the order that on a given day a certain number of exiles
and convicts--men and women--had to be sent off. The convoy officer
could not be guilty either, for his business was to receive a certain
number of persons in a certain place, and to deliver up the same number.
He conducted them in the usual manner, and could not foresee that two
such strong men as those Nekhludoff saw would not be able to stand it
and would die. No one is guilty, and yet the men have been murdered by
these people who are not guilty of their murder.

"All this comes," Nekhludoff thought, "from the fact that all these
people, governors, inspectors, police officers, and men, consider that
there are circumstances in which human relations are not necessary
between human beings. All these men, Maslennikoff, and the inspector,
and the convoy officer, if they were not _governor, inspector, officer,_
would have considered twenty times before sending people in such heat
in such a mass--would have stopped twenty times on the way, and, seeing
that a man was growing weak, gasping for breath, would have led him
into the shade, would have given him water and let him rest, and if an
accident had still occurred they would have expressed pity. But they
not only did not do it, but hindered others from doing it, because they
considered not men and their duty towards them but only the office they
themselves filled, and held what that office demanded of them to be
above human relations. That's what it is," Nekhludoff went on in his
thoughts. "If one acknowledges but for a single hour that anything
can be more important than love for one's fellowmen, even in some
one exceptional case, any crime can be committed without a feeling of
guilt."

Nekhludoff was so engrossed by his thoughts that he did not notice how
the weather changed. The sun was covered over by a low-hanging, ragged
cloud. A compact, light grey cloud was rapidly coming from the west, and
was already falling in heavy, driving rain on the fields and woods far
in the distance. Moisture, coming from the cloud, mixed with the air.
Now and then the cloud was rent by flashes of lightning, and peals of
thunder mingled more and more often with the rattling of the train. The
cloud came nearer and nearer, the rain-drops driven by the wind began
to spot the platform and Nekhludoff's coat; and he stepped to the other
side of the little platform, and, inhaling the fresh, moist air--filled
with the smell of corn and wet earth that had long been waiting for
rain--he stood looking at the gardens, the woods, the yellow rye fields,
the green oatfields, the dark-green strips of potatoes in bloom, that
glided past. Everything looked as if covered over with varnish--the
green turned greener, the yellow yellower, the black blacker.

"More! more!" said Nekhludoff, gladdened by the sight of gardens and
fields revived by the beneficent shower. The shower did not last long.
Part of the cloud had come down in rain, part passed over, and the last
fine drops fell straight on to the earth. The sun reappeared,
everything began to glisten, and in the east--not very high above the
horizon--appeared a bright rainbow, with the violet tint very distinct
and broken only at one end.

"Why, what was I thinking about?" Nekhludoff asked himself when all
these changes in nature were over, and the train ran into a cutting
between two high banks.

"Oh! I was thinking that all those people (inspector, convoy men--all
those in the service) are for the greater part kind people--cruel only
because they are serving." He recalled Maslennikoff's indifference when
he told him about what was being done in the prison, the inspector's
severity, the cruelty of the convoy officer when he refused places on
the carts to those who asked for them, and paid no attention to the fact
that there was a woman in travail in the train. All these people were
evidently invulnerable and impregnable to the simplest feelings of
compassion only because they held offices. "As officials they were
impermeable to the feelings of humanity, as this paved ground is
impermeable to the rain." Thus thought Nekhludoff as he looked at the
railway embankment paved with stones of different colours, down which
the water was running in streams instead of soaking into the earth.
"Perhaps it is necessary to pave the banks with stones, but it is sad
to look at the ground, which might be yielding corn, grass, bushes, or
trees in the same way as the ground visible up there is doing--deprived
of vegetation, and so it is with men," thought Nekhludoff. "Perhaps
these governors, inspectors, policemen, are needed, but it is terrible
to see men deprived of the chief human attribute, that of love and
sympathy for one another. The thing is," he continued, "that these
people consider lawful what is not lawful, and do not consider the
eternal, immutable law, written in the hearts of men by God, as law.
That is why I feel so depressed when I am with these people. I am
simply afraid of them, and really they are terrible, more terrible than
robbers. A robber might, after all, feel pity, but they can feel
no pity, they are inured against pity as these stones are against
vegetation. That is what makes them terrible. It is said that the
Pougatcheffs, the Razins [leaders of rebellions in Russia: Stonka Razin
in the 17th and Pougatcheff in the 18th century] are terrible. These are
a thousand times more terrible," he continued, in his thoughts. "If
a psychological problem were set to find means of making men of our
time--Christian, humane, simple, kind people--perform the most horrible
crimes without feeling guilty, only one solution could be devised: to
go on doing what is being done. It is only necessary that these people
should he governors, inspectors, policemen; that they should be fully
convinced that there is a kind of business, called government service,
which allows men to treat other men as things, without human brotherly
relations with them, and also that these people should be so linked
together by this government service that the responsibility for the
results of their actions should not fall on any one of them separately.
Without these conditions, the terrible acts I witnessed to-day would be
impossible in our times. It all lies in the fact that men think there
are circumstances in which one may deal with human beings without love;
and there are no such circumstances. One may deal with things without
love. One may cut down trees, make bricks, hammer iron without love; but
you cannot deal with men without it, just as one cannot deal with bees
without being careful. If you deal carelessly with bees you will injure
them, and will yourself be injured. And so with men. It cannot be
otherwise, because natural love is the fundamental law of human life. It
is true that a man cannot force another to love him, as he can force
him to work for him; but it does not follow that a man may deal with men
without love, especially to demand anything from them. If you feel no
love, sit still," Nekhludoff thought; "occupy yourself with things, with
yourself, with anything you like, only not with men. You can only eat
without injuring yourself when you feel inclined to eat, so you can only
deal with men usefully when you love. Only let yourself deal with a man
without love, as I did yesterday with my brother-in-law, and there are
no limits to the suffering you will bring on yourself, as all my life
proves. Yes, yes, it is so," thought Nekhludoff; "it is good; yes, it is
good," he repeated, enjoying the freshness after the torturing heat, and
conscious of having attained to the fullest clearness on a question that
had long occupied him.



CHAPTER XLI.

TARAS'S STORY.

The carriage in which Nekhludoff had taken his place was half filled
with people. There were in it servants, working men, factory hands,
butchers, Jews, shopmen, workmen's wives, a soldier, two ladies, a
young one and an old one with bracelets on her arm, and a severe-looking
gentleman with a cockade on his black cap. All these people were sitting
quietly; the bustle of taking their places was long over; some sat
cracking and eating sunflower seeds, some smoking, some talking.

Taras sat, looking very happy, opposite the door, keeping a place for
Nekhludoff, and carrying on an animated conversation with a man in
a cloth coat who sat opposite to him, and who was, as Nekhludoff
afterwards found out, a gardener going to a new situation. Before
reaching the place where Taras sat Nekhludoff stopped between the seats
near a reverend-looking old man with a white beard and nankeen coat, who
was talking with a young woman in peasant dress. A little girl of about
seven, dressed in a new peasant costume, sat, her little legs dangling
above the floor, by the side of the woman, and kept cracking seeds.

The old man turned round, and, seeing Nekhludoff, he moved the lappets
of his coat off the varnished seat next to him, and said, in a friendly
manner:

"Please, here's a seat."

Nekhludoff thanked him, and took the seat. As soon as he was seated the
woman continued the interrupted conversation.

She was returning to her village, and related how her husband, whom she
had been visiting, had received her in town.

"I was there during the carnival, and now, by the Lord's help, I've been
again," she said. "Then, God willing, at Christmas I'll go again."

"That's right," said the old man, with a look at Nekhludoff, "it's the
best way to go and see him, else a young man can easily go to the bad,
living in a town."

"Oh, no, sir, mine is not such a man. No nonsense of any kind about him;
his life is as good as a young maiden's. The money he earns he sends
home all to a copeck. And, as to our girl here, he was so glad to see
her, there are no words for it," said the woman, and smiled.

The little girl, who sat cracking her seeds and spitting out the shells,
listened to her mother's words, and, as if to confirm them, looked up
with calm, intelligent eyes into Nekhludoff's and the old man's faces.

"Well, if he's good, that's better still," said the old man. "And none
of that sort of thing?" he added, with a look at a couple, evidently
factory hands, who sat at the other side of the carriage. The husband,
with his head thrown back, was pouring vodka down his throat out of a
bottle, and the wife sat holding a bag, out of which they had taken the
bottle, and watched him intently.

"No, mine neither drinks nor smokes," said the woman who was conversing
with the old man, glad of the opportunity of praising her husband once
more. "No, sir, the earth does not hold many such." And, turning to
Nekhludoff, she added, "That's the sort of man he is."

"What could be better," said the old man, looking at the factory worker,
who had had his drink and had passed the bottle to his wife. The wife
laughed, shook her head, and also raised the bottle to her lips.

Noticing Nekhludoff's and the old man's look directed towards them, the
factory worker addressed the former.

"What is it, sir? That we are drinking? Ah, no one sees how we work,
but every one sees how we drink. I have earned it, and I am drinking and
treating my wife, and no one else."

"Yes, yes," said Nekhludoff, not knowing what to say.

"True, sir. My wife is a steady woman. I am satisfied with my wife,
because she can feel for me. Is it right what I'm saying, Mavra?"

"There you are, take it, I don't want any more," said the wife,
returning the bottle to him. "And what are you jawing for like that?"
she added.

"There now! She's good--that good; and suddenly she'll begin squeaking
like a wheel that's not greased. Mavra, is it right what I'm saying?"

Mavra laughed and moved her hand with a tipsy gesture.

"Oh, my, he's at it again."

"There now, she's that good--that good; but let her get her tail over
the reins, and you can't think what she'll be up to. . . . Is it right
what I'm saying? You must excuse me, sir, I've had a drop! What's to be
done?" said the factory worker, and, preparing to go to sleep, put his
head in his wife's lap.

Nekhludoff sat a while with the old man, who told him all about himself.
The old man was a stove builder, who had been working for 53 years, and
had built so many stoves that he had lost count, and now he wanted to
rest, but had no time. He had been to town and found employment for the
young ones, and was now going to the country to see the people at home.
After hearing the old man's story, Nekhludoff went to the place that
Taras was keeping for him.

"It's all right, sir; sit down; we'll put the bag here," said the
gardener, who sat opposite Taras, in a friendly tone, looking up into
Nekhludoff's face.

"Rather a tight fit, but no matter since we are friends," said Taras,
smiling, and lifting the bag, which weighed more than five stone, as if
it were a feather, he carried it across to the window.

"Plenty of room; besides, we might stand up a bit; and even under
the seat it's as comfortable as you could wish. What's the good of
humbugging?" he said, beaming with friendliness and kindness.

Taras spoke of himself as being unable to utter a word when quite sober;
but drink, he said, helped him to find the right words, and then he
could express everything. And in reality, when he was sober Taras kept
silent; but when he had been drinking, which happened rarely and only on
special occasions, he became very pleasantly talkative. Then he spoke
a great deal, spoke well and very simply and truthfully, and especially
with great kindliness, which shone in his gentle, blue eyes and in the
friendly smile that never left his lips. He was in such a state to-day.
Nekhludoff's approach interrupted the conversation; but when he had put
the bag in its place, Taras sat down again, and with his strong hands
folded in his lap, and looking straight into the gardener's face,
continued his story. He was telling his new acquaintance about his wife
and giving every detail: what she was being sent to Siberia for, and why
he was now following her. Nekhludoff had never heard a detailed account
of this affair, and so he listened with interest. When he came up, the
story had reached the point when the attempt to poison was already an
accomplished fact, and the family had discovered that it was Theodosia's
doing.

"It's about my troubles that I'm talking," said Taras, addressing
Nekhludoff with cordial friendliness. "I have chanced to come across
such a hearty man, and we've got into conversation, and I'm telling him
all."

"I see," said Nekhludoff.

"Well, then in this way, my friend, the business became known. Mother,
she takes that cake. 'I'm going,' says she, 'to the police officer.' My
father is a just old man. 'Wait, wife,' says he, 'the little woman is
a mere child, and did not herself know what she was doing. We must have
pity. She may come to her senses.' But, dear me, mother would not hear
of it. 'While we keep her here,' she says, 'she may destroy us all like
cockroaches.' Well, friend, so she goes off for the police officer. He
bounces in upon us at once. Calls for witnesses."

"Well, and you?" asked the gardener.

"Well, I, you see, friend, roll about with the pain in my stomach, and
vomit. All my inside is turned inside out; I can't even speak. Well, so
father he goes and harnesses the mare, and puts Theodosia into the cart,
and is off to the police-station, and then to the magistrate's. And she,
you know, just as she had done from the first, so also there, confesses
all to the magistrate--where she got the arsenic, and how she kneaded
the cake. 'Why did you do it?' says he. 'Why,' says she, 'because he's
hateful to me. I prefer Siberia to a life with him.' That's me," and
Taras smiled.

"Well, so she confessed all. Then, naturally--the prison, and father
returns alone. And harvest time just coming, and mother the only woman
at home, and she no longer strong. So we think what we are to do. Could
we not bail her out? So father went to see an official. No go. Then
another. I think he went to five of them, and we thought of giving it
up. Then we happened to come across a clerk--such an artful one as you
don't often find. 'You give me five roubles, and I'll get her out,' says
he. He agreed to do it for three. Well, and what do you think, friend? I
went and pawned the linen she herself had woven, and gave him the money.
As soon as he had written that paper," drawled out Taras, just as if he
were speaking of a shot being fired, "we succeeded at once. I went to
fetch her myself. Well, friend, so I got to town, put up the mare, took
the paper, and went to the prison. 'What do you want?' 'This is what I
want,' say I, 'you've got my wife here in prison.' 'And have you got a
paper?' I gave him the paper. He gave it a look. 'Wait,' says he. So I
sat down on a bench. It was already past noon by the sun. An official
comes out. 'You are Vargoushoff?' 'I am.' 'Well, you may take her.' The
gates opened, and they led her out in her own clothes quite all right.
'Well, come along. Have you come on foot?' 'No, I have the horse here.'
So I went and paid the ostler, and harnessed, put in all the hay that
was left, and covered it with sacking for her to sit on. She got in and
wrapped her shawl round her, and off we drove. She says nothing and I
say nothing. Just as we were coming up to the house she says, 'And how's
mother; is she alive?' 'Yes, she's alive.' 'And father; is he alive?
'Yes, he is.' 'Forgive me, Taras,' she says, 'for my folly. I did not
myself know what I was doing.' So I say, 'Words won't mend matters. I
have forgiven you long ago,' and I said no more. We got home, and she
just fell at mother's feet. Mother says, 'The Lord will forgive you.'
And father said, 'How d'you do?' and 'What's past is past. Live as
best you can. Now,' says he, 'is not the time for all that; there's
the harvest to be gathered in down at Skorodino,' he says. 'Down on the
manured acre, by the Lord's help, the ground has borne such rye that
the sickle can't tackle it. It's all interwoven and heavy, and has sunk
beneath its weight; that must be reaped. You and Taras had better go
and see to it to-morrow.' Well, friend, from that moment she took to the
work and worked so that every one wondered. At that time we rented three
desiatins, and by God's help we had a wonderful crop both of oats and
rye. I mow and she binds the sheaves, and sometimes we both of us
reap. I am good at work and not afraid of it, but she's better still at
whatever she takes up. She's a smart woman, young, and full of life; and
as to work, friend, she'd grown that eager that I had to stop her. We
get home, our fingers swollen, our arms aching, and she, instead of
resting, rushes off to the barn to make binders for the sheaves for next
day. Such a change!"

"Well, and to you? Was she kinder, now?" asked the gardener.

"That's beyond question. She clings to me as if we were one soul.
Whatever I think she understands. Even mother, angry as she was, could
not help saying: 'It's as if our Theodosia had been transformed; she's
quite a different woman now!' We were once going to cart the sheaves
with two carts. She and I were in the first, and I say, 'How could you
think of doing that, Theodosia?' and she says, 'How could I think of it?
just so, I did not wish to live with you. I thought I'd rather die
than live with you!' I say, 'And now?' and she says, 'Now you're in
my heart!'" Taras stopped, and smiled joyfully, shook his head as if
surprised. "Hardly had we got the harvest home when I went to soak the
hemp, and when I got home there was a summons, she must go to be tried,
and we had forgotten all about the matter that she was to be tried for."

"It can only be the evil one," said the gardener. "Could any man of
himself think of destroying a living soul? We had a fellow once--" and
the gardener was about to commence his tale when the train began to
stop.

"It seems we are coming to a station," he said. "I'll go and have a
drink."

The conversation stopped, and Nekhludoff followed the gardener out of
the carriage onto the wet platform of the station.



CHAPTER XLII.

LE VRAI GRAND MONDE.

Before Nekhludoff got out he had noticed in the station yard several
elegant equipages, some with three, some with four, well-fed horses,
with tinkling bells on their harness. When he stepped out on the wet,
dark-coloured boards of the platform, he saw a group of people in front
of the first-class carriage, among whom were conspicuous a stout
lady with costly feathers on her hat, and a waterproof, and a tall,
thin-legged young man in a cycling suit. The young man had by his side
an enormous, well-fed dog, with a valuable collar. Behind them stood
footmen, holding wraps and umbrellas, and a coachman, who had also come
to meet the train.

On the whole of the group, from the fat lady down to the coachman who
stood holding up his long coat, there lay the stamp of wealth and quiet
self-assurance. A curious and servile crowd rapidly gathered round this
group--the station-master, in his red cap, a gendarme, a thin young lady
in a Russian costume, with beads round her neck, who made a point of
seeing the trains come in all through the summer, a telegraph clerk, and
passengers, men and women.

In the young man with the dog Nekhludoff recognised young Korchagin,
a gymnasium student. The fat lady was the Princess's sister, to whose
estate the Korchagins were now moving. The guard, with his gold cord and
shiny top-boots, opened the carriage door and stood holding it as a sign
of deference, while Philip and a porter with a white apron carefully
carried out the long-faced Princess in her folding chair. The sisters
greeted each other, and French sentences began flying about. Would the
Princess go in a closed or an open carriage? At last the procession
started towards the exit, the lady's maid, with her curly fringe,
parasol and leather case in the rear.

Nekhludoff not wishing to meet them and to have to take leave over
again, stopped before he got to the door, waiting for the procession to
pass.

The Princess, her son, Missy, the doctor, and the maid went out first,
the old Prince and his sister-in-law remained behind. Nekhludoff was too
far to catch anything but a few disconnected French sentences of their
conversation One of the sentences uttered by the Prince, as it often
happens, for some unaccountable reason remained in his memory with all
its intonations and the sound of the voice.

"_Oh, il est du vrai grand monde, du vrai grand monde_," said the Prince
in his loud, self-assured tone as he went out of the station with his
sister-in-law, accompanied by the respectful guards and porters.

At this moment from behind the corner of the station suddenly appeared
a crowd of workmen in bark shoes, wearing sheepskin coats and carrying
bags on their backs. The workmen went up to the nearest carriage with
soft yet determined steps, and were about to get in, but were at
once driven away by a guard. Without stopping, the workmen passed
on, hurrying and jostling one another, to the next carriage and began
getting in, catching their bags against the corners and door of the
carriage, but another guard caught sight of them from the door of the
station, and shouted at them severely. The workmen, who had already got
in, hurried out again and went on, with the same soft and firm steps,
still further towards Nekhludoff's carriage. A guard was again going to
stop them, but Nekhludoff said there was plenty of room inside, and that
they had better get in. They obeyed and got in, followed by Nekhludoff.

The workmen were about to take their seats, when the gentleman with the
cockade and the two ladies, looking at this attempt to settle in their
carriage as a personal insult to themselves, indignantly protested and
wanted to turn them out. The workmen--there were 20 of them, old men
and quite young ones, all of them wearied, sunburnt, with haggard
faces--began at once to move on through the carriage, catching the
seats, the walls, and the doors with their bags. They evidently felt
they had offended in some way, and seemed ready to go on indefinitely
wherever they were ordered to go.

"Where are you pushing to, you fiends? Sit down here," shouted another
guard they met.

"Voila encore des nouvelles," exclaimed the younger of the two ladies,
quite convinced that she would attract Nekhludoff's notice by her good
French.

The other lady with the bracelets kept sniffing and making faces,
and remarked something about how pleasant it was to sit with smelly
peasants.

The workmen, who felt the joy and calm experienced by people who have
escaped some kind of danger, threw off their heavy bags with a movement
of their shoulders and stowed them away under the seats.

The gardener had left his own seat to talk with Taras, and now went
back, so that there were two unoccupied seats opposite and one next to
Taras. Three of the workmen took these seats, but when Nekhludoff came
up to them, in his gentleman's clothing, they got so confused that they
rose to go away, but Nekhludoff asked them to stay, and himself sat down
on the arm of the seat, by the passage down the middle of the carriage.

One of the workmen, a man of about 50, exchanged a surprised and even
frightened look with a young man. That Nekhludoff, instead of scolding
and driving them away, as was natural to a gentleman, should give up his
seat to them, astonished and perplexed them. They even feared that this
might have some evil result for them.

However, they soon noticed that there was no underlying plot when they
heard Nekhludoff talking quite simply with Taras, and they grew quiet
and told one of the lads to sit down on his bag and give his seat to
Nekhludoff. At first the elderly workman who sat opposite Nekhludoff
shrank and drew back his legs for fear of touching the gentleman, but
after a while he grew quite friendly, and in talking to him and Taras
even slapped Nekhludoff on the knee when he wanted to draw special
attention to what he was saying.

He told them all about his position and his work in the peat bogs,
whence he was now returning home. He had been working there for two and
a half months, and was bringing home his wages, which only came to 10
roubles, since part had been paid beforehand when he was hired. They
worked, as he explained, up to their knees in water from sunrise to
sunset, with two hours' interval for dinner.

"Those who are not used to it find it hard, of course," he said; "but
when one's hardened it doesn't matter, if only the food is right. At
first the food was bad. Later the people complained, and they got good
food, and it was easy to work."

Then he told them how, during 28 years he went out to work, and sent all
his earnings home. First to his father, then to his eldest brother, and
now to his nephew, who was at the head of the household. On himself he
spent only two or three roubles of the 50 or 60 he earned a year, just
for luxuries--tobacco and matches.

"I'm a sinner, when tired I even drink a little vodka sometimes," he
added, with a guilty smile.

Then he told them how the women did the work at home, and how the
contractor had treated them to half a pail of vodka before they started
to-day, how one of them had died, and another was returning home ill.
The sick workman he was talking about was in a corner of the same
carriage. He was a young lad, with a pale, sallow face and bluish lips.
He was evidently tormented by intermittent fever. Nekhludoff went up to
him, but the lad looked up with such a severe and suffering expression
that Nekhludoff did not care to bother him with questions, but advised
the elder man to give him quinine, and wrote down the name of the
medicine. He wished to give him some money, but the old workman said he
would pay for it himself.

"Well, much as I have travelled, I have never met such a gentleman
before. Instead of punching your head, he actually gives up his place
to you," said the old man to Taras. "It seems there are all sorts of
gentlefolk, too."

"Yes, this is quite a new and different world," thought Nekhludoff,
looking at these spare, sinewy, limbs, coarse, home-made garments,
and sunburnt, kindly, though weary-looking faces, and feeling himself
surrounded on all sides with new people and the serious interests, joys,
and sufferings of a life of labour.

"Here is_ le vrai grand monde_," thought Nekhludoff, remembering the
words of Prince Korchagin and all that idle, luxurious world to which
the Korchagins belonged, with their petty, mean interests. And he felt
the joy of a traveller on discovering a new, unknown, and beautiful
world.


END OF BOOK II.




BOOK III.



CHAPTER I.

MASLOVA MAKES NEW FRIENDS.

The gang of prisoners to which Maslova belonged had walked about three
thousand three hundred miles. She and the other prisoners condemned for
criminal offences had travelled by rail and by steamboats as far as the
town of Perm. It was only here that Nekhludoff succeeded in obtaining a
permission for her to continue the journey with the political prisoners,
as Vera Doukhova, who was among the latter, advised him to do. The
journey up to Perm had been very trying to Maslova both morally and
physically. Physically, because of the overcrowding, the dirt, and the
disgusting vermin, which gave her no peace; morally, because of the
equally disgusting men. The men, like the vermin, though they changed
at each halting-place, were everywhere alike importunate; they swarmed
round her, giving her no rest. Among the women prisoners and the men
prisoners, the jailers and the convoy soldiers, the habit of a kind of
cynical debauch was so firmly established that unless a female prisoner
was willing to utilise her position as a woman she had to be constantly
on the watch. To be continually in a state of fear and strife was very
trying. And Maslova was specially exposed to attacks, her appearance
being attractive and her past known to every one. The decided resistance
with which she now met the importunity of all the men seemed offensive
to them, and awakened another feeling, that of ill-will towards her. But
her position was made a little easier by her intimacy with Theodosia,
and Theodosia's husband, who, having heard of the molestations his wife
was subject to, had in Nijni been arrested at his own desire in order
to be able to protect her, and was now travelling with the gang as a
prisoner. Maslova's position became much more bearable when she was
allowed to join the political prisoners, who were provided with better
accomodations, better food, and were treated less rudely, but besides
all this Maslova's condition was much improved because among the
political prisoners she was no longer molested by the men, and could
live without being reminded of that past which she was so anxious to
forget. But the chief advantage of the change lay in the fact that she
made the acquaintance of several persons who exercised a decided and
most beneficial influence on her character. Maslova was allowed to stop
with the political prisoners at all the halting-places, but being a
strong and healthy woman she was obliged to march with the criminal
convicts. In this way she walked all the way from Tomsk. Two political
prisoners also marched with the gang, Mary Pavlovna Schetinina, the girl
with the hazel eyes who had attracted Nekhludoff's attention when he had
been to visit Doukhova in prison, and one Simonson, who was on his
way to the Takoutsk district, the dishevelled dark young fellow with
deep-lying eyes, whom Nekhludoff had also noticed during that visit.
Mary Pavlovna was walking because she had given her place on the cart
to one of the criminals, a woman expecting to be confined, and Simonson
because he did not dare to avail himself of a class privilege.

These three always started early in the morning before the rest of the
political prisoners, who followed later on in the carts.

They were ready to start in this way just outside a large town, where a
new convoy officer had taken charge of the gang.

It was early on a dull September morning. It kept raining and snowing
alternately, and the cold wind blew in sudden gusts. The whole gang of
prisoners, consisting of four hundred men and fifty women, was already
assembled in the court of the halting station. Some of them were
crowding round the chief of the convoy, who was giving to specially
appointed prisoners money for two days' keep to distribute among the
rest, while others were purchasing food from women who had been let into
the courtyard. One could hear the voices of the prisoners counting their
money and making their purchases, and the shrill voices of the women
with the food.

Simonson, in his rubber jacket and rubber overshoes fastened with a
string over his worsted stockings (he was a vegetarian and would not
wear the skin of slaughtered animals), was also in the courtyard waiting
for the gang to start. He stood by the porch and jotted down in his
notebook a thought that had occurred to him. This was what he wrote:
"If a bacteria watched and examined a human nail it would pronounce
it inorganic matter, and thus we, examining our globe and watching its
crust, pronounce it to be inorganic. This is incorrect."

Katusha and Mary Pavlovna, both wearing top-boots and with shawls tied
round their heads, came out of the building into the courtyard where the
women sat sheltered from the wind by the northern wall of the court,
and vied with one another, offering their goods, hot meat pie, fish,
vermicelli, buckwheat porridge, liver, beef, eggs, milk. One had even a
roast pig to offer.

Having bought some eggs, bread, fish, and some rusks, Maslova was
putting them into her bag, while Mary Pavlovna was paying the women,
when a movement arose among the convicts. All were silent and took their
places. The officer came out and began giving the last orders before
starting. Everything was done in the usual manner. The prisoners were
counted, the chains on their legs examined, and those who were to
march in couples linked together with manacles. But suddenly the angry,
authoritative voice of the officer shouting something was heard, also
the sound of a blow and the crying of a child. All was silent for a
moment and then came a hollow murmur from the crowd. Maslova and Mary
Pavlovna advanced towards the spot whence the noise proceeded.



CHAPTER II.

AN INCIDENT OF THE MARCH.

This is what Mary Pavlovna and Katusha saw when they came up to the
scene whence the noise proceeded. The officer, a sturdy fellow, with
fair moustaches, stood uttering words of foul and coarse abuse, and
rubbing with his left the palm of his right hand, which he had hurt in
hitting a prisoner on the face. In front of him a thin, tall convict,
with half his head shaved and dressed in a cloak too short for him and
trousers much too short, stood wiping his bleeding face with one hand,
and holding a little shrieking girl wrapped in a shawl with the other.

"I'll give it you" (foul abuse); "I'll teach you to reason" (more
abuse); "you're to give her to the women!" shouted the officer. "Now,
then, on with them."

The convict, who was exiled by the Commune, had been carrying his little
daughter all the way from Tomsk, where his wife had died of typhus, and
now the officer ordered him to be manacled. The exile's explanation that
he could not carry the child if he was manacled irritated the officer,
who happened to be in a bad temper, and he gave the troublesome prisoner
a beating. [A fact described by Lineff in his "Transportation".] Before
the injured convict stood a convoy soldier, and a black-bearded prisoner
with manacles on one hand and a look of gloom on his face, which he
turned now to the officer, now to the prisoner with the little girl.

The officer repeated his orders for the soldiers to take away the girl.
The murmur among the prisoners grew louder.

"All the way from Tomsk they were not put on," came a hoarse voice from
some one in the rear. "It's a child, and not a puppy."

"What's he to do with the lassie? That's not the law," said some one
else.

"Who's that?" shouted the officer as if he had been stung, and rushed
into the crowd.

"I'll teach you the law. Who spoke. You? You?"

"Everybody says so, because-" said a short, broad-faced prisoner.

Before he had finished speaking the officer hit him in the face.

"Mutiny, is it? I'll show you what mutiny means. I'll have you all
shot like dogs, and the authorities will be only too thankful. Take the
girl."

The crowd was silent. One convoy soldier pulled away the girl, who was
screaming desperately, while another manacled the prisoner, who now
submissively held out his hand.

"Take her to the women," shouted the officer, arranging his sword belt.

The little girl, whose face had grown quite red, was trying to disengage
her arms from under the shawl, and screamed unceasingly. Mary Pavlovna
stepped out from among the crowd and came up to the officer.

"Will you allow me to carry the little girl?" she said.

"Who are you?" asked the officer.

"A political prisoner."

Mary Pavlovna's handsome face, with the beautiful prominent eyes (he
had noticed her before when the prisoners were given into his charge),
evidently produced an effect on the officer. He looked at her in silence
as if considering, then said: "I don't care; carry her if you like. It
is easy for you to show pity; if he ran away who would have to answer?"

"How could he run away with the child in his arms?" said Mary Pavlovna.

"I have no time to talk with you. Take her if you like."

"Shall I give her?" asked the soldier.

"Yes, give her."

"Come to me," said Mary Pavlovna, trying to coax the child to come to
her.

But the child in the soldier's arms stretched herself towards her father
and continued to scream, and would not go to Mary Pavlovna.

"Wait a bit, Mary Pavlovna," said Maslova, getting a rusk out of her
bag; "she will come to me."

The little girl knew Maslova, and when she saw her face and the rusk
she let her take her. All was quiet. The gates were opened, and the gang
stepped out, the convoy counted the prisoners over again, the bags were
packed and tied on to the carts, the weak seated on the top. Maslova
with the child in her arms took her place among the women next to
Theodosia. Simonson, who had all the time been watching what was going
on, stepped with large, determined strides up to the officer, who,
having given his orders, was just getting into a trap, and said, "You
have behaved badly."

"Get to your place; it is no business of yours."

"It is my business to tell you that you have behaved badly and I have
said it," said Simonson, looking intently into the officer's face from
under his bushy eyebrows.

"Ready? March!" the officer called out, paying no heed to Simonson, and,
taking hold of the driver's shoulder, he got into the trap. The gang
started and spread out as it stepped on to the muddy high road with
ditches on each side, which passed through a dense forest.



CHAPTER III.

MARY PAVLOVNA.

In spite of the hard conditions in which they were placed, life among
the political prisoners seemed very good to Katusha after the depraved,
luxurious and effeminate life she had led in town for the last six
years, and after two months' imprisonment with criminal prisoners. The
fifteen to twenty miles they did per day, with one day's rest after two
days' marching, strengthened her physically, and the fellowship with her
new companions opened out to her a life full of interests such as she
had never dreamed of. People so wonderful (as she expressed it) as those
whom she was now going with she had not only never met but could not
even have imagined.

"There now, and I cried when I was sentenced," she said. "Why, I must
thank God for it all the days of my life. I have learned to know what I
never should have found out else."

The motives she understood easily and without effort that guided these
people, and, being of the people, fully sympathised with them. She
understood that these persons were for the people and against the
upper classes, and though themselves belonging to the upper classes
had sacrificed their privileges, their liberty and their lives for the
people. This especially made her value and admire them. She was charmed
with all the new companions, but particularly with Mary Pavlovna,
and she was not only charmed with her, but loved her with a peculiar,
respectful and rapturous love. She was struck by the fact that this
beautiful girl, the daughter of a rich general, who could speak three
languages, gave away all that her rich brother sent her, and lived like
the simplest working girl, and dressed not only simply, but poorly,
paying no heed to her appearance. This trait and a complete absence
of coquetry was particularly surprising and therefore attractive to
Maslova. Maslova could see that Mary Pavlovna knew, and was even pleased
to know, that she was handsome, and yet the effect her appearance had on
men was not at all pleasing to her; she was even afraid of it, and felt
an absolute disgust to all love affairs. Her men companions knew it, and
if they felt attracted by her never permitted themselves to show it to
her, but treated her as they would a man; but with strangers, who often
molested her, the great physical strength on which she prided herself
stood her in good stead.

"It happened once," she said to Katusha, "that a man followed me in the
street and would not leave me on any account. At last I gave him such a
shaking that he was frightened and ran away."

She became a revolutionary, as she said, because she felt a dislike to
the life of the well-to-do from childhood up, and loved the life of the
common people, and she was always being scolded for spending her time
in the servants' hall, in the kitchen or the stables instead of the
drawing-room.

"And I found it amusing to be with cooks and the coachmen, and dull with
our gentlemen and ladies," she said. "Then when I came to understand
things I saw that our life was altogether wrong; I had no mother and I
did not care for my father, and so when I was nineteen I left home, and
went with a girl friend to work as a factory hand."

After she left the factory she lived in the country, then returned to
town and lived in a lodging, where they had a secret printing press.
There she was arrested and sentenced to hard labour. Mary Pavlovna
said nothing about it herself, but Katusha heard from others that Mary
Pavlovna was sentenced because, when the lodging was searched by the
police and one of the revolutionists fired a shot in the dark, she
pleaded guilty.

As soon as she had learned to know Mary Pavlovna, Katusha noticed
that, whatever the conditions she found herself in, Mary Pavlovna never
thought of herself, but was always anxious to serve, to help some one,
in matters small or great. One of her present companions, Novodvoroff,
said of her that she devoted herself to philanthropic amusements. And
this was true. The interest of her whole life lay in the search for
opportunities of serving others. This kind of amusement had become the
habit, the business of her life. And she did it all so naturally that
those who knew her no longer valued but simply expected it of her.

When Maslova first came among them, Mary Pavlovna felt repulsed and
disgusted. Katusha noticed this, but she also noticed that, having made
an effort to overcome these feelings, Mary Pavlovna became particularly
tender and kind to her. The tenderness and kindness of so uncommon
a being touched Maslova so much that she gave her whole heart, and
unconsciously accepting her views, could not help imitating her in
everything.

This devoted love of Katusha touched Mary Pavlovna in her turn, and she
learned to love Katusha.

These women were also united by the repulsion they both felt to sexual
love. The one loathed that kind of love, having experienced all its
horrors, the other, never having experienced it, looked on it as
something incomprehensible and at the same time as something repugnant
and offensive to human dignity.



CHAPTER IV.

SIMONSON.

Mary Pavlovna's influence was one that Maslova submitted to because she
loved Mary Pavlovna. Simonson influenced her because he loved her.

Everybody lives and acts partly according to his own, partly according
to other people's, ideas. This is what constitutes one of the great
differences among men. To some, thinking is a kind of mental game; they
treat their reason as if it were a fly-wheel without a connecting strap,
and are guided in their actions by other people's ideas, by custom or
laws; while others look upon their own ideas as the chief motive power
of all their actions, and always listen to the dictates of their own
reason and submit to it, accepting other people's opinions only on rare
occasions and after weighing them critically. Simonson was a man of the
latter sort; he settled and verified everything according to his own
reason and acted on the decisions he arrived at. When a schoolboy
he made up his mind that his father's income, made as a paymaster in
government office was dishonestly gained, and he told his father that it
ought to be given to the people. When his father, instead of listening
to him, gave him a scolding, he left his father's house and would not
make use of his father's means. Having come to the conclusion that all
the existing misery was a result of the people's ignorance, he joined
the socialists, who carried on propaganda among the people, as soon as
he left the university and got a place as a village schoolmaster.
He taught and explained to his pupils and to the peasants what he
considered to be just, and openly blamed what he thought unjust. He was
arrested and tried. During his trial he determined to tell his judges
that his was a just cause, for which he ought not to be tried or
punished. When the judges paid no heed to his words, but went on with
the trial, he decided not to answer them and kept resolutely silent when
they questioned him. He was exiled to the Government of Archangel. There
he formulated a religious teaching which was founded on the theory that
everything in the world was alive, that nothing is lifeless, and that
all the objects we consider to be without life or inorganic are only
parts of an enormous organic body which we cannot compass. A man's task
is to sustain the life of that huge organism and all its animate parts.
Therefore he was against war, capital punishment and every kind of
killing, not only of human beings, but also of animals. Concerning
marriage, too, he had a peculiar idea of his own; he thought that
increase was a lower function of man, the highest function being to
serve the already existing lives. He found a confirmation of his
theory in the fact that there were phacocytes in the blood. Celibates,
according to his opinion, were the same as phacocytes, their function
being to help the weak and the sickly particles of the organism. From
the moment he came to this conclusion he began to consider himself as
well as Mary Pavlovna as phacocytes, and to live accordingly, though
as a youth he had been addicted to vice. His love for Katusha did not
infringe this conception, because he loved her platonically, and such
love he considered could not hinder his activity as a phacocytes, but
acted, on the contrary, as an inspiration.

Not only moral, but also most practical questions he decided in his own
way. He applied a theory of his own to all practical business, had rules
relating to the number of hours for rest and for work, to the kind of
food to eat, the way to dress, to heat and light up the rooms. With all
this Simonson was very shy and modest; and yet when he had once made
up his mind nothing could make him waver. And this man had a decided
influence on Maslova through his love for her. With a woman's instinct
Maslova very soon found out that he loved her. And the fact that
she could awaken love in a man of that kind raised her in her own
estimation. It was Nekhludoff's magnanimity and what had been in the
past that made him offer to marry her, but Simonson loved her such as
she was now, loved her simply because of the love he bore her. And she
felt that Simonson considered her to be an exceptional woman, having
peculiarly high moral qualities. She did not quite know what the
qualities he attributed to her were, but in order to be on the safe side
and that he should not be disappointed in her, she tried with all her
might to awaken in herself all the highest qualities she could conceive,
and she tried to be as good as possible. This had begun while they
were still in prison, when on a common visiting day she had noticed his
kindly dark blue eyes gazing fixedly at her from under his projecting
brow. Even then she had noticed that this was a peculiar man, and that
he was looking at her in a peculiar manner, and had also noticed the
striking combination of sternness--the unruly hair and the frowning
forehead gave him this appearance--with the child-like kindness and
innocence of his look. She saw him again in Tomsk, where she joined the
political prisoners. Though they had not uttered a word, their looks
told plainly that they had understood one another. Even after that they
had had no serious conversation with each other, but Maslova felt that
when he spoke in her presence his words were addressed to her, and that
he spoke for her sake, trying to express himself as plainly as he could;
but it was when he started walking with the criminal prisoners that they
grew specially near to one another.



CHAPTER V.

THE POLITICAL PRISONERS.

Until they left Perm Nekhludoff only twice managed to see Katusha, once
in Nijni, before the prisoners were embarked on a barge surrounded with
a wire netting, and again in Perm in the prison office. At both these
interviews he found her reserved and unkind. She answered his questions
as to whether she was in want of anything, and whether she was
comfortable, evasively and bashfully, and, as he thought, with the same
feeling of hostile reproach which she had shown several times
before. Her depressed state of mind, which was only the result of the
molestations from the men that she was undergoing at the time, tormented
Nekhludoff. He feared lest, influenced by the hard and degrading
circumstances in which she was placed on the journey, she should again
get into that state of despair and discord with her own self which
formerly made her irritable with him, and which had caused her to drink
and smoke excessively to gain oblivion. But he was unable to help her in
any way during this part of the journey, as it was impossible for him to
be with her. It was only when she joined the political prisoners that he
saw how unfounded his fears were, and at each interview he noticed that
inner change he so strongly desired to see in her becoming more and more
marked. The first time they met in Tomsk she was again just as she had
been when leaving Moscow. She did not frown or become confused when she
saw him, but met him joyfully and simply, thanking him for what he had
done for her, especially for bringing her among the people with whom she
now was.

After two months' marching with the gang, the change that had taken
place within her became noticeable in her appearance. She grew sunburned
and thinner, and seemed older; wrinkles appeared on her temples and
round her mouth. She had no ringlets on her forehead now, and her hair
was covered with the kerchief; in the way it was arranged, as well as in
her dress and her manners, there was no trace of coquetry left. And this
change, which had taken place and was still progressing in her, made
Nekhludoff very happy.

He felt for her something he had never experienced before. This feeling
had nothing in common with his first poetic love for her, and even less
with the sensual love that had followed, nor even with the satisfaction
of a duty fulfilled, not unmixed with self-admiration, with which he
decided to marry her after the trial. The present feeling was simply one
of pity and tenderness. He had felt it when he met her in prison for
the first time, and then again when, after conquering his repugnance,
he forgave her the imagined intrigue with the medical assistant in the
hospital (the injustice done her had since been discovered); it was the
same feeling he now had, only with this difference, that formerly it was
momentary, and that now it had become permanent. Whatever he was doing,
whatever he was thinking now, a feeling of pity and tenderness dwelt
with him, and not only pity and tenderness for her, but for everybody.
This feeling seemed to have opened the floodgates of love, which had
found no outlet in Nekhludoff's soul, and the love now flowed out to
every one he met.

During this journey Nekhludoff's feelings were so stimulated that he
could not help being attentive and considerate to everybody, from the
coachman and the convoy soldiers to the prison inspectors and governors
whom he had to deal with. Now that Maslova was among the political
prisoners, Nekhludoff could not help becoming acquainted with many of
them, first in Ekaterinburg, where they had a good deal of freedom and
were kept altogether in a large cell, and then on the road when Maslova
was marching with three of the men and four of the women. Coming in
contact with political exiles in this way made Nekhludoff completely
change his mind concerning them.

From the very beginning of the revolutionary movement in Russia, but
especially since that first of March, when Alexander II was murdered,
Nekhludoff regarded the revolutionists with dislike and contempt. He
was repulsed by the cruelty and secrecy of the methods they employed
in their struggles against the government, especially the cruel murders
they committed, and their arrogance also disgusted him. But having
learned more intimately to know them and all they had suffered at the
hands of the government, he saw that they could not be other than they
were.

Terrible and endless as were the torments which were inflicted on the
criminals, there was at least some semblance of justice shown them
before and after they were sentenced, but in the case of the political
prisoners there was not even that semblance, as Nekhludoff saw in the
case of Sholostova and that of many and many of his new acquaintances.
These people were dealt with like fish caught with a net; everything
that gets into the nets is pulled ashore, and then the big fish which
are required are sorted out and the little ones are left to perish
unheeded on the shore. Having captured hundreds that were evidently
guiltless, and that could not be dangerous to the government, they left
them imprisoned for years, where they became consumptive, went out of
their minds or committed suicide, and kept them only because they had
no inducement to set them free, while they might be of use to elucidate
some question at a judicial inquiry, safe in prison. The fate of these
persons, often innocent even from the government point of view, depended
on the whim, the humour of, or the amount of leisure at the disposal
of some police officer or spy, or public prosecutor, or magistrate,
or governor, or minister. Some one of these officials feels dull, or
inclined to distinguish himself, and makes a number of arrests, and
imprisons or sets free, according to his own fancy or that of the
higher authorities. And the higher official, actuated by like motives,
according to whether he is inclined to distinguish himself, or to what
his relations to the minister are, exiles men to the other side of the
world or keeps them in solitary confinement, condemns them to Siberia,
to hard labour, to death, or sets them free at the request of some lady.

They were dealt with as in war, and they naturally employed the
means that were used against them. And as the military men live in an
atmosphere of public opinion that not only conceals from them the guilt
of their actions, but sets these actions up as feats of heroism,
so these political offenders were also constantly surrounded by
an atmosphere of public opinion which made the cruel actions they
committed, in the face of danger and at the risk of liberty and life,
and all that is dear to men, seem not wicked but glorious actions.
Nekhludoff found in this the explanation of the surprising phenomenon
that men, with the mildest characters, who seemed incapable of
witnessing the sufferings of any living creature, much less of
inflicting pain, quietly prepared to murder men, nearly all of them
considering murder lawful and just on certain occasions as a means
for self-defence, for the attainment of higher aims or for the general
welfare.

The importance they attribute to their cause, and consequently to
themselves, flowed naturally from the importance the government attached
to their actions, and the cruelty of the punishments it inflicted on
them. When Nekhludoff came to know them better he became convinced that
they were not the right-down villains that some imagined them to be, nor
the complete heroes that others thought them, but ordinary people, just
the same as others, among whom there were some good and some bad, and
some mediocre, as there are everywhere.

There were some among them who had turned revolutionists because they
honestly considered it their duty to fight the existing evils, but there
were also those who chose this work for selfish, ambitious motives; the
majority, however, was attracted to the revolutionary idea by the desire
for danger, for risks, the enjoyment of playing with one's life, which,
as Nekhludoff knew from his military experiences, is quite common to
the most ordinary people while they are young and full of energy. But
wherein they differed from ordinary people was that their moral standard
was a higher one than that of ordinary men. They considered not only
self-control, hard living, truthfulness, but also the readiness to
sacrifice everything, even life, for the common welfare as their duty.
Therefore the best among them stood on a moral level that is not often
reached, while the worst were far below the ordinary level, many of them
being untruthful, hypocritical and at the same time self-satisfied and
proud. So that Nekhludoff learned not only to respect but to love some
of his new acquaintances, while he remained more than indifferent to
others.



CHAPTER VI.

KRYLTZOFF'S STORY.

Nekhludoff grew especially fond of Kryltzoff, a consumptive young man
condemned to hard labour, who was going with the same gang as Katusha.
Nekhludoff had made his acquaintance already in Ekaterinburg, and
talked with him several times on the road after that. Once, in summer,
Nekhludoff spent nearly the whole of a day with him at a halting
station, and Kryltzoff, having once started talking, told him his
story and how he had become a revolutionist. Up to the time of his
imprisonment his story was soon told. He lost his father, a rich landed
proprietor in the south of Russia, when still a child. He was the only
son, and his mother brought him up. He learned easily in the university,
as well as the gymnasium, and was first in the mathematical faculty
in his year. He was offered a choice of remaining in the university
or going abroad. He hesitated. He loved a girl and was thinking of
marriage, and taking part in the rural administration. He did not like
giving up either offer, and could not make up his mind. At this time
his fellow-students at the university asked him for money for a common
cause. He did not know that this common cause was revolutionary, which
he was not interested in at that time, but gave the money from a sense
of comradeship and vanity, so that it should not be said that he was
afraid. Those who received the money were caught, a note was found which
proved that the money had been given by Kryltzoff, he was arrested, and
first kept at the police station, then imprisoned.

"The prison where I was put," Kryltzoff went on to relate (he was
sitting on the high shelf bedstead, his elbows on his knees, with
sunken chest, the beautiful, intelligent eyes with which he looked at
Nekhludoff glistening feverishly)--"they were not specially strict in
that prison. We managed to converse, not only by tapping the wall, but
could walk about the corridors, share our provisions and our tobacco,
and in the evenings we even sang in chorus. I had a fine voice--yes, if
it had not been for mother it would have been all right, even pleasant
and interesting. Here I made the acquaintance of the famous Petroff--he
afterwards killed himself with a piece of glass at the fortress--and
also of others. But I was not yet a revolutionary. I also became
acquainted with my neighbours in the cells next to mine. They were both
caught with Polish proclamations and arrested in the same cause, and
were tried for an attempt to escape from the convoy when they were being
taken to the railway station. One was a Pole, Lozinsky; the other a
Jew, Rozovsky. Yes. Well, this Rozovsky was quite a boy. He said he
was seventeen, but he looked fifteen--thin, small, active, with black,
sparkling eyes, and, like most Jews, very musical. His voice was still
breaking, and yet he sang beautifully. Yes. I saw them both taken to be
tried. They were taken in the morning. They returned in the evening, and
said they were condemned to death. No one had expected it. Their case
was so unimportant; they only tried to get away from the convoy, and had
not even wounded any one. And then it was so unnatural to execute such
a child as Rozovsky. And we in prison all came to the conclusion that it
was only done to frighten them, and would not be confirmed. At first
we were excited, and then we comforted ourselves, and life went on
as before. Yes. Well, one evening, a watchman comes to my door and
mysteriously announces to me that carpenters had arrived, and were
putting up the gallows. At first I did not understand. What's that? What
gallows? But the watchman was so excited that I saw at once it was
for our two. I wished to tap and communicate with my comrades, but was
afraid those two would hear. The comrades were also silent. Evidently
everybody knew. In the corridors and in the cells everything was as
still as death all that evening. They did not tap the wall nor sing.
At ten the watchman came again and announced that a hangman had arrived
from Moscow. He said it and went away. I began calling him back.
Suddenly I hear Rozovsky shouting to me across the corridor: 'What's the
matter? Why do you call him?' I answered something about asking him to
get me some tobacco, but he seemed to guess, and asked me: 'Why did we
not sing to-night, why did we not tap the walls?' I do not remember
what I said, but I went away so as not to speak to him. Yes. It was a
terrible night. I listened to every sound all night. Suddenly, towards
morning, I hear doors opening and somebody walking--many persons. I went
up to my window. There was a lamp burning in the corridor. The first
to pass was the inspector. He was stout, and seemed a resolute,
self-satisfied man, but he looked ghastly pale, downcast, and seemed
frightened; then his assistant, frowning but resolute; behind them the
watchman. They passed my door and stopped at the next, and I hear the
assistant calling out in a strange voice: 'Lozinsky, get up and put on
clean linen.' Yes. Then I hear the creaking of the door; they entered
into his cell. Then I hear Lozinsky's steps going to the opposite side
of the corridor. I could only see the inspector. He stood quite pale,
and buttoned and unbuttoned his coat, shrugging his shoulders. Yes.
Then, as if frightened of something, he moved out of the way. It was
Lozinsky, who passed him and came up to my door. A handsome young fellow
he was, you know, of that nice Polish type: broad shouldered, his head
covered with fine, fair, curly hair as with a cap, and with beautiful
blue eyes. So blooming, so fresh, so healthy. He stopped in front of my
window, so that I could see the whole of his face. A dreadful, gaunt,
livid face. 'Kryltzoff, have you any cigarettes?' I wished to pass him
some, but the assistant hurriedly pulled out his cigarette case and
passed it to him. He took out one, the assistant struck a match, and he
lit the cigarette and began to smoke and seemed to be thinking. Then,
as if he had remembered something, he began to speak. 'It is cruel and
unjust. I have committed no crime. I--' I saw something quiver in his
white young throat, from which I could not take my eyes, and he stopped.
Yes. At that moment I hear Rozovsky shouting in his fine, Jewish
voice. Lozinsky threw away the cigarette and stepped from the door.
And Rozovsky appeared at the window. His childish face, with the limpid
black eyes, was red and moist. He also had clean linen on, the trousers
were too wide, and he kept pulling them up and trembled all over. He
approached his pitiful face to my window. 'Kryltzoff, it's true that the
doctor has prescribed cough mixture for me, is it not? I am not well.
I'll take some more of the mixture.' No one answered, and he looked
inquiringly, now at me, now at the inspector. What he meant to say
I never made out. Yes. Suddenly the assistant again put on a stern
expression, and called out in a kind of squeaking tone: 'Now, then, no
nonsense. Let us go.' Rozovsky seemed incapable of understanding what
awaited him, and hurried, almost ran, in front of him all along the
corridor. But then he drew back, and I could hear his shrill voice
and his cries, then the trampling of feet, and general hubbub. He was
shrieking and sobbing. The sounds came fainter and fainter, and at
last the door rattled and all was quiet. Yes. And so they hanged them.
Throttled them both with a rope. A watchman, another one, saw it done,
and told me that Lozinsky did not resist, but Rozovsky struggled for
a long time, so that they had to pull him up on to the scaffold and to
force his head into the noose. Yes. This watchman was a stupid fellow.
He said: 'They told me, sir, that it would be frightful, but it was
not at all frightful. After they were hanged they only shrugged their
shoulders twice, like this.' He showed how the shoulders convulsively
rose and fell. 'Then the hangman pulled a bit so as to tighten the
noose, and it was all up, and they never budged."' And Kryltzoff
repeated the watchman's words, "Not at all frightful," and tried to
smile, but burst into sobs instead.

For a long time after that he kept silent, breathing heavily, and
repressing the sobs that were choking him.

"From that time I became a revolutionist. Yes," he said, when he was
quieter and finished his story in a few words. He belonged to the
Narodovoltzy party, and was even at the head of the disorganising group,
whose object was to terrorise the government so that it should give
up its power of its own accord. With this object he travelled
to Petersburg, to Kiev, to Odessa and abroad, and was everywhere
successful. A man in whom he had full confidence betrayed him. He was
arrested, tried, kept in prison for two years, and condemned to death,
but the sentence was mitigated to one of hard labour for life.

He went into consumption while in prison, and in the conditions he was
now placed he had scarcely more than a few months longer to live. This
he knew, but did not repent of his action, but said that if he had
another life he would use it in the same way to destroy the conditions
in which such things as he had seen were possible.

This man's story and his intimacy with him explained to Nekhludoff much
that he had not previously understood.



CHAPTER VII.

NEKHLUDOFF SEEKS AN INTERVIEW WITH MASLOVA.

On the day when the convoy officer had the encounter with the prisoners
at the halting station about the child, Nekhludoff, who had spent
the night at the village inn, woke up late, and was some time writing
letters to post at the next Government town, so that he left the inn
later than usual, and did not catch up with the gang on the road as
he had done previously, but came to the village where the next halting
station was as it was growing dusk.

Having dried himself at the inn, which was kept by an elderly woman who
had an extraordinarily fat, white neck, he had his tea in a clean room
decorated with a great number of icons and pictures and then hurried
away to the halting station to ask the officer for an interview
with Katusha. At the last six halting stations he could not get the
permission for an interview from any of the officers. Though they had
been changed several times, not one of them would allow Nekhludoff
inside the halting stations, so that he had not seen Katusha for
more than a week. This strictness was occasioned by the fact that
an important prison official was expected to pass that way. Now this
official had passed without looking in at the gang, after all, and
Nekhludoff hoped that the officer who had taken charge of the gang in
the morning would allow him an interview with the prisoners, as former
officers had done.

The landlady offered Nekhludoff a trap to drive him to the halting
station, situated at the farther end of the village, but Nekhludoff
preferred to walk. A young labourer, a broad-shouldered young fellow
of herculean dimensions, with enormous top-boots freshly blackened with
strongly smelling tar, offered himself as a guide.

A dense mist obscured the sky, and it was so dark that when the young
fellow was three steps in advance of him Nekhludoff could not see him
unless the light of some window happened to fall on the spot, but he
could hear the heavy boots wading through the deep, sticky slush. After
passing the open place in front of the church and the long street,
with its rows of windows shining brightly in the darkness, Nekhludoff
followed his guide to the outskirts of the village, where it was pitch
dark. But soon here, too, rays of light, streaming through the mist
from the lamps in the front of the halting station, became discernible
through the darkness. The reddish spots of light grew bigger and bigger;
at last the stakes of the palisade, the moving figure of the sentinel, a
post painted with white and black stripes and the sentinel's box became
visible.

The sentinel called his usual "Who goes there?" as they approached, and
seeing they were strangers treated them with such severity that he would
not allow them to wait by the palisade; but Nekhludoff's guide was not
abashed by this severity.

"Hallo, lad! why so fierce? You go and rouse your boss while we wait
here?"

The sentinel gave no answer, but shouted something in at the gate and
stood looking at the broad-shouldered young labourer scraping the mud
off Nekhludoff's boots with a chip of wood by the light of the lamp.
From behind the palisade came the hum of male and female voices. In
about three minutes more something rattled, the gate opened, and a
sergeant, with his cloak thrown over his shoulders, stepped out of the
darkness into the lamplight.

The sergeant was not as strict as the sentinel, but he was extremely
inquisitive. He insisted on knowing what Nekhludoff wanted the officer
for, and who he was, evidently scenting his booty and anxious not to let
it escape. Nekhludoff said he had come on special business, and would
show his gratitude, and would the sergeant take a note for him to the
officer. The sergeant took the note, nodded, and went away. Some time
after the gate rattled again, and women carrying baskets, boxes, jugs
and sacks came out, loudly chattering in their peculiar Siberian dialect
as they stepped over the threshold of the gate. None of them wore
peasant costumes, but were dressed town fashion, wearing jackets and
fur-lined cloaks. Their skirts were tucked up high, and their heads
wrapped up in shawls. They examined Nekhludoff and his guide curiously
by the light of the lamp. One of them showed evident pleasure at the
sight of the broad-shouldered fellow, and affectionately administered to
him a dose of Siberian abuse.

"You demon, what are you doing here? The devil take you," she said,
addressing him.

"I've been showing this traveller here the way," answered the young
fellow. "And what have you been bringing here?"

"Dairy produce, and I am to bring more in the morning."

The guide said something in answer that made not only the women but even
the sentinel laugh, and, turning to Nekhludoff, he said:

"You'll find your way alone? Won't get lost, will you?"

"I shall find it all right."

"When you have passed the church it's the second from the two-storied
house. Oh, and here, take my staff," he said, handing the stick he
was carrying, and which was longer than himself, to Nekhludoff; and
splashing through the mud with his enormous boots, he disappeared in the
darkness, together with the women.

His voice mingling with the voices of the women was still audible
through the fog, when the gate again rattled, and the sergeant appeared
and asked Nekhludoff to follow him to the officer.



CHAPTER VIII.

NEKHLUDOFF AND THE OFFICER.

This halting station, like all such stations along the Siberian
road, was surrounded by a courtyard, fenced in with a palisade of
sharp-pointed stakes, and consisted of three one-storied houses. One of
them, the largest, with grated windows, was for the prisoners, another
for the convoy soldiers, and the third, in which the office was, for the
officers.

There were lights in the windows of all the three houses, and, like
all such lights, they promised, here in a specially deceptive manner,
something cosy inside the walls. Lamps were burning before the porches
of the houses and about five lamps more along the walls lit up the yard.

The sergeant led Nekhludoff along a plank which lay across the yard up
to the porch of the smallest of the houses.

When he had gone up the three steps of the porch he let Nekhludoff pass
before him into the ante-room, in which a small lamp was burning, and
which was filled with smoky fumes. By the stove a soldier in a coarse
shirt with a necktie and black trousers, and with one top-boot on, stood
blowing the charcoal in a somovar, using the other boot as bellows. [The
long boots worn in Russia have concertina-like sides, and when held to
the chimney of the somovar can be used instead of bellows to make the
charcoal inside burn up.] When he saw Nekhludoff, the soldier left the
somovar and helped him off with his waterproof; then went into the inner
room.

"He has come, your honour."

"Well, ask him in," came an angry voice.

"Go in at the door," said the soldier, and went back to the somovar.

In the next room an officer with fair moustaches and a very red face,
dressed in an Austrian jacket that closely fitted his broad chest and
shoulders, sat at a covered table, on which were the remains of his
dinner and two bottles; there was a strong smell of tobacco and some
very strong, cheap scent in the warm room. On seeing Nekhludoff the
officer rose and gazed ironically and suspiciously, as it seemed, at the
newcomer.

"What is it you want?" he asked, and, not waiting for a reply, he
shouted through the open door:

"Bernoff, the somovar! What are you about?"

"Coming at once."

"You'll get it 'at once' so that you'll remember it," shouted the
officer, and his eyes flashed.

"I'm coming," shouted the soldier, and brought in the somovar.
Nekhludoff waited while the soldier placed the somovar on the table.
When the officer had followed the soldier out of the room with his cruel
little eyes looking as if they were aiming where best to hit him, he
made the tea, got the four-cornered decanter out of his travelling case
and some Albert biscuits, and having placed all this on the cloth he
again turned to Nekhludoff. "Well, how can I be of service to you?"

"I should like to be allowed to visit a prisoner," said Nekhludoff,
without sitting down.

"A political one? That's forbidden by the law," said the officer.

"The woman I mean is not a political prisoner," said Nekhludoff.

"Yes. But pray take a scat," said the officer. Nekhludoff sat down.

"She is not a political one, but at my request she has been allowed by
the higher authorities to join the political prisoners--"

"Oh, yes, I know," interrupted the other; "a little dark one? Well,
yes, that can be managed. Won't you smoke?" He moved a box of cigarettes
towards Nekhludoff, and, having carefully poured out two tumblers of
tea, he passed one to Nekhludoff. "If you please," he said.

"Thank you; I should like to see--"

"The night is long. You'll have plenty of time. I shall order her to be
sent out to you."

"But could I not see her where she is? Why need she be sent for?"
Nekhludoff said.

"In to the political prisoners? It is against the law."

"I have been allowed to go in several times. If there is any danger of
my passing anything in to them I could do it through her just as well."

"Oh, no; she would be searched," said the officer, and laughed in an
unpleasant manner.

"Well, why not search me?"

"All right; we'll manage without that," said the officer, opening the
decanter, and holding it out towards Nekhludoff's tumbler of tea. "May
I? No? Well, just as you like. When you are living here in Siberia you
are too glad to meet an educated person. Our work, as you know, is the
saddest, and when one is used to better things it is very hard. The idea
they have of us is that convoy officers are coarse, uneducated men, and
no one seems to remember that we may have been born for a very different
position."

This officer's red face, his scents, his rings, and especially his
unpleasant laughter disgusted Nekhludoff very much, but to-day, as
during the whole of his journey, he was in that serious, attentive state
which did not allow him to behave slightingly or disdainfully towards
any man, but made him feel the necessity of speaking to every one
"entirely," as he expressed to himself, this relation to men. When he
had heard the officer and understood his state of mind, he said in a
serious manner:

"I think that in your position, too, some comfort could be found in
helping the suffering people," he said.

"What are their sufferings? You don't know what these people are."

"They are not special people," said Nekhludoff; "they are just such
people as others, and some of them are quite innocent."

"Of course, there are all sorts among them, and naturally one pities
them. Others won't let anything off, but I try to lighten their
condition where I can. It's better that I should suffer, but not they.
Others keep to the law in every detail, even as far as to shoot, but
I show pity. May I?--Take another," he said, and poured out another
tumbler of tea for Nekhludoff.

"And who is she, this woman that you want to see?" he asked.

"It is an unfortunate woman who got into a brothel, and was there
falsely accused of poisoning, and she is a very good woman," Nekhludoff
answered.

The officer shook his head. "Yes, it does happen. I can tell you about
a certain Emma who lived in Kasan. She was a Hungarian by birth, but she
had quite Persian eyes," he continued, unable to restrain a smile at the
recollection; "there was so much chic about her that a countess--"

Nekhludoff interrupted the officer and returned to the former topic of
conversation.

"I think that you could lighten the condition of the people while they
are in your charge. And in acting that way I am sure you would find
great joy!" said Nekhludoff, trying to pronounce as distinctly as
possible, as he might if talking to a foreigner or a child.

The officer looked at Nekhludoff impatiently, waiting for him to stop
so as to continue the tale about the Hungarian with Persian eyes, who
evidently presented herself very vividly to his imagination and quite
absorbed his attention.

"Yes, of course, this is all quite true," he said, "and I do pity them;
but I should like to tell you about Emma. What do you think she did--?"

"It does not interest me," said Nekhludoff, "and I will tell you
straight, that though I was myself very different at one time, I now
hate that kind of relation to women."

The officer gave Nekhludoff a frightened look.

"Won't you take some more tea?" he said.

"No, thank you."

"Bernoff!" the officer called, "take the gentleman to Vakouloff. Tell
him to let him into the separate political room. He may remain there
till the inspection."



CHAPTER IX.

THE POLITICAL PRISONERS.

Accompanied by the orderly, Nekhludoff went out into the courtyard,
which was dimly lit up by the red light of the lamps.

"Where to?" asked the convoy sergeant, addressing the orderly.

"Into the separate cell, No. 5."

"You can't pass here; the boss has gone to the village and taken the
keys."

"Well, then, pass this way."

The soldier led Nekhludoff along a board to another entrance. While
still in the yard Nekhludoff could hear the din of voices and general
commotion going on inside as in a beehive when the bees are preparing to
swarm; but when he came nearer and the door opened the din grew louder,
and changed into distinct sounds of shouting, abuse and laughter. He
heard the clatter of chairs and smelt the well-known foul air. This din
of voices and the clatter of the chairs, together with the close smell,
always flowed into one tormenting sensation, and produced in Nekhludoff
a feeling of moral nausea which grew into physical sickness, the two
feelings mingling with and heightening each other.

The first thing Nekhludoff saw, on entering, was a large, stinking tub.
A corridor into which several doors opened led from the entrance. The
first was the family room, then the bachelors' room, and at the very end
two small rooms were set apart for the political prisoners.

The buildings, which were arranged to hold one hundred and fifty
prisoners, now that there were four hundred and fifty inside, were so
crowded that the prisoners could not all get into the rooms, but filled
the passage, too. Some were sitting or lying on the floor, some were
going out with empty teapots, or bringing them back filled with boiling
water. Among the latter was Taras. He overtook Nekhludoff and greeted
him affectionately. The kind face of Taras was disfigured by dark
bruises on his nose and under his eye.

"What has happened to you?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Yes, something did happen," Taras said, with a smile.

"All because of the woman," added a prisoner, who followed Taras; "he's
had a row with Blind Fedka."

"And how's Theodosia?"

"She's all right. Here I am bringing her the water for her tea," Taras
answered, and went into the family room.

Nekhludoff looked in at the door. The room was crowded with women and
men, some of whom were on and some under the bedsteads; it was full of
steam from the wet clothes that were drying, and the chatter of women's
voices was unceasing. The next door led into the bachelors' room. This
room was still more crowded; even the doorway and the passage in front
of it were blocked by a noisy crowd of men, in wet garments, busy doing
or deciding something or other.

The convoy sergeant explained that it was the prisoner appointed to buy
provisions, paying off out of the food money what was owing to a sharper
who had won from or lent money to the prisoners, and receiving back
little tickets made of playing cards. When they saw the convoy soldier
and a gentleman, those who were nearest became silent, and followed
them with looks of ill-will. Among them Nekhludoff noticed the criminal
Fedoroff, whom he knew, and who always kept a miserable lad with
a swelled appearance and raised eyebrows beside him, and also a
disgusting, noseless, pock-marked tramp, who was notorious among the
prisoners because he killed his comrade in the marshes while trying to
escape, and had, as it was rumoured, fed on his flesh. The tramp stood
in the passage with his wet cloak thrown over one shoulder, looking
mockingly and boldly at Nekhludoff, and did not move out of the way.
Nekhludoff passed him by.

Though this kind of scene had now become quite familiar to him, though
he had during the last three months seen these four hundred criminal
prisoners over and over again in many different circumstances; in the
heat, enveloped in clouds of dust which they raised as they dragged
their chained feet along the road, and at the resting places by the way,
where the most horrible scenes of barefaced debauchery had occurred, yet
every time he came among them, and felt their attention fixed upon him
as it was now, shame and consciousness of his sin against them tormented
him. To this sense of shame and guilt was added an unconquerable feeling
of loathing and horror. He knew that, placed in a position such as
theirs, they could not be other than they were, and yet he was unable to
stifle his disgust.

"It's well for them do-nothings," Nekhludoff heard some one say in a
hoarse voice as he approached the room of the political prisoners. Then
followed a word of obscene abuse, and spiteful, mocking laughter.



CHAPTER X.

MAKAR DEVKIN.

When they had passed the bachelors' room the sergeant who accompanied
Nekhludoff left him, promising to come for him before the inspection
would take place. As soon as the sergeant was gone a prisoner, quickly
stepping with his bare feet and holding up the chains, came close up to
Nekhludoff, enveloping him in the strong, acid smell of perspiration,
and said in a mysterious whisper:

"Help the lad, sir; he's got into an awful mess. Been drinking. To-day
he's given his name as Karmanoff at the inspection. Take his part, sir.
We dare not, or they'll kill us," and looking uneasily round he turned
away.

This is what had happened. The criminal Kalmanoff had persuaded a young
fellow who resembled him in appearance and was sentenced to exile to
change names with him and go to the mines instead of him, while he only
went to exile. Nekhludoff knew all this. Some convict had told him about
this exchange the week before. He nodded as a sign that he understood
and would do what was in his power, and continued his way without
looking round.

Nekhludoff knew this convict, and was surprised by his action. When in
Ekaterinburg the convict had asked Nekhludoff to get a permission for
his wife to follow him. The convict was a man of medium size and of the
most ordinary peasant type, about thirty years old. He was condemned to
hard labour for an attempt to murder and rob. His name was Makar Devkin.
His crime was a very curious one. In the account he gave of it to
Nekhludoff, he said it was not his but his devil's doing. He said that
a traveller had come to his father's house and hired his sledge to drive
him to a village thirty miles off for two roubles. Makar's father told
him to drive the stranger. Makar harnessed the horse, dressed, and
sat down to drink tea with the stranger. The stranger related at the
tea-table that he was going to be married and had five hundred roubles,
which he had earned in Moscow, with him. When he had heard this, Makar
went out into the yard and put an axe into the sledge under the straw.
"And I did not myself know why I was taking the axe," he said. "'Take
the axe,' says _he_, and I took it. We got in and started. We drove
along all right; I even forgot about the axe. Well, we were getting
near the village; only about four miles more to go. The way from the
cross-road to the high road was up hill, and I got out. I walked behind
the sledge and _he_ whispers to me, 'What are you thinking about? When
you get to the top of the hill you will meet people along the highway,
and then there will be the village. He will carry the money away. If
you mean to do it, now's the time.' I stooped over the sledge as if to
arrange the straw, and the axe seemed to jump into my hand of itself.
The man turned round. 'What are you doing?' I lifted the axe and tried
to knock him down, but he was quick, jumped out, and took hold of my
hands. 'What are you doing, you villain?' He threw me down into the
snow, and I did not even struggle, but gave in at once. He bound my arms
with his girdle, and threw me into the sledge, and took me straight to
the police station. I was imprisoned and tried. The commune gave me a
good character, said that I was a good man, and that nothing wrong had
been noticed about me. The masters for whom I worked also spoke well of
me, but we had no money to engage a lawyer, and so I was condemned to
four years' hard labour."

It was this man who, wishing to save a fellow-villager, knowing that he
was risking his life thereby, told Nekhludoff the prisoner's secret, for
doing which (if found out) he should certainly be throttled.



CHAPTER XI.

MASLOVA AND HER COMPANIONS.

The political prisoners were kept in two small rooms, the doors of which
opened into a part of the passage partitioned off from the rest. The
first person Nekhludoff saw on entering into this part of the passage
was Simonson in his rubber jacket and with a log of pine wood in his
hands, crouching in front of a stove, the door of which trembled, drawn
in by the heat inside.

When he saw Nekhludoff he looked up at him from under his protruding
brow, and gave him his hand without rising.

"I am glad you have come; I want to speak to you," he said, looking
Nekhludoff straight in the eyes with an expression of importance.

"Yes; what is it?" Nekhludoff asked.

"It will do later on; I am busy just now," and Simonson turned again
towards the stove, which he was heating according to a theory of his
own, so as to lose as little heat energy as possible.

Nekhludoff was going to enter in at the first door, when Maslova,
stooping and pushing a large heap of rubbish and dust towards the stove
with a handleless birch broom, came out of the other. She had a white
jacket on, her skirt was tucked up, and a kerchief, drawn down to her
eyebrows, protected her hair from the dust. When she saw Nekhludoff, she
drew herself up, flushing and animated, put down the broom, wiped her
hands on her skirt, and stopped right in front of him. "You are tidying
up the apartments, I see," said Nekhludoff, shaking hands.

"Yes; my old occupation," and she smiled. "But the dirt! You can't
imagine what it is. We have been cleaning and cleaning. Well, is the
plaid dry?" she asked, turning to Simonson.

"Almost," Simonson answered, giving her a strange look, which struck
Nekhludoff.

"All right, I'll come for it, and will bring the cloaks to dry. Our
people are all in here," she said to Nekhludoff, pointing to the first
door as she went out of the second.

Nekhludoff opened the door and entered a small room dimly lit by a
little metal lamp, which was standing low down on the shelf bedstead. It
was cold in the room, and there was a smell of the dust, which had not
had time to settle, damp and tobacco smoke.

Only those who were close to the lamp were clearly visible, the
bedsteads were in the shade and wavering shadows glided over the walls.
Two men, appointed as caterers, who had gone to fetch boiling water and
provisions, were away; most of the political prisoners were gathered
together in the small room. There was Nekhludoff's old acquaintance,
Vera Doukhova, with her large, frightened eyes, and the swollen vein on
her forehead, in a grey jacket with short hair, and thinner and yellower
than ever.. She had a newspaper spread out in front of her, and sat
rolling cigarettes with a jerky movement of her hands.

Emily Rintzeva, whom Nekhludoff considered to be the pleasantest of the
political prisoners, was also here. She looked after the housekeeping,
and managed to spread a feeling of home comfort even in the midst of
the most trying surroundings. She sat beside the lamp, with her sleeves
rolled up, wiping cups and mugs, and placing them, with her deft, red
and sunburnt hands, on a cloth that was spread on the bedstead. Rintzeva
was a plain-looking young woman, with a clever and mild expression of
face, which, when she smiled, had a way of suddenly becoming merry,
animated and captivating. It was with such a smile that she now welcomed
Nekhludoff.

"Why, we thought you had gone back to Russia," she said.

Here in a dark corner was also Mary Pavlovna, busy with a little,
fair-haired girl, who kept prattling in her sweet, childish accents.

"How nice that you have come," she said to Nekhludoff.

"Have you seen Katusha? And we have a visitor here," and she pointed to
the little girl.

Here was also Anatole Kryltzoff with felt boots on, sitting in a far
corner with his feet under him, doubled up and shivering, his arms
folded in the sleeves of his cloak, and looking at Nekhludoff with
feverish eyes. Nekhludoff was going up to him, but to the right of
the door a man with spectacles and reddish curls, dressed in a rubber
jacket, sat talking to the pretty, smiling Grabetz. This was the
celebrated revolutionist Novodvoroff. Nekhludoff hastened to greet him.
He was in a particular hurry about it, because this man was the only one
among all the political prisoners whom he disliked. Novodvoroff's eyes
glistened through his spectacles as he looked at Nekhludoff and held his
narrow hand out to him.

"Well, are you having a pleasant journey?" he asked, with apparent
irony.

"Yes, there is much that is interesting," Nekhludoff answered, as if
he did not notice the irony, but took the question for politeness, and
passed on to Kryltzoff.

Though Nekhludoff appeared indifferent, he was really far from
indifferent, and these words of Novodvoroff, showing his evident desire
to say or do something unpleasant, interfered with the state of kindness
in which Nekhludoff found himself, and he felt depressed and sad.

"Well, how are you?" he asked, pressing Kryltzoff's cold and trembling
hand.

"Pretty well, only I cannot get warm; I got wet through," Kryltzoff
answered, quickly replacing his hands into the sleeves of his cloak.
"And here it is also beastly cold. There, look, the window-panes are
broken," and he pointed to the broken panes behind the iron bars. "And
how are you? Why did you not come?"

"I was not allowed to, the authorities were so strict, but to-day the
officer is lenient."

"Lenient indeed!" Kryltzoff remarked. "Ask Mary what she did this
morning."

Mary Pavlovna from her place in the corner related what had happened
about the little girl that morning when they left the halting station.

"I think it is absolutely necessary to make a collective protest," said
Vera Doukhova, in a determined tone, and yet looking now at one, now
at another, with a frightened, undecided look. "Valdemar Simonson did
protest, but that is not sufficient."

"What protest!" muttered Kryltzoff, cross and frowning. Her want
of simplicity, artificial tone and nervousness had evidently been
irritating him for a long time.

"Are you looking for Katusha?" he asked, addressing Nekhludoff. "She is
working all the time. She has cleaned this, the men's room, and now she
has gone to clean the women's! Only it is not possible to clean away
the fleas. And what is Mary doing there?" he asked, nodding towards the
corner where Mary Pavlovna sat.

"She is combing out her adopted daughter's hair," replied Rintzeva.

"But won't she let the insects loose on us?" asked Kryltzoff.

"No, no; I am very careful. She is a clean little girl now. You take
her," said Mary, turning to Rintzeva, "while I go and help Katusha, and
I will also bring him his plaid."

Rintzeva took the little girl on her lap, pressing her plump, bare,
little arms to her bosom with a mother's tenderness, and gave her a bit
of sugar. As Mary Pavlovna left the room, two men came in with boiling
water and provisions.



CHAPTER XII.

NABATOFF AND MARKEL.

One of the men who came in was a short, thin, young man, who had a
cloth-covered sheepskin coat on, and high top-boots. He stepped lightly
and quickly, carrying two steaming teapots, and holding a loaf wrapped
in a cloth under his arm.

"Well, so our prince has put in an appearance again," he said, as he
placed the teapot beside the cups, and handed the bread to Rintzeva.
"We have bought wonderful things," he continued, as he took off his
sheepskin, and flung it over the heads of the others into the corner
of the bedstead. "Markel has bought milk and eggs. Why, we'll have
a regular ball to-day. And Rintzeva is spreading out her aesthetic
cleanliness," he said, and looked with a smile at Rintzeva, "and now she
will make the tea."

The whole presence of this man--his motion, his voice, his look--seemed
to breathe vigour and merriment. The other newcomer was just the reverse
of the first. He looked despondent and sad. He was short, bony, had very
prominent cheek bones, a sallow complexion, thin lips and beautiful,
greenish eyes, rather far apart. He wore an old wadded coat, top-boots
and goloshes, and was carrying two pots of milk and two round boxes
made of birch bark, which he placed in front of Rintzeva. He bowed to
Nekhludoff, bending only his neck, and with his eyes fixed on him. Then,
having reluctantly given him his damp hand to shake, he began to take
out the provisions.

Both these political prisoners were of the people; the first was
Nabatoff, a peasant; the second, Markel Kondratieff, a factory hand.
Markel did not come among the revolutionists till he was quite a man,
Nabatoff only eighteen. After leaving the village school, owing to
his exceptional talents Nabatoff entered the gymnasium, and maintained
himself by giving lessons all the time he studied there, and obtained
the gold medal. He did not go to the university because, while still in
the seventh class of the gymnasium, he made up his mind to go among the
people and enlighten his neglected brethren. This he did, first getting
the place of a Government clerk in a large village. He was soon arrested
because he read to the peasants and arranged a co-operative industrial
association among them. They kept him imprisoned for eight months and
then set him free, but he remained under police supervision. As soon
as he was liberated he went to another village, got a place as
schoolmaster, and did the same as he had done in the first village.
He was again taken up and kept fourteen months in prison, where his
convictions became yet stronger. After that he was exiled to the Perm
Government, from where he escaped. Then he was put to prison for seven
months and after that exiled to Archangel. There he refused to take the
oath of allegiance that was required of them and was condemned to
be exiled to the Takoutsk Government, so that half his life since he
reached manhood was passed in prison and exile. All these adventures did
not embitter him nor weaken his energy, but rather stimulated it. He was
a lively young fellow, with a splendid digestion, always active, gay
and vigorous. He never repented of anything, never looked far ahead, and
used all his powers, his cleverness, his practical knowledge to act in
the present. When free he worked towards the aim he had set himself, the
enlightening and the uniting of the working men, especially the country
labourers. When in prison he was just as energetic and practical in
finding means to come in contact with the outer world, and in arranging
his own life and the life of his group as comfortably as the conditions
would allow. Above all things he was a communist. He wanted, as it
seemed to him, nothing for himself and contented himself with very
little, but demanded very much for the group of his comrades, and could
work for it either physically or mentally day and night, without sleep
or food. As a peasant he had been industrious, observant, clever at
his work, and naturally self-controlled, polite without any effort, and
attentive not only to the wishes but also the opinions of others. His
widowed mother, an illiterate, superstitious, old peasant woman, was
still living, and Nabatoff helped her and went to see her while he was
free. During the time he spent at home he entered into all the interests
of his mother's life, helped her in her work, and continued his
intercourse with former playfellows; smoked cheap tobacco with them in
so-called "dog's feet," [a kind of cigarette that the peasants smoke,
made of a bit of paper and bent at one end into a hook] took part
in their fist fights, and explained to them how they were all being
deceived by the State, and how they ought to disentangle themselves out
of the deception they were kept in. When he thought or spoke of what a
revolution would do for the people he always imagined this people from
whom he had sprung himself left in very nearly the same conditions
as they were in, only with sufficient land and without the gentry and
without officials. The revolution, according to him, and in this
he differed from Novodvoroff and Novodvoroff's follower, Markel
Kondratieff, should not alter the elementary forms of the life of the
people, should not break down the whole edifice, but should only alter
the inner walls of the beautiful, strong, enormous old structure he
loved so dearly. He was also a typical peasant in his views on religion,
never thinking about metaphysical questions, about the origin of
all origin, or the future life. God was to him, as also to Arago, an
hypothesis, which he had had no need of up to now. He had no business
with the origin of the world, whether Moses or Darwin was right.
Darwinism, which seemed so important to his fellows, was only the same
kind of plaything of the mind as the creation in six days. The question
how the world had originated did not interest him, just because the
question how it would be best to live in this world was ever before him.
He never thought about future life, always bearing in the depth of his
soul the firm and quiet conviction inherited from his forefathers, and
common to all labourers on the land, that just as in the world of plants
and animals nothing ceases to exist, but continually changes its form,
the manure into grain, the grain into a food, the tadpole into a frog,
the caterpillar into a butterfly, the acorn into an oak, so man also
does not perish, but only undergoes a change. He believed in this, and
therefore always looked death straight in the face, and bravely bore the
sufferings that lead towards it, but did not care and did not know how
to speak about it. He loved work, was always employed in some practical
business, and put his comrades in the way of the same kind of practical
work.

The other political prisoner from among the people, Markel Kondratieff,
was a very different kind of man. He began to work at the age of
fifteen, and took to smoking and drinking in order to stifle a dense
sense of being wronged. He first realised he was wronged one Christmas
when they, the factory children, were invited to a Christmas tree, got
up by the employer's wife, where he received a farthing whistle, an
apple, a gilt walnut and a fig, while the employer's children had
presents given them which seemed gifts from fairyland, and had cost more
than fifty roubles, as he afterwards heard.

When he was twenty a celebrated revolutionist came to their factory to
work as a working girl, and noticing his superior qualities began giving
books and pamphlets to Kondratieff and to talk and explain his position
to him, and how to remedy it. When the possibility of freeing himself
and others from their oppressed state rose clearly in his mind, the
injustice of this state appeared more cruel and more terrible than
before, and he longed passionately not only for freedom, but also for
the punishment of those who had arranged and who kept up this cruel
injustice. Kondratieff devoted himself with passion to the acquirement
of knowledge. It was not clear to him how knowledge should bring about
the realisation of the social ideal, but he believed that the knowledge
that had shown him the injustice of the state in which he lived would
also abolish that injustice itself. Besides knowledge would, in his
opinion, raise him above others. Therefore he left off drinking and
smoking, and devoted all his leisure time to study. The revolutionist
gave him lessons, and his thirst for every kind of knowledge, and the
facility with which he took it in, surprised her. In two years he had
mastered algebra, geometry, history--which he was specially fond of--and
made acquaintance with artistic and critical, and especially socialistic
literature. The revolutionist was arrested, and Kondratieff with her,
forbidden books having been found in their possession, and they were
imprisoned and then exiled to the Vologda Government. There Kondratieff
became acquainted with Novodvoroff, and read a great deal more
revolutionary literature, remembered it all, and became still firmer
in his socialistic views. While in exile he became leader in a large
strike, which ended in the destruction of a factory and the murder of
the director. He was again arrested and condemned to Siberia.

His religious views were of the same negative nature as his views of the
existing economic conditions. Having seen the absurdity of the religion
in which he was brought up, and having gained with great effort, and
at first with fear, but later with rapture, freedom from it, he did
not tire of viciously and with venom ridiculing priests and religious
dogmas, as if wishing to revenge himself for the deception that had been
practised on him.

He was ascetic through habit, contented himself with very little, and,
like all those used to work from childhood and whose muscles have been
developed, he could work much and easily, and was quick at any manual
labour; but what he valued most was the leisure in prisons and halting
stations, which enabled him to continue his studies. He was now studying
the first volume of Karl Marks's, and carefully hid the book in his sack
as if it were a great treasure. He behaved with reserve and indifference
to all his comrades, except Novodvoroff, to whom he was greatly
attached, and whose arguments on all subjects he accepted as
unanswerable truths.

He had an indefinite contempt for women, whom he looked upon as a
hindrance in all necessary business. But he pitied Maslova and was
gentle with her, for he considered her an example of the way the lower
are exploited by the upper classes. The same reason made him dislike
Nekhludoff, so that he talked little with him, and never pressed
Nekhludoff's hand, but only held out his own to be pressed when greeting
him.



CHAPTER XIII.

LOVE AFFAIRS OF THE EXILES.

The stove had burned up and got warm, the tea was made and poured out
into mugs and cups, and milk was added to it; rusks, fresh rye and wheat
bread, hard-boiled eggs, butter, and calf's head and feet were placed on
the cloth. Everybody moved towards the part of the shelf beds which took
the place of the table and sat eating and talking. Rintzeva sat on a box
pouring out the tea. The rest crowded round her, only Kryltzoff, who had
taken off his wet cloak and wrapped himself in his dry plaid and lay in
his own place talking to Nekhludoff.

After the cold and damp march and the dirt and disorder they had found
here, and after the pains they had taken to get it tidy, after having
drunk hot tea and eaten, they were all in the best and brightest of
spirits.

The fact that the tramp of feet, the screams and abuse of the criminals,
reached them through the wall, reminding them of their surroundings,
seemed only to increase the sense of coziness. As on an island in the
midst of the sea, these people felt themselves for a brief interval not
swamped by the degradation and sufferings which surrounded them; this
made their spirits rise, and excited them. They talked about everything
except their present position and that which awaited them. Then, as it
generally happens among young men, and women especially, if they are
forced to remain together, as these people were, all sorts of agreements
and disagreements and attractions, curiously blended, had sprung up
among them. Almost all of them were in love. Novodvoroff was in love
with the pretty, smiling Grabetz. This Grabetz was a young, thoughtless
girl who had gone in for a course of study, perfectly indifferent to
revolutionary questions, but succumbing to the influence of the day, she
compromised herself in some way and was exiled. The chief interest of
her life during the time of her trial in prison and in exile was her
success with men, just as it had been when she was free. Now on the way
she comforted herself with the fact that Novodvoroff had taken a fancy
to her, and she fell in love with him. Vera Doukhova, who was very prone
to fall in love herself, but did not awaken love in others, though she
was always hoping for mutual love, was sometimes drawn to Nabatoff, then
to Novodvoroff. Kryltzoff felt something like love for Mary Pavlovna. He
loved her with a man's love, but knowing how she regarded this sort of
love, hid his feelings under the guise of friendship and gratitude
for the tenderness with which she attended to his wants. Nabatoff and
Rintzeva were attached to each other by very complicated ties. Just as
Mary Pavlovna was a perfectly chaste maiden, in the same way Rintzeva
was perfectly chaste as her own husband's wife. When only a schoolgirl
of sixteen she fell in love with Rintzeff, a student of the Petersburg
University, and married him before he left the university, when she was
only nineteen years old. During his fourth year at the university her
husband had become involved in the students' rows, was exiled from
Petersburg, and turned revolutionist. She left the medical courses she
was attending, followed him, and also turned revolutionist. If she had
not considered her husband the cleverest and best of men she would not
have fallen in love with him; and if she had not fallen in love would
not have married; but having fallen in love and married him whom she
thought the best and cleverest of men, she naturally looked upon life
and its aims in the way the best and cleverest of men looked at them. At
first he thought the aim of life was to learn, and she looked upon study
as the aim of life. He became a revolutionist, and so did she. She could
demonstrate very clearly that the existing state of things could not go
on, and that it was everybody's duty to fight this state of things and
to try to bring about conditions in which the individual could develop
freely, etc. And she imagined that she really thought and felt all
this, but in reality she only regarded everything her husband thought
as absolute truth, and only sought for perfect agreement, perfect
identification of her own soul with his which alone could give her full
moral satisfaction. The parting with her husband and their child, whom
her mother had taken, was very hard to bear; but she bore it firmly and
quietly, since it was for her husband's sake and for that cause which
she had not the slightest doubt was true, since he served it. She was
always with her husband in thoughts, and did not love and could not love
any other any more than she had done before. But Nabatoff's devoted and
pure love touched and excited her. This moral, firm man, her husband's
friend, tried to treat her as a sister, but something more appeared in
his behaviour to her, and this something frightened them both, and yet
gave colour to their life of hardship.

So that in all this circle only Mary Pavlovna and Kondratieff were quite
free from love affairs.



CHAPTER XIV.

CONVERSATIONS IN PRISON.

Expecting to have a private talk with Katusha, as usual, after tea,
Nekhludoff sat by the side of Kryltzoff, conversing with him. Among
other things he told him the story of Makar's crime and about his
request to him. Kryltzoff listened attentively, gazing at Nekhludoff
with glistening eyes.

"Yes," said Kryltzoff suddenly, "I often think that here we are going
side by side with them, and who are they? The same for whose sake we
are going, and yet we not only do not know them, but do not even wish to
know them. And they, even worse than that, they hate us and look upon us
as enemies. This is terrible."

"There is nothing terrible about it," broke in Novodvoroff. "The masses
always worship power only. The government is in power, and they worship
it and hate us. To-morrow we shall have the power, and they will worship
us," he said with his grating voice. At that moment a volley of abuse
and the rattle of chains sounded from behind the wall, something was
heard thumping against it and screaming and shrieking, some one was
being beaten, and some one was calling out, "Murder! help!"

"Hear them, the beasts! What intercourse can there be between us and
such as them?" quietly remarked Novodvoroff.

"You call them beasts, and Nekhludoff was just telling me about such an
action!" irritably retorted Kryltzoff, and went on to say how Makar was
risking his life to save a fellow-villager. "That is not the action of a
beast, it is heroism."

"Sentimentality!" Novodvoroff ejaculated ironically; "it is difficult
for us to understand the emotions of these people and the motives on
which they act. You see generosity in the act, and it may be simply
jealousy of that other criminal."

"How is it that you never wish to see anything good in another?" Mary
Pavlovna said suddenly, flaring up.

"How can one see what does not exist!"

"How does it not exist, when a man risks dying a terrible death?"

"I think," said Novodvoroff, "that if we mean to do our work, the first
condition is that" (here Kondratieff put down the book he was reading by
the lamplight and began to listen attentively to his master's words) "we
should not give way to fancy, but look at things as they are. We should
do all in our power for the masses, and expect nothing in return.
The masses can only be the object of our activity, but cannot be our
fellow-workers as long as they remain in that state of inertia they are
in at present," he went on, as if delivering a lecture. "Therefore, to
expect help from them before the process of development--that process
which we are preparing them for--has taken place is an illusion."

"What process of development?" Kryltzoff began, flushing all over. "We
say that we are against arbitrary rule and despotism, and is this not
the most awful despotism?"

"No despotism whatever," quietly rejoined Novodvoroff. "I am only saying
that I know the path that the people must travel, and can show them that
path."

"But how can you be sure that the path you show is the true path?
Is this not the same kind of despotism that lay at the bottom of the
Inquisition, all persecutions, and the great revolution? They, too, knew
the one true way, by means of their science."

"Their having erred is no proof of my going to err; besides, there is a
great difference between the ravings of idealogues and the facts based
on sound, economic science." Novodvoroff's voice filled the room; he
alone was speaking, all the rest were silent.

"They are always disputing," Mary Pavlovna said, when there was a
moment's silence.

"And you yourself, what do you think about it?" Nekhludoff asked her.

"I think Kryltzoff is right when he says we should not force our views
on the people."

"And you, Katusha?" asked Nekhludoff with a smile, waiting anxiously for
her answer, fearing she would say something awkward.

"I think the common people are wronged," she said, and blushed scarlet.
"I think they are dreadfully wronged."

"That's right, Maslova, quite right," cried Nabatoff. "They are terribly
wronged, the people, and they must not be wronged, and therein lies the
whole of our task."

"A curious idea of the object of revolution," Novodvoroff remarked
crossly, and began to smoke.

"I cannot talk to him," said Kryltzoff in a whisper, and was silent.

"And it is much better not to talk," Nekhludoff said.



CHAPTER XV.

NOVODVOROFF.

Although Novodvoroff was highly esteemed of all the revolutionists,
though he was very learned, and considered very wise, Nekhludoff
reckoned him among those of the revolutionists who, being below the
average moral level, were very far below it. His inner life was of a
nature directly opposite to that of Simonson's. Simonson was one of
those people (of an essentially masculine type) whose actions follow
the dictates of their reason, and are determined by it. Novodvoroff
belonged, on the contrary, to the class of people of a feminine type,
whose reason is directed partly towards the attainment of aims set by
their feelings, partly to the justification of acts suggested by their
feelings. The whole of Novodvoroff's revolutionary activity, though
he could explain it very eloquently and very convincingly, appeared
to Nekhludoff to be founded on nothing but ambition and the desire
for supremacy. At first his capacity for assimilating the thoughts of
others, and of expressing them correctly, had given him a position of
supremacy among pupils and teachers in the gymnasium and the university,
where qualities such as his are highly prized, and he was satisfied.
When he had finished his studies and received his diploma he suddenly
altered his views, and from a modern liberal he turned into a rabid
Narodovoletz, in order (so Kryltzoff, who did not like him, said) to
gain supremacy in another sphere.

As he was devoid of those moral and aesthetic qualities which call
forth doubts and hesitation, he very soon acquired a position in the
revolutionary world which satisfied him--that of the leader of a party.
Having once chosen a direction, he never doubted or hesitated, and was
therefore certain that he never made a mistake. Everything seemed quite
simple, clear and certain. And the narrowness and one-sidedness of his
views did make everything seem simple and clear. One only had to be
logical, as he said. His self-assurance was so great that it either
repelled people or made them submit to him. As he carried on his work
among very young people, his boundless self-assurance led them to
believe him very profound and wise; the majority did submit to him,
and he had a great success in revolutionary circles. His activity was
directed to the preparation of a rising in which he was to usurp the
power and call together a council. A programme, composed by him, should
be proposed before the council, and he felt sure that this programme of
his solved every problem, and that it would be impossible not to carry
it out.

His comrades respected but did not love him. He did not love any one,
looked upon all men of note as upon rivals, and would have willingly
treated them as old male monkeys treat young ones if he could have done
it. He would have torn all mental power, every capacity, from other men,
so that they should not interfere with the display of his talents. He
behaved well only to those who bowed before him. Now, on the journey he
behaved well to Kondratieff, who was influenced by his propaganda; to
Vera Doukhova and pretty little Grabetz, who were both in love with him.
Although in principle he was in favour of the woman's movement, yet in
the depth of his soul he considered all women stupid and insignificant
except those whom he was sentimentally in love with (as he was now in
love with Grabetz), and such women he considered to be exceptions, whose
merits he alone was capable of discerning.

The question of the relations of the sexes he also looked upon as
thoroughly solved by accepting free union. He had one nominal and
one real wife, from both of whom he was separated, having come to the
conclusion that there was no real love between them, and now he thought
of entering on a free union with Grabetz. He despised Nekhludoff
for "playing the fool," as Novodvoroff termed it, with Maslova, but
especially for the freedom Nekhludoff took of considering the defects
of the existing system and the methods of correcting those defects in a
manner which was not only not exactly the same as Novodvoroff's, but was
Nekhludoff's own--a prince's, that is, a fool's manner. Nekhludoff felt
this relation of Novodvoroff's towards him, and knew to his sorrow that
in spite of the state of good will in which he found himself on this
journey he could not help paying this man in his own coin, and could not
stifle the strong antipathy he felt for him.



CHAPTER XVI.

SIMONSON SPEAKS TO NEKHLUDOFF.

The voices of officials sounded from the next room. All the prisoners
were silent, and a sergeant, followed by two convoy soldiers, entered.
The time of the inspection had come. The sergeant counted every one, and
when Nekhludoff's turn came he addressed him with kindly familiarity.

"You must not stay any longer, Prince, after the inspection; you must go
now."

Nekhludoff knew what this meant, went up to the sergeant and shoved a
three-rouble note into his hand.

"Ah, well, what is one to do with you; stay a bit longer, if you like."
The sergeant was about to go when another sergeant, followed by a
convict, a spare man with a thin beard and a bruise under his eye, came
in.

"It's about the girl I have come," said the convict.

"Here's daddy come," came the ringing accents of a child's voice, and a
flaxen head appeared from behind Rintzeva, who, with Katusha's and Mary
Pavlovna's help, was making a new garment for the child out of one of
Rintzeva's own petticoats.

"Yes, daughter, it's me," Bousovkin, the prisoner, said softly.

"She is quite comfortable here," said Mary Pavlovna, looking with pity
at Bousovkin's bruised face. "Leave her with us."

"The ladies are making me new clothes," said the girl, pointing to
Rintzeva's sewing--"nice red ones," she went on, prattling.

"Do you wish to sleep with us?" asked Rintzeva, caressing the child.

"Yes, I wish. And daddy, too."

"No, daddy can't. Well, leave her then," she said, turning to the
father.

"Yes, you may leave her," said the first sergeant, and went out with the
other.

As soon as they were out of the room Nabatoff went up to Bousovkin,
slapped him on the shoulder, and said: "I say, old fellow, is it true
that Karmanoff wishes to exchange?"

Bousovkin's kindly, gentle face turned suddenly sad and a veil seemed to
dim his eyes.

"We have heard nothing--hardly," he said, and with the same dimness
still over his eyes he turned to the child.

"Well, Aksutka, it seems you're to make yourself comfortable with the
ladies," and he hurried away.

"It's true about the exchange, and he knows it very well," said
Nabatoff.

"What are you going to do?"

"I shall tell the authorities in the next town. I know both prisoners by
sight," said Nekhludoff.

All were silent, fearing a recommencement of the dispute.

Simonson, who had been lying with his arms thrown back behind his head,
and not speaking, rose, and determinately walked up to Nekhludoff,
carefully passing round those who were sitting.

"Could you listen to me now?"

"Of course," and Nekhludoff rose and followed him.

Katusha looked up with an expression of suspense, and meeting
Nekhludoff's eyes, she blushed and shook her head.

"What I want to speak to you about is this," Simonson began, when they
had come out into the passage. In the passage the din of the criminal's
voices and shouts sounded louder. Nekhludoff made a face, but Simonson
did not seem to take any notice.

"Knowing of your relations to Katerina Maslova," he began seriously and
frankly, with his kind eyes looking straight into Nekhludoff's face,
"I consider it my duty"--He was obliged to stop because two voices were
heard disputing and shouting, both at once, close to the door.

"I tell you, blockhead, they are not mine," one voice shouted.

"May you choke, you devil," snorted the other.

At this moment Mary Pavlovna came out into the passage.

"How can one talk here?" she said; "go in, Vera is alone there," and she
went in at the second door, and entered a tiny room, evidently meant for
a solitary cell, which was now placed at the disposal of the political
women prisoners, Vera Doukhova lay covered up, head and all, on the bed.

"She has got a headache, and is asleep, so she cannot hear you, and I
will go away," said Mary Pavlovna.

"On the contrary, stay here," said Simonson; "I have no secrets from any
one, certainly none from you."

"All right," said Mary Pavlovna, and moving her whole body from side to
side, like a child, so as to get farther back on to the bed, she settled
down to listen, her beautiful hazel eyes seeming to look somewhere far
away.

"Well, then, this is my business," Simonson repeated. "Knowing of your
relations to Katerina Maslova, I consider myself bound to explain to you
my relations to her."

Nekhludoff could not help admiring the simplicity and truthfulness with
which Simonson spoke to him.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that I should like to marry Katerina Maslova--"

"How strange!" said Mary Pavlovna, fixing her eyes on Simonson.

"--And so I made up my mind to ask her to be my wife," Simonson
continued.

"What can I do? It depends on her," said Nekhludoff.

"Yes; but she will not come to any decision without you."

"Why?"

"Because as long as your relations with her are unsettled she cannot
make up her mind."

"As far as I am concerned, it is finally settled. I should like to do
what I consider to be my duty and also to lighten her fate, but on no
account would I wish to put any restraint on her."

"Yes, but she does not wish to accept your sacrifice."

"It is no sacrifice."

"And I know that this decision of hers is final."

"Well, then, there is no need to speak to me," said Nekhludoff.

"She wants you to acknowledge that you think as she does."

"How can I acknowledge that I must not do what I consider to be my duty?
All I can say is that I am not free, but she is."

Simonson was silent; then, after thinking a little, he said: "Very
well, then, I'll tell her. You must not think I am in love with her,"
he continued; "I love her as a splendid, unique, human being who has
suffered much. I want nothing from her. I have only an awful longing to
help her, to lighten her posi--"

Nekhludoff was surprised to hear the trembling in Simonson's voice.

"--To lighten her position," Simonson continued. "If she does not wish
to accept your help, let her accept mine. If she consents, I shall ask
to be sent to the place where she will be imprisoned. Four years are
not an eternity. I would live near her, and perhaps might lighten her
fate--" and he again stopped, too agitated to continue.

"What am I to say?" said Nekhludoff. "I am very glad she has found such
a protector as you--"

"That's what I wanted to know," Simonson interrupted.

"I wanted to know if, loving her and wishing her happiness, you would
consider it good for her to marry me?"

"Oh, yes," said Nekhludoff decidedly.

"It all depends on her; I only wish that this suffering soul should find
rest," said Simonson, with such childlike tenderness as no one could
have expected from so morose-looking a man.

Simonson rose, and stretching his lips out to Nekhludoff, smiled shyly
and kissed him.

"So I shall tell her," and he went away.



CHAPTER XVII.

"I HAVE NOTHING MORE TO SAY."

"What do you think of that?" said Mary Pavlovna. "In love--quite in
love. Now, that's a thing I never should have expected, that Valdemar
Simonson should be in love, and in the silliest, most boyish manner. It
is strange, and, to say the truth, it is sad," and she sighed.

"But she? Katusha? How does she look at it, do you think?" Nekhludoff
asked.

"She?" Mary Pavlovna waited, evidently wishing to give as exact an
answer as possible. "She? Well, you see, in spite of her past she
has one of the most moral natures--and such fine feelings. She loves
you--loves you well, and is happy to be able to do you even the negative
good of not letting you get entangled with her. Marriage with you would
be a terrible fall for her, worse than all that's past, and therefore
she will never consent to it. And yet your presence troubles her."

"Well, what am I to do? Ought I to vanish?"

Mary Pavlovna smiled her sweet, childlike smile, and said, "Yes,
partly."

"How is one to vanish partly?"

"I am talking nonsense. But as for her, I should like to tell you that
she probably sees the silliness of this rapturous kind of love (he has
not spoken to her), and is both flattered and afraid of it. I am not
competent to judge in such affairs, you know, still I believe that on
his part it is the most ordinary man's feeling, though it is masked. He
says that this love arouses his energy and is Platonic, but I know that
even if it is exceptional, still at the bottom it is degrading."

Mary Pavlovna had wandered from the subject, having started on her
favourite theme.

"Well, but what am I to do?" Nekhludoff asked.

"I think you should tell her everything; it is always best that
everything should be clear. Have a talk with her; I shall call her.
Shall I?" said Mary Pavlovna.

"If you please," said Nekhludoff, and Mary Pavlovna went.

A strange feeling overcame Nekhludoff when he was alone in the little
room with the sleeping Vera Doukhova, listening to her soft breathing,
broken now and then by moans, and to the incessant dirt that came
through the two doors that separated him from the criminals. What
Simonson had told him freed him from the self-imposed duty, which had
seemed hard and strange to him in his weak moments, and yet now he felt
something that was not merely unpleasant but painful.

He had a feeling that this offer of Simonson's destroyed the exceptional
character of his sacrifice, and thereby lessened its value in his own
and others' eyes; if so good a man who was not bound to her by any kind
of tie wanted to join his fate to hers, then this sacrifice was not so
great. There may have also been an admixture of ordinary jealousy. He
had got so used to her love that he did not like to admit that she loved
another.

Then it also upset the plans he had formed of living near her while
she was doing her term. If she married Simonson his presence would be
unnecessary, and he would have to form new plans.

Before he had time to analyse his feelings the loud din of the
prisoners' voices came in with a rush (something special was going on
among them to-day) as the door opened to let Katusha in.

She stepped briskly close up to him and said, "Mary Pavlovna has sent
me."

"Yes, I must have a talk with you. Sit down. Valdemar Simonson has been
speaking to me."

She sat down and folded her hands in her lap and seemed quite calm, but
hardly had Nekhludoff uttered Simonson's name when she flushed crimson.

"What did he say?" she asked.

"He told me he wanted to marry you."

Her face suddenly puckered up with pain, but she said nothing and only
cast down her eyes.

"He is asking for my consent or my advice. I told him that it all
depends entirely on you--that you must decide."

"Ah, what does it all mean? Why?" she muttered, and looked in his eyes
with that peculiar squint that always strangely affected Nekhludoff.

They sat silent for a few minutes looking into each other's eyes, and
this look told much to both of them.

"You must decide," Nekhludoff repeated.

"What am I to decide? Everything has long been decided."

"No; you must decide whether you will accept Mr. Simonson's offer," said
Nekhludoff.

"What sort of a wife can I be--I, a convict? Why should I ruin Mr.
Simonson, too?" she said, with a frown.

"Well, but if the sentence should be mitigated."

"Oh, leave me alone. I have nothing more to say," she said, and rose to
leave the room.



CHAPTER XVIII.

NEVEROFF'S FATE.

When, following Katusha, Nekhludoff returned to the men's room, he found
every one there in agitation. Nabatoff, who went about all over the
place, and who got to know everybody, and noticed everything, had
just brought news which staggered them all. The news was that he had
discovered a note on a wall, written by the revolutionist Petlin, who
had been sentenced to hard labour, and who, every one thought, had long
since reached the Kara; and now it turned out that he had passed this
way quite recently, the only political prisoner among criminal convicts.

"On the 17th of August," so ran the note, "I was sent off alone with
the criminals. Neveroff was with me, but hanged himself in the lunatic
asylum in Kasan. I am well and in good spirits and hope for the best."

All were discussing Petlin's position and the possible reasons of
Neveroff's suicide. Only Kryltzoff sat silent and preoccupied, his
glistening eyes gazing fixedly in front of him.

"My husband told me that Neveroff had a vision while still in the
Petropavlovski prison," said Rintzeva.

"Yes, he was a poet, a dreamer; this sort of people cannot stand
solitary confinement," said Novodvoroff. "Now, I never gave my
imagination vent when in solitary confinement, but arranged my days most
systematically, and in this way always bore it very well."

"What is there unbearable about it? Why, I used to be glad when they
locked me up," said Nabatoff cheerfully, wishing to dispel the general
depression.

"A fellow's afraid of everything; of being arrested himself and
entangling others, and of spoiling the whole business, and then he gets
locked up, and all responsibility is at an end, and he can rest; he can
just sit and smoke."

"You knew him well?" asked Mary Pavlovna, glancing anxiously at the
altered, haggard expression of Kryltzoff's face.

"Neveroff a dreamer?" Kryltzoff suddenly began, panting for breath as
if he had been shouting or singing for a long time. "Neveroff was a man
'such as the earth bears few of,' as our doorkeeper used to express it.
Yes, he had a nature like crystal, you could see him right through; he
could not lie, he could not dissemble; not simply thin skinned, but
with all his nerves laid bare, as if he were flayed. Yes, his was a
complicated, rich nature, not such a-- But where is the use of talking?"
he added, with a vicious frown. "Shall we first educate the people
and then change the forms of life, or first change the forms and then
struggle, using peaceful propaganda or terrorism? So we go on disputing
while _they_ kill; _they_ do not dispute--they know their business; they
don't care whether dozens, hundreds of men perish--and what men! No;
that the best should perish is just what they want. Yes, Herzen said
that when the Decembrists were withdrawn from circulation the average
level of our society sank. I should think so, indeed. Then Herzen
himself and his fellows were withdrawn; now is the turn of the
Neveroffs."

"They can't all be got rid off," said Nabatoff, in his cheerful tones.
"There will always be left enough to continue the breed. No, there
won't, if we show any pity to _them_ there," Nabatoff said, raising his
voice; and not letting himself be interrupted, "Give me a cigarette."

"Oh, Anatole, it is not good for you," said Mary Pavlovna. "Please do
not smoke."

"Oh, leave me alone," he said angrily, and lit a cigarette, but at once
began to cough and to retch, as if he were going to be sick. Having
cleared his throat though, he went on:

"What we have been doing is not the thing at all. Not to argue, but for
all to unite--to destroy them--that's it."

"But _they_ are also human beings," said Nekhludoff.

"No, _they_ are not human, they who can do what they are
doing--No--There, now, I heard that some kind of bombs and balloons have
been invented. Well, one ought to go up in such a balloon and sprinkle
bombs down on _them_ as if _they_ were bugs, until _they_ are all
exterminated--Yes. Because--" he was going to continue, but, flushing
all over, he began coughing worse than before, and a stream of blood
rushed from his mouth.

Nabatoff ran to get ice. Mary Pavlovna brought valerian drops and
offered them to him, but he, breathing quickly and heavily, pushed her
away with his thin, white hand, and kept his eyes closed. When the ice
and cold water had eased Kryltzoff a little, and he had been put to
bed, Nekhludoff, having said good-night to everybody, went out with the
sergeant, who had been waiting for him some time.

The criminals were now quiet, and most of them were asleep. Though the
people were lying on and under the bed shelves and in the space between,
they could not all be placed inside the rooms, and some of them lay in
the passage with their sacks under their heads and covered with their
cloaks. The moans and sleepy voices came through the open doors and
sounded through the passage. Everywhere lay compact heaps of human
beings covered with prison cloaks. Only a few men who were sitting in
the bachelors' room by the light of a candle end, which they put out
when they noticed the sergeant, were awake, and an old man who sat naked
under the lamp in the passage picking the vermin off his shirt. The
foul air in the political prisoners' rooms seemed pure compared to the
stinking closeness here. The smoking lamp shone dimly as through a mist,
and it was difficult to breathe. Stepping along the passage, one had to
look carefully for an empty space, and having put down one foot had to
find place for the other. Three persons, who had evidently found no
room even in the passage, lay in the anteroom, close to the stinking and
leaking tub. One of these was an old idiot, whom Nekhludoff had often
seen marching with the gang; another was a boy about twelve; he lay
between the two other convicts, with his head on the leg of one of them.

When he had passed out of the gate Nekhludoff took a deep breath and
long continued to breathe in deep draughts of frosty air.



CHAPTER XIX.

WHY IS IT DONE?

It had cleared up and was starlight. Except in a few places the mud was
frozen hard when Nekhludoff returned to his inn and knocked at one of
its dark windows. The broad-shouldered labourer came barefooted to open
the door for him and let him in. Through a door on the right, leading
to the back premises, came the loud snoring of the carters, who slept
there, and the sound of many horses chewing oats came from the yard. The
front room, where a red lamp was burning in front of the icons, smelt
of wormwood and perspiration, and some one with mighty lungs was snoring
behind a partition. Nekhludoff undressed, put his leather travelling
pillow on the oilcloth sofa, spread out his rug and lay down, thinking
over all he had seen and heard that day; the boy sleeping on the liquid
that oozed from the stinking tub, with his head on the convict's leg,
seemed more dreadful than all else.

Unexpected and important as his conversation with Simonson and Katusha
that evening had been, he did not dwell on it; his situation in relation
to that subject was so complicated and indefinite that he drove the
thought from his mind. But the picture of those unfortunate beings,
inhaling the noisome air, and lying in the liquid oozing out of the
stinking tub, especially that of the boy, with his innocent face asleep
on the leg of a criminal, came all the more vividly to his mind, and he
could not get it out of his head.

To know that somewhere far away there are men who torture other men
by inflicting all sorts of humiliations and inhuman degradation and
sufferings on them, or for three months incessantly to look on while men
were inflicting these humiliations and sufferings on other men is a very
different thing. And Nekhludoff felt it. More than once during these
three months he asked himself, "Am I mad because I see what others do
not, or are they mad that do these things that I see?"

Yet they (and there were many of them) did what seemed so astonishing
and terrible to him with such quiet assurance that what they were doing
was necessary and was important and useful work that it was hard to
believe they were mad; nor could he, conscious of the clearness of his
thoughts, believe he was mad; and all this kept him continually in a
state of perplexity.

This is how the things he saw during these three months impressed
Nekhludoff: From among the people who were free, those were chosen, by
means of trials and the administration, who were the most nervous,
the most hot tempered, the most excitable, the most gifted, and the
strongest, but the least careful and cunning. These people, not a wit
more dangerous than many of those who remained free, were first locked
in prisons, transported to Siberia, where they were provided for and
kept months and years in perfect idleness, and away from nature, their
families, and useful work--that is, away from the conditions necessary
for a natural and moral life. This firstly. Secondly, these people
were subjected to all sorts of unnecessary indignity in these different
Places--chains, shaved heads, shameful clothing--that is, they were
deprived of the chief motives that induce the weak to live good lives,
the regard for public opinion, the sense of shame and the consciousness
of human dignity. Thirdly, they were continually exposed to dangers,
such as the epidemics so frequent in places of confinement, exhaustion,
flogging, not to mention accidents, such as sunstrokes, drowning or
conflagrations, when the instinct of self-preservation makes even the
kindest, most moral men commit cruel actions, and excuse such actions
when committed by others.

Fourthly, these people were forced to associate with others who
were particularly depraved by life, and especially by these very
institutions--rakes, murderers and villains--who act on those who are
not yet corrupted by the measures inflicted on them as leaven acts on
dough.

And, fifthly, the fact that all sorts of violence, cruelty, inhumanity,
are not only tolerated, but even permitted by the government, when it
suits its purposes, was impressed on them most forcibly by the inhuman
treatment they were subjected to; by the sufferings inflicted on
children, women and old men; by floggings with rods and whips; by
rewards offered for bringing a fugitive back, dead or alive; by the
separation of husbands and wives, and the uniting them with the wives
and husbands of others for sexual intercourse; by shooting or hanging
them. To those who were deprived of their freedom, who were in want
and misery, acts of violence were evidently still more permissible.
All these institutions seemed purposely invented for the production of
depravity and vice, condensed to such a degree that no other conditions
could produce it, and for the spreading of this condensed depravity and
vice broadcast among the whole population.

"Just as if a problem had been set to find the best, the surest means
of depraving the greatest number of persons," thought Nekhludoff, while
investigating the deeds that were being done in the prisons and halting
stations. Every year hundreds of thousands were brought to the highest
pitch of depravity, and when completely depraved they were set free to
carry the depravity they had caught in prison among the people. In
the prisons of Tamen, Ekaterinburg, Tomsk and at the halting stations
Nekhludoff saw how successfully the object society seemed to have set
itself was attained.

Ordinary, simple men with a conception of the demands of the social and
Christian Russian peasant morality lost this conception, and found a
new one, founded chiefly on the idea that any outrage or violence was
justifiable if it seemed profitable. After living in a prison those
people became conscious with the whole of their being that, judging by
what was happening to themselves, all the moral laws, the respect and
the sympathy for others which church and the moral teachers preach,
was really set aside, and that, therefore, they, too, need not keep the
laws. Nekhludoff noticed the effects of prison life on all the convicts
he knew--on Fedoroff, on Makar, and even on Taras, who, after two months
among the convicts, struck Nekhludoff by the want of morality in his
arguments. Nekhludoff found out during his journey how tramps, escaping
into the marshes, persuade a comrade to escape with them, and then kill
him and feed on his flesh. (He saw a living man who was accused of this
and acknowledged the fact.) And the most terrible part was that this was
not a solitary, but a recurring case.

Only by a special cultivation of vice, such as was perpetrated in these
establishments, could a Russian be brought to the state of this tramp,
who excelled Nietzsche's newest teaching, and held that everything was
possible and nothing forbidden, and who spread this teaching first among
the convicts and then among the people in general.

The only explanation of all that was being done was the wish to put
a stop to crime by fear, by correction, by lawful vengeance as it was
written in the books. But in reality nothing in the least resembling any
of these results came to pass. Instead of vice being put a stop to, it
only spread further; instead of being frightened, the criminals were
encouraged (many a tramp returned to prison of his own free will).
Instead of being corrected, every kind of vice was systematically
instilled, while the desire for vengeance did not weaken by the measures
of the government, but was bred in the people who had none of it.

"Then why is it done?" Nekhludoff asked himself, but could find no
answer. And what seemed most surprising was that all this was not being
done accidentally, not by mistake, not once, but that it had continued
for centuries, with this difference only, that at first the people's
nostrils used to be torn and their ears cut off; then they were branded,
and now they were manacled and transported by steam instead of on the
old carts. The arguments brought forward by those in government service,
who said that the things which aroused his indignation were simply due
to the imperfect arrangements of the places of confinement, and that
they could all be put to rights if prisons of a modern type were built,
did not satisfy Nekhludoff, because he knew that what revolted him was
not the consequence of a better or worse arrangement of the prisons.
He had read of model prisons with electric bells, of executions by
electricity, recommended by Tard; but this refined kind of violence
revolted him even more.

But what revolted Nekhludoff most was that there were men in the law
courts and in the ministry who received large salaries, taken from the
people, for referring to books written by men like themselves and with
like motives, and sorting actions that violated laws made by themselves
according to different statutes; and, in obedience to these statutes,
sending those guilty of such actions to places where they were
completely at the mercy of cruel, hardened inspectors, jailers, convoy
soldiers, where millions of them perished body and soul.

Now that he had a closer knowledge of prisons, Nekhludoff found out
that all those vices which developed among the prisoners--drunkenness,
gambling, cruelty, and all these terrible crimes, even cannibalism--were
not casual, or due to degeneration or to the existence of monstrosities
of the criminal type, as science, going hand in hand with the
government, explained it, but an unavoidable consequence of the
incomprehensible delusion that men may punish one another. Nekhludoff
saw that cannibalism did not commence in the marshes, but in the
ministry. He saw that his brother-in-law, for example, and, in fact, all
the lawyers and officials, from the usher to the minister, do not care
in the least for justice or the good of the people about whom they
spoke, but only for the roubles they were paid for doing the things that
were the source whence all this degradation and suffering flowed. This
was quite evident.

"Can it be, then, that all this is done simply through misapprehension?
Could it not be managed that all these officials should have their
salaries secured to them, and a premium paid them, besides, so that
they should leave off, doing all that they were doing now?" Nekhludoff
thought, and in spite of the fleas, that seemed to spring up round him
like water from a fountain whenever he moved, he fell fast asleep.



CHAPTER XX.

THE JOURNEY RESUMED.

The carters had left the inn long before Nekhludoff awoke. The landlady
had had her tea, and came in wiping her fat, perspiring neck with
her handkerchief, and said that a soldier had brought a note from
the halting station. The note was from Mary Pavlovna. She wrote that
Kryltzoff's attack was more serious than they had imagined. "We wished
him to be left behind and to remain with him, but this has not been
allowed, so that we shall take him on; but we fear the worst. Please
arrange so that if he should be left in the next town, one of us might
remain with him. If in order to get the permission to stay I should be
obliged to get married to him, I am of course ready to do so."

Nekhludoff sent the young labourer to the post station to order horses
and began packing up hurriedly. Before he had drunk his second tumbler
of tea the three-horsed postcart drove up to the porch with ringing
bells, the wheels rattling on the frozen mud as on stones. Nekhludoff
paid the fat-necked landlady, hurried out and got into the cart,
and gave orders to the driver to go on as fast as possible, so as to
overtake the gang. Just past the gates of the commune pasture ground
they did overtake the carts, loaded with sacks and the sick prisoners,
as they rattled over the frozen mud, that was just beginning to be
rolled smooth by the wheels (the officer was not there, he had gone in
advance). The soldiers, who had evidently been drinking, followed by the
side of the road, chatting merrily. There were a great many carts. In
each of the first carts sat six invalid criminal convicts, close packed.
On each of the last two were three political prisoners. Novodvoroff,
Grabetz and Kondratieff sat on one, Rintzeva, Nabatoff and the woman to
whom Mary Pavlovna had given up her own place on the other, and on one
of the carts lay Kryltzoff on a heap of hay, with a pillow under his
head, and Mary Pavlovna sat by him on the edge of the cart. Nekhludoff
ordered his driver to stop, got out and went up to Kryltzoff. One of
the tipsy soldiers waved his hand towards Nekhludoff, but he paid no
attention and started walking by Kryltzoff's side, holding on to the
side of the cart with his hand. Dressed in a sheepskin coat, with a fur
cap on his head and his mouth bound up with a handkerchief, he seemed
paler and thinner than ever. His beautiful eyes looked very large and
brilliant. Shaken from side to side by the jottings of the cart, he lay
with his eyes fixed on Nekhludoff; but when asked about his health, he
only closed his eyes and angrily shook his head. All his energy seemed
to be needed in order to bear the jolting of the cart. Mary Pavlovna was
on the other side. She exchanged a significant glance with Nekhludoff,
which expressed all her anxiety about Kryltzoff's state, and then began
to talk at once in a cheerful manner.

"It seems the officer is ashamed of himself," she shouted, so as to be
heard above the rattle of the wheels. "Bousovkin's manacles have
been removed, and he is carrying his little girl himself. Katusha and
Simonson are with him, and Vera, too. She has taken my place."

Kryltzoff said something that could not be heard because of the noise,
and frowning in the effort to repress his cough shook his head. Then
Nekhludoff stooped towards him, so as to hear, and Kryltzoff, freeing
his mouth of the handkerchief, whispered:

"Much better now. Only not to catch cold."

Nekhludoff nodded in acquiescence, and again exchanged a glance with
Mary Pavlovna.

"How about the problem of the three bodies?" whispered Kryltzoff,
smiling with great difficulty. "The solution is difficult."

Nekhludoff did not understand, but Mary Pavlovna explained that he meant
the well-known mathematical problem which defined the position of the
sun, moon and earth, which Kryltzoff compared to the relations between
Nekhludoff, Katusha and Simonson. Kryltzoff nodded, to show that Mary
Pavlovna had explained his joke correctly.

"The decision does not lie with me," Nekhludoff said.

"Did you get my note? Will you do it?" Mary Pavlovna asked.

"Certainly," answered Nekhludoff; and noticing a look of displeasure on
Kryltzoff's face, he returned to his conveyance, and holding with both
hands to the sides of the cart, got in, which jolted with him over the
ruts of the rough road. He passed the gang, which, with its grey cloaks
and sheepskin coats, chains and manacles, stretched over three-quarters
of a mile of the road. On the opposite side of the road Nekhludoff
noticed Katusha's blue shawl, Vera Doukhova's black coat, and Simonson's
crochet cap, white worsted stockings, with bands, like those of sandals,
tied round him. Simonson was walking with the woman and carrying on a
heated discussion.

When they saw Nekhludoff they bowed to him, and Simonson raised his hat
in a solemn manner. Nekhludoff, having nothing to say, did not stop, and
was soon ahead of the carts. Having got again on to a smoother part of
the road, they drove still more quickly, but they had continually to
turn aside to let pass long rows of carts that were moving along the
road in both directions.

The road, which was cut up by deep ruts, lay through a thick pine
forest, mingled with birch trees and larches, bright with yellow leaves
they had not yet shed. By the time Nekhludoff had passed about half the
gang he reached the end of the forest. Fields now lay stretched along
both sides of the road, and the crosses and cupolas of a monastery
appeared in the distance. The clouds had dispersed, and it had cleared
up completely; the leaves, the frozen puddles and the gilt crosses and
cupolas of the monastery glittered brightly in the sun that had risen
above the forest. A little to the right mountains began to gleam white
in the blue-grey distance, and the trap entered a large village.
The village street was full of people, both Russians and other
nationalities, wearing peculiar caps and cloaks. Tipsy men and women
crowded and chattered round booths, traktirs, public houses and carts.
The vicinity of a town was noticeable. Giving a pull and a lash of the
whip to the horse on his right, the driver sat down sideways on the
right edge of the seat, so that the reins hung over that side, and with
evident desire of showing off, he drove quickly down to the river, which
had to be crossed by a ferry. The raft was coming towards them, and
had reached the middle of the river. About twenty carts were waiting to
cross. Nekhludoff had not long to wait. The raft, which had been pulled
far up the stream, quickly approached the landing, carried by the swift
waters. The tall, silent, broad-shouldered, muscular ferryman, dressed
in sheepskins, threw the ropes and moored the raft with practised hand,
landed the carts that were on it, and put those that were waiting on
the bank on board. The whole raft was filled with vehicles and horses
shuffling at the sight of the water. The broad, swift river splashed
against the sides of the ferryboats, tightening their moorings.

When the raft was full, and Nekhludoff's cart, with the horses taken out
of it, stood closely surrounded by other carts on the side of the raft,
the ferryman barred the entrance, and, paying no heed to the prayers of
those who had not found room in the raft, unfastened the ropes and set
off.

All was quiet on the raft; one could hear nothing but the tramp of the
ferryman's boots and the horses changing from foot to foot.



CHAPTER XXI.

"JUST A WORTHLESS TRAMP."

Nekhludoff stood on the edge of the raft looking at the broad river. Two
pictures kept rising up in his mind. One, that of Kryltzoff, unprepared
for death and dying, made a heavy, sorrowful impression on him. The
other, that of Katusha, full of energy, having gained the love of such a
man as Simonson, and found a true and solid path towards righteousness,
should have been pleasant, yet it also created a heavy impression on
Nekhludoff's mind, and he could not conquer this impression.

The vibrating sounds of a big brass bell reached them from the town.
Nekhludoff's driver, who stood by his side, and the other men on the
raft raised their caps and crossed themselves, all except a short,
dishevelled old man, who stood close to the railway and whom Nekhludoff
had not noticed before. He did not cross himself, but raised his head
and looked at Nekhludoff. This old man wore a patched coat, cloth
trousers and worn and patched shoes. He had a small wallet on his back,
and a high fur cap with the fur much rubbed on his head.

"Why don't you pray, old chap?" asked Nekhludoff's driver as he replaced
and straightened his cap. "Are you unbaptized?"

"Who's one to pray to?" asked the old man quickly, in a determinately
aggressive tone.

"To whom? To God, of course," said the driver sarcastically.

"And you just show me where he is, that god." There was something so
serious and firm in the expression of the old man, that the driver felt
that he had to do with a strong-minded man, and was a bit abashed. And
trying not to show this, not to be silenced, and not to be put to shame
before the crowd that was observing them, he answered quickly.

"Where? In heaven, of course."

"And have you been up there?"

"Whether I've been or not, every one knows that you must pray to God."

"No one has ever seen God at any time. The only begotten Son who is in
the bosom of the Father he hath declared him," said the old man in the
same rapid manner, and with a severe frown on his brow.

"It's clear you are not a Christian, but a hole worshipper. You pray
to a hole," said the driver, shoving the handle of his whip into his
girdle, pulling straight the harness on one of the horses.

Some one laughed.

"What is your faith, Dad?" asked a middle-aged man, who stood by his
cart on the same side of the raft.

"I have no kind of faith, because I believe no one--no one but myself,"
said the old man as quickly and decidedly as before.

"How can you believe yourself?" Nekhludoff asked, entering into a
conversation with him. "You might make a mistake."

"Never in your life," the old man said decidedly, with a toss of his
head.

"Then why are there different faiths?" Nekhludoff asked.

"It's just because men believe others and do not believe themselves that
there are different faiths. I also believed others, and lost myself as
in a swamp,--lost myself so that I had no hope of finding my way out.
Old believers and new believers and Judaisers and Khlysty and Popovitzy,
and Bespopovitzy and Avstriaks and Molokans and Skoptzy--every faith
praises itself only, and so they all creep about like blind puppies.
There are many faiths, but the spirit is one--in me and in you and in
him. So that if every one believes himself all will be united. Every one
be himself, and all will be as one."

The old man spoke loudly and often looked round, evidently wishing that
as many as possible should hear him.

"And have you long held this faith?"

"I? A long time. This is the twenty-third year that they persecute me."

"Persecute you? How?"

"As they persecuted Christ, so they persecute me. They seize me, and
take me before the courts and before the priests, the Scribes and the
Pharisees. Once they put me into a madhouse; but they can do nothing
because I am free. They say, 'What is your name?' thinking I shall name
myself. But I do not give myself a name. I have given up everything:
I have no name, no place, no country, nor anything. I am just myself.
'What is your name?' 'Man.' 'How old are you?' I say, 'I do not count my
years and cannot count them, because I always was, I always shall be.'
'Who are your parents?' 'I have no parents except God and Mother Earth.
God is my father.' 'And the Tsar? Do you recognise the Tsar?' they say.
I say, 'Why not? He is his own Tsar, and I am my own Tsar.' 'Where's the
good of talking to him,' they say, and I say, 'I do not ask you to talk
to me.' And so they begin tormenting me."

"And where are you going now?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Where God will lead me. I work when I can find work, and when I can't
I beg." The old man noticed that the raft was approaching the bank and
stopped, looking round at the bystanders with a look of triumph.

Nekhludoff got out his purse and offered some money to the old man, but
he refused, saying:

"I do not accept this sort of thing--bread I do accept."

"Well, then, excuse me."

"There is nothing to excuse, you have not offended me. And it is not
possible to offend me." And the old man put the wallet he had taken
off again on his back. Meanwhile, the post-cart had been landed and the
horses harnessed.

"I wonder you should care to talk to him, sir," said the driver, when
Nekhludoff, having tipped the bowing ferryman, got into the cart again.
"He is just a worthless tramp."



CHAPTER XXII.

NEKHLUDOFF SEES THE GENERAL.

When they got to the top of the hill bank the driver turned to
Nekhludoff.

"Which hotel am I to drive to?"

"Which is the best?"

"Nothing could be better than the Siberian, but Dukeoff's is also good."

"Drive to whichever you like."

The driver again seated himself sideways and drove faster. The town
was like all such towns. The same kind of houses with attic windows
and green roofs, the same kind of cathedral, the same kind of shops and
stores in the principal street, and even the same kind of policemen.
Only the houses were almost all of them wooden, and the streets were not
paved. In one of the chief streets the driver stopped at the door of an
hotel, but there was no room to be had, so he drove to another. And here
Nekhludoff, after two months, found himself once again in surroundings
such as he had been accustomed to as far as comfort and cleanliness
went. Though the room he was shown to was simple enough, yet Nekhludoff
felt greatly relieved to be there after two months of post-carts,
country inns and halting stations. His first business was to clean
himself of the lice which he had never been able to get thoroughly rid
of after visiting a halting station. When he had unpacked he went to the
Russian bath, after which he made himself fit to be seen in a town,
put on a starched shirt, trousers that had got rather creased along the
seams, a frock-coat and an overcoat, and drove to the Governor of the
district. The hotel-keeper called an isvostchik, whose well-fed Kirghiz
horse and vibrating trap soon brought Nekhludoff to the large porch of
a big building, in front of which stood sentinels and a policeman. The
house had a garden in front, and at the back, among the naked branches
of aspen and birch trees, there grew thick and dark green pines and
firs. The General was not well, and did not receive; but Nekhludoff
asked the footman to hand in his card all the same, and the footman came
back with a favourable reply.

"You are asked to come in."

The hall, the footman, the orderly, the staircase, the dancing-room,
with its well-polished floor, were very much the same as in Petersburg,
only more imposing and rather dirtier. Nekhludoff was shown into the
cabinet.

The General, a bloated, potato-nosed man, with a sanguine disposition,
large bumps on his forehead, bald head, and puffs under his eyes, sat
wrapped in a Tartar silk dressing-gown smoking a cigarette and sipping
his tea out of a tumbler in a silver holder.

"How do you do, sir? Excuse my dressing-gown; it is better so than if I
had not received you at all," he said, pulling up his dressing-gown over
his fat neck with its deep folds at the nape. "I am not quite well, and
do not go out. What has brought you to our remote region?"

"I am accompanying a gang of prisoners, among whom there is a person
closely connected with me, said Nekhludoff, and now I have come to
see your Excellency partly in behalf of this person, and partly about
another business." The General took a whiff and a sip of tea, put
his cigarette into a malachite ashpan, with his narrow eyes fixed on
Nekhludoff, listening seriously. He only interrupted him once to offer
him a cigarette.

The General belonged to the learned type of military men who believed
that liberal and humane views can be reconciled with their profession.
But being by nature a kind and intelligent man, he soon felt the
impossibility of such a reconciliation; so as not to feel the inner
discord in which he was living, he gave himself up more and more to the
habit of drinking, which is so widely spread among military men, and
was now suffering from what doctors term alcoholism. He was imbued
with alcohol, and if he drank any kind of liquor it made him tipsy. Yet
strong drink was an absolute necessity to him, he could not live without
it, so he was quite drunk every evening; but had grown so used to this
state that he did not reel nor talk any special nonsense. And if he
did talk nonsense, it was accepted as words of wisdom because of the
important and high position which he occupied. Only in the morning, just
at the time Nekhludoff came to see him, he was like a reasonable being,
could understand what was said to him, and fulfil more or less aptly a
proverb he was fond of repeating: "He's tipsy, but he's wise, so he's
pleasant in two ways."

The higher authorities knew he was a drunkard, but he was more educated
than the rest, though his education had stopped at the spot where
drunkenness had got hold of him. He was bold, adroit, of imposing
appearance, and showed tact even when tipsy; therefore, he was
appointed, and was allowed to retain so public and responsible an
office.

Nekhludoff told him that the person he was interested in was a woman,
that she was sentenced, though innocent, and that a petition had been
sent to the Emperor in her behalf.

"Yes, well?" said the General.

"I was promised in Petersburg that the news concerning her fate should
be sent to me not later than this month and to this place-"

The General stretched his hand with its stumpy fingers towards the
table, and rang a bell, still looking at Nekhludoff and puffing at his
cigarette.

"So I would like to ask you that this woman should be allowed to remain
here until the answer to her petition comes."

The footman, an orderly in uniform, came in.

"Ask if Anna Vasilievna is up," said the General to the orderly, "and
bring some more tea." Then, turning to Nekhludoff, "Yes, and what else?"

"My other request concerns a political prisoner who is with the same
gang."

"Dear me," said the General, with a significant shake of the head.

"He is seriously ill--dying, and he will probably be left here in the
hospital, so one of the women prisoners would like to stay behind with
him."

"She is no relation of his?"

"No, but she is willing to marry him if that will enable her to remain
with him."

The General looked fixedly with twinkling eyes at his interlocutor, and,
evidently with a wish to discomfit him, listened, smoking in silence.

When Nekhludoff had finished, the General took a book off the table,
and, wetting his finger, quickly turned over the pages and found the
statute relating to marriage.

"What is she sentenced to?" he asked, looking up from the book.

"She? To hard labour."

"Well, then, the position of one sentenced to that cannot be bettered by
marriage."

"Yes, but--"

"Excuse me. Even if a free man should marry her, she would have to
serve her term. The question in such cases is, whose is the heavier
punishment, hers or his?"

"They are both sentenced to hard labour."

"Very well; so they are quits," said the General, with a laugh. "She's
got what he has, only as he is sick he may be left behind, and of course
what can be done to lighten his fate shall be done. But as for her, even
if she did marry him, she could not remain behind."

"The Generaless is having her coffee," the footman announced.

The General nodded and continued:

"However, I shall think about it. What are their names? Put them down
here."

Nekhludoff wrote down the names.

Nekhludoff's request to be allowed to see the dying man the General
answered by saying, "Neither can I do that. Of course I do not suspect
you, but you take an interest in him and in the others, and you have
money, and here with us anything can be done with money. I have been
told to put down bribery. But how can I put down bribery when everybody
takes bribes? And the lower their rank the more ready they are to be
bribed. How can one find it out across more than three thousand miles?
There any official is a little Tsar, just as I am here," and he laughed.
"You have in all likelihood been to see the political prisoners; you
gave money and got permission to see them," he said, with a smile. "Is
it not so?"

"Yes, it is."

"I quite understand that you had to do it. You pity a political prisoner
and wish to see him. And the inspector or the convoy soldier accepts,
because he has a salary of twice twenty copecks and a family, and he
can't help accepting it. In his place and yours I should have acted
in the same way as you and he did. But in my position I do not permit
myself to swerve an inch from the letter of the law, just because I am
a man, and might be influenced by pity. But I am a member of the
executive, and I have been placed in a position of trust on certain
conditions, and these conditions I must carry out. Well, so this
business is finished. And now let us hear what is going on in the
metropolis." And the General began questioning with the evident desire
to hear the news and to show how very human he was.



CHAPTER XXIII.

THE SENTENCE COMMUTED.

"By-the-way, where are you staying?" asked the General as he was taking
leave of Nekhludoff. "At Duke's? Well, it's horrid enough there. Come
and dine with us at five o'clock. You speak English?"

"Yes, I do."

"That's good. You see, an English traveller has just arrived here. He
is studying the question of transportation and examining the prisons of
Siberia. Well, he is dining with us to-night, and you come and meet him.
We dine at five, and my wife expects punctuality. Then I shall also
give you an answer what to do about that woman, and perhaps it may be
possible to leave some one behind with the sick prisoner."

Having made his bow to the General, Nekhludoff drove to the post-office,
feeling himself in an extremely animated and energetic frame of mind.

The post-office was a low-vaulted room. Several officials sat behind
a counter serving the people, of whom there was quite a crowd. One
official sat with his head bent to one side and kept stamping the
envelopes, which he slipped dexterously under the stamp. Nekhludoff had
not long to wait. As soon as he had given his name, everything that had
come for him by post was at once handed to him. There was a good deal:
letters, and money, and books, and the last number of Fatherland Notes.
Nekhludoff took all these things to a wooden bench, on which a soldier
with a book in his hand sat waiting for something, took the seat by
his side, and began sorting the letters. Among them was one registered
letter in a fine envelope, with a distinctly stamped bright red seal. He
broke the seal, and seeing a letter from Selenin and some official paper
inside the envelope, he felt the blood rush to his face, and his heart
stood still. It was the answer to Katusha's petition. What would that
answer be? Nekhludoff glanced hurriedly through the letter, written
in an illegibly small, hard, and cramped hand, and breathed a sigh of
relief. The answer was a favourable one.

"Dear friend," wrote Selenin, "our last talk has made a profound
impression on me. You were right concerning Maslova. I looked carefully
through the case, and see that shocking injustice has been done her. It
could be remedied only by the Committee of Petitions before which you
laid it. I managed to assist at the examination of the case, and I
enclose herewith the copy of the mitigation of the sentence. Your aunt,
the Countess Katerina Ivanovna, gave me the address which I am sending
this to. The original document has been sent to the place where she was
imprisoned before her trial, and will from there he probably sent
at once to the principal Government office in Siberia. I hasten to
communicate this glad news to you and warmly press your hand.

                    "Yours,

                        "SELENIN."

The document ran thus: "His Majesty's office for the reception
of petitions, addressed to his Imperial name"--here followed the
date----"by order of the chief of his Majesty's office for the reception
of petitions addressed to his Imperial name. The meschanka Katerina
Maslova is hereby informed that his Imperial Majesty, with reference to
her most loyal petition, condescending to her request, deigns to order
that her sentence to hard labour should be commuted to one of exile to
the less distant districts of Siberia."

This was joyful and important news; all that Nekhludoff could have hoped
for Katusha, and for himself also, had happened. It was true that the
new position she was in brought new complications with it. While she was
a convict, marriage with her could only be fictitious, and would have
had no meaning except that he would have been in a position to alleviate
her condition. And now there was nothing to prevent their living
together, and Nekhludoff had not prepared himself for that. And,
besides, what of her relations to Simonson? What was the meaning of her
words yesterday? If she consented to a union with Simonson, would it
be well? He could not unravel all these questions, and gave up thinking
about it. "It will all clear itself up later on," he thought; "I must
not think about it now, but convey the glad news to her as soon as
possible, and set her free." He thought that the copy of the document he
had received would suffice, so when he left the post-office he told the
isvostchik to drive him to the prison.

Though he had received no order from the governor to visit the prison
that morning, he knew by experience that it was easy to get from the
subordinates what the higher officials would not grant, so now he meant
to try and get into the prison to bring Katusha the joyful news, and
perhaps to get her set free, and at the same time to inquire about
Kryltzoff's state of health, and tell him and Mary Pavlovna what the
general had said. The prison inspector was a tall, imposing-looking man,
with moustaches and whiskers that twisted towards the corners of his
mouth. He received Nekhludoff very gravely, and told him plainly that
he could not grant an outsider the permission to interview the prisoners
without a special order from his chief. To Nekhludoff's remark that he
had been allowed to visit the prisoners even in the cities he answered:

"That may be so, but I do not allow it," and his tone implied, "You
city gentlemen may think to surprise and perplex us, but we in Eastern
Siberia also know what the law is, and may even teach it you." The copy
of a document straight from the Emperor's own office did not have any
effect on the prison inspector either. He decidedly refused to let
Nekhludoff come inside the prison walls. He only smiled contemptuously
at Nekhludoff's naive conclusion, that the copy he had received would
suffice to set Maslova free, and declared that a direct order from his
own superiors would be needed before any one could be set at liberty.
The only things he agreed to do were to communicate to Maslova that a
mitigation had arrived for her, and to promise that he would not detain
her an hour after the order from his chief to liberate her would arrive.
He would also give no news of Kryltzoff, saying he could not even tell
if there was such a prisoner; and so Nekhludoff, having accomplished
next to nothing, got into his trap and drove back to his hotel.

The strictness of the inspector was chiefly due to the fact that an
epidemic of typhus had broken out in the prison, owing to twice the
number of persons that it was intended for being crowded in it. The
isvostchik who drove Nekhludoff said, "Quite a lot of people are dying
in the prison every day, some kind of disease having sprung up among
them, so that as many as twenty were buried in one day."



CHAPTER XXIV.

THE GENERAL'S HOUSEHOLD.

In spite of his ineffectual attempt at the prison, Nekhludoff, still
in the same vigorous, energetic frame of mind, went to the Governor's
office to see if the original of the document had arrived for Maslova.
It had not arrived, so Nekhludoff went back to the hotel and wrote
without delay to Selenin and the advocate about it. When he had
finished writing he looked at his watch and saw it was time to go to the
General's dinner party.

On the way he again began wondering how Katusha would receive the news
of the mitigation of her sentence. Where she would be settled? How he
should live with her? What about Simonson? What would his relations to
her be? He remembered the change that had taken place in her, and
this reminded him of her past. "I must forget it for the present," he
thought, and again hastened to drive her out of his mind. "When the time
comes I shall see," he said to himself, and began to think of what he
ought to say to the General.

The dinner at the General's, with the luxury habitual to the lives
of the wealthy and those of high rank, to which Nekhludoff had been
accustomed, was extremely enjoyable after he had been so long deprived
not only of luxury but even of the most ordinary comforts. The mistress
of the house was a Petersburg grande dame of the old school, a maid of
honour at the court of Nicholas I., who spoke French quite naturally and
Russian very unnaturally. She held herself very erect and, moving her
hands, she kept her elbows close to her waist. She was quietly and,
somewhat sadly considerate for her husband, and extremely kind to
all her visitors, though with a tinge of difference in her behaviour
according to their position. She received Nekhludoff as if he were one
of them, and her fine, almost imperceptible flattery made him once again
aware of his virtues and gave him a feeling of satisfaction. She made
him feel that she knew of that honest though rather singular step of his
which had brought him to Siberia, and held him to be an exceptional man.
This refined flattery and the elegance and luxury of the General's house
had the effect of making Nekhludoff succumb to the enjoyment of the
handsome surroundings, the delicate dishes and the ease and pleasure
of intercourse with educated people of his own class, so that the
surroundings in the midst of which he had lived for the last months
seemed a dream from which he had awakened to reality. Besides those
of the household, the General's daughter and her husband and an
aide-de-camp, there were an Englishman, a merchant interested in gold
mines, and the governor of a distant Siberian town. All these people
seemed pleasant to Nekhludoff. The Englishman, a healthy man with a
rosy complexion, who spoke very bad French, but whose command of his own
language was very good and oratorically impressive, who had seen a great
deal, was very interesting to listen to when he spoke about America,
India, Japan and Siberia.

The young merchant interested in the gold mines, the son of a peasant,
whose evening dress was made in London, who had diamond studs to his
shirt, possessed a fine library, contributed freely to philanthropic
work, and held liberal European views, seemed pleasant to Nekhludoff
as a sample of a quite new and good type of civilised European culture,
grafted on a healthy, uncultivated peasant stem.

The governor of the distant Siberian town was that same man who had been
so much talked about in Petersburg at the time Nekhludoff was there. He
was plump, with thin, curly hair, soft blue eyes, carefully-tended white
hands, with rings on the fingers, a pleasant smile, and very big in the
lower part of his body. The master of the house valued this governor
because of all the officials he was the only one who would not be
bribed. The mistress of the house, who was very fond of music and a
very good pianist herself, valued him because he was a good musician and
played duets with her.

Nekhludoff was in such good humour that even this man was not unpleasant
to him, in spite of what he knew of his vices. The bright, energetic
aide-de-camp, with his bluey grey chin, who was continually offering his
services, pleased Nekhludoff by his good nature. But it was the charming
young couple, the General's daughter and her husband, who pleased
Nekhludoff best. The daughter was a plain-looking, simple-minded young
woman, wholly absorbed in her two children. Her husband, whom she had
fallen in love with and married after a long struggle with her parents,
was a Liberal, who had taken honours at the Moscow University, a modest
and intellectual young man in Government service, who made up statistics
and studied chiefly the foreign tribes, which he liked and tried to save
from dying out.

All of them were not only kind and attentive to Nekhludoff, but
evidently pleased to see him, as a new and interesting acquaintance. The
General, who came in to dinner in uniform and with a white cross round
his neck, greeted Nekhludoff as a friend, and asked the visitors to
the side table to take a glass of vodka and something to whet their
appetites. The General asked Nekhludoff what he had been doing since
he left that morning, and Nekhludoff told him he had been to the
post-office and received the news of the mitigation of that person's
sentence that he had spoken of in the morning, and again asked for a
permission to visit the prison.

The General, apparently displeased that business should be mentioned at
dinner, frowned and said nothing.

"Have a glass of vodka," he said, addressing the Englishman, who had
just come up to the table. The Englishman drank a glass, and said he had
been to see the cathedral and the factory, but would like to visit the
great transportation prison.

"Oh, that will just fit in," said the General to Nekhludoff. "You will
be able to go together. Give them a pass," he added, turning to his
aide-de-camp.

"When would you like to go?" Nekhludoff asked.

"I prefer visiting the prisons in the evening," the Englishman answered.
"All are indoors and there is no preparation; you find them all as they
are."

"Ah, he would like to see it in all its glory! Let him do so. I have
written about it and no attention has been paid to it. Let him find out
from foreign publications," the General said, and went up to the dinner
table, where the mistress of the house was showing the visitors their
places. Nekhludoff sat between his hostess and the Englishman. In front
of him sat the General's daughter and the ex-director of the Government
department in Petersburg. The conversation at dinner was carried on by
fits and starts, now it was India that the Englishman talked about, now
the Tonkin expedition that the General strongly disapproved of, now the
universal bribery and corruption in Siberia. All these topics did not
interest Nekhludoff much.

But after dinner, over their coffee, Nekhludoff and the Englishman began
a very interesting conversation about Gladstone, and Nekhludoff thought
he had said many clever things which were noticed by his interlocutor.
And Nekhludoff felt it more and more pleasant to be sipping his coffee
seated in an easy-chair among amiable, well-bred people. And when at
the Englishman's request the hostess went up to the piano with the
ex-director of the Government department, and they began to play in
well-practised style Beethoven's fifth symphony, Nekhludoff fell into
a mental state of perfect self-satisfaction to which he had long been
a stranger, as though he had only just found out what a good fellow he
was.

The grand piano was a splendid instrument, the symphony was well
performed. At least, so it seemed to Nekhludoff, who knew and liked that
symphony. Listening to the beautiful andante, he felt a tickling in his
nose, he was so touched by his many virtues.

Nekhludoff thanked his hostess for the enjoyment that he had been
deprived of for so long, and was about to say goodbye and go when the
daughter of the house came up to him with a determined look and said,
with a blush, "You asked about my children. Would you like to see them?"

"She thinks that everybody wants to see her children," said her mother,
smiling at her daughter's winning tactlessness. "The Prince is not at
all interested."

"On the contrary, I am very much interested," said Nekhludoff, touched
by this overflowing, happy mother-love. "Please let me see them."

"She's taking the Prince to see her babies," the General shouted,
laughing from the card-table, where he sat with his son-in-law, the mine
owner and the aide-de-camp. "Go, go, pay your tribute."

The young woman, visibly excited by the thought that judgment was about
to be passed on her children, went quickly towards the inner apartments,
followed by Nekhludoff. In the third, a lofty room, papered with white
and lit up by a shaded lamp, stood two small cots, and a nurse with a
white cape on her shoulders sat between the cots. She had a kindly, true
Siberian face, with its high cheek-bones.

The nurse rose and bowed. The mother stooped over the first cot, in
which a two-year-old little girl lay peacefully sleeping with her little
mouth open and her long, curly hair tumbled over the pillow.

"This is Katie," said the mother, straightening the white and blue
crochet coverlet, from under which a little white foot pushed itself
languidly out.

"Is she not pretty? She's only two years old, you know."

"Lovely."

"And this is Vasiuk, as 'grandpapa' calls him. Quite a different type. A
Siberian, is he not?"

"A splendid boy," said Nekhludoff, as he looked at the little fatty
lying asleep on his stomach.

"Yes," said the mother, with a smile full of meaning.

Nekhludoff recalled to his mind chains, shaved heads, fighting
debauchery, the dying Kryltzoff, Katusha and the whole of her past, and
he began to feel envious and to wish for what he saw here, which now
seemed to him pure and refined happiness.

After having repeatedly expressed his admiration of the children,
thereby at least partially satisfying their mother, who eagerly drank
in this praise, he followed her back to the drawing-room, where the
Englishman was waiting for him to go and visit the prison, as they had
arranged. Having taken leave of their hosts, the old and the young ones,
the Englishman and Nekhludoff went out into the porch of the General's
house.

The weather had changed. It was snowing, and the snow fell densely in
large flakes, and already covered the road, the roof and the trees in
the garden, the steps of the porch, the roof of the trap and the back of
the horse.

The Englishman had a trap of his own, and Nekhludoff, having told the
coachman to drive to the prison, called his isvostchik and got in with
the heavy sense of having to fulfil an unpleasant duty, and followed
the Englishman over the soft snow, through which the wheels turned with
difficulty.



CHAPTER XXV.

MASLOVA'S DECISION.

The dismal prison house, with its sentinel and lamp burning under the
gateway, produced an even more dismal impression, with its long row of
lighted windows, than it had done in the morning, in spite of the white
covering that now lay over everything--the porch, the roof and the
walls.

The imposing inspector came up to the gate and read the pass that had
been given to Nekhludoff and the Englishman by the light of the lamp,
shrugged his fine shoulders in surprise, but, in obedience to the order,
asked the visitors to follow him in. He led them through the courtyard
and then in at a door to the right and up a staircase into the office.
He offered them a seat and asked what he could do for them, and when
he heard that Nekhludoff would like to see Maslova at once, he sent a
jailer to fetch her. Then he prepared himself to answer the questions
which the Englishman began to put to him, Nekhludoff acting as
interpreter.

"How many persons is the prison built to hold?" the Englishman asked.
"How many are confined in it? How many men? How many women? Children?
How many sentenced to the mines? How many exiles? How many sick
persons?"

Nekhludoff translated the Englishman's and the inspector's words without
paying any attention to their meaning, and felt an awkwardness he had
not in the least expected at the thought of the impending interview.
When, in the midst of a sentence he was translating for the Englishman,
he heard the sound of approaching footsteps, and the office door opened,
and, as had happened many times before, a jailer came in, followed by
Katusha, and he saw her with a kerchief tied round her head, and in a
prison jacket a heavy sensation came over him. "I wish to live, I want
a family, children, I want a human life." These thoughts flashed through
his mind as she entered the room with rapid steps and blinking her eyes.

He rose and made a few steps to meet her, and her face appeared hard
and unpleasant to him. It was again as it had been at the time when
she reproached him. She flushed and turned pale, her fingers nervously
twisting a corner of her jacket. She looked up at him, then cast down
her eyes.

"You know that a mitigation has come?"

"Yes, the jailer told me."

"So that as soon as the original document arrives you may come away and
settle where you like. We shall consider--"

She interrupted him hurriedly. "What have I to consider? Where Valdemar
Simonson goes, there I shall follow." In spite of the excitement she
was in she raised her eyes to Nekhludoff's and pronounced these words
quickly and distinctly, as if she had prepared what she had to say.

"Indeed!"

"Well, Dmitri Ivanovitch, you see he wishes me to live with him--" and
she stopped, quite frightened, and corrected herself. "He wishes me to
be near him. What more can I desire? I must look upon it as happiness.
What else is there for me--"

"One of two things," thought he. "Either she loves Simonson and does not
in the least require the sacrifice I imagined I was bringing her, or she
still loves me and refuses me for my own sake, and is burning her ships
by uniting her fate with Simonson." And Nekhludoff felt ashamed and knew
that he was blushing.

"And you yourself, do you love him?" he asked.

"Loving or not loving, what does it matter? I have given up all that.
And then Valdemar Simonson is quite an exceptional man."

"Yes, of course," Nekhludoff began. "He is a splendid man, and I
think--"

But she again interrupted him, as if afraid that he might say too much
or that she should not say all. "No, Dmitri Ivanovitch, you must forgive
me if I am not doing what you wish," and she looked at him with those
unfathomable, squinting eyes of hers. "Yes, it evidently must be so. You
must live, too."

She said just what he had been telling himself a few moments before, but
he no longer thought so now and felt very differently. He was not only
ashamed, but felt sorry to lose all he was losing with her. "I did not
expect this," he said.

"Why should you live here and suffer? You have suffered enough."

"I have not suffered. It was good for me, and I should like to go on
serving you if I could."

"We do not want anything," she said, and looked at him.

"You have done so much for me as it is. If it had not been for you--"
She wished to say more, but her voice trembled.

"You certainly have no reason to thank me," Nekhludoff said.

"Where is the use of our reckoning? God will make up our accounts," she
said, and her black eyes began to glisten with the tears that filled
them.

"What a good woman you are," he said.

"I good?" she said through her tears, and a pathetic smile lit up her
face.

"Are you ready?" the Englishman asked.

"Directly," replied Nekhludoff and asked her about Kryltzoff.

She got over her emotion and quietly told him all she knew. Kryltzoff
was very weak and had been sent into the infirmary. Mary Pavlovna was
very anxious, and had asked to be allowed to go to the infirmary as a
nurse, but could not get the permission.

"Am I to go?" she asked, noticing that the Englishman was waiting.

"I will not say good-bye; I shall see you again," said Nekhludoff,
holding out his hand.

"Forgive me," she said so low that he could hardly hear her. Their eyes
met, and Nekhludoff knew by the strange look of her squinting eyes and
the pathetic smile with which she said not "Good-bye" but "Forgive
me," that of the two reasons that might have led to her resolution,
the second was the real one. She loved him, and thought that by uniting
herself to him she would be spoiling his life. By going with Simonson
she thought she would be setting Nekhludoff free, and felt glad that she
had done what she meant to do, and yet she suffered at parting from him.

She pressed his hand, turned quickly and left the room.

Nekhludoff was ready to go, but saw that the Englishman was noting
something down, and did not disturb him, but sat down on a wooden seat
by the wall, and suddenly a feeling of terrible weariness came over him.
It was not a sleepless night that had tired him, not the journey, not
the excitement, but he felt terribly tired of living. He leaned against
the back of the bench, shut his eyes and in a moment fell into a deep,
heavy sleep.

"Well, would you like to look round the cells now?" the inspector asked.

Nekhludoff looked up and was surprised to find himself where he was. The
Englishman had finished his notes and expressed a wish to see the cells.

Nekhludoff, tired and indifferent, followed him.



CHAPTER XXVI.

THE ENGLISH VISITOR.

When they had passed the anteroom and the sickening, stinking corridor,
the Englishman and Nekhludoff, accompanied by the inspector, entered the
first cell, where those sentenced to hard labour were confined. The beds
took up the middle of the cell and the prisoners were all in bed. There
were about 70 of them. When the visitors entered all the prisoners
jumped up and stood beside the beds, excepting two, a young man who was
in a state of high fever, and an old man who did nothing but groan.

The Englishman asked if the young man had long been ill. The inspector
said that he was taken ill in the morning, but that the old man had long
been suffering with pains in the stomach, but could not be removed, as
the infirmary had been overfilled for a long time. The Englishman shook
his head disapprovingly, said he would like to say a few words to these
people, asking Nekhludoff to interpret. It turned out that besides
studying the places of exile and the prisons of Siberia, the Englishman
had another object in view, that of preaching salvation through faith
and by the redemption.

"Tell them," he said, "that Christ died for them. If they believe in
this they shall be saved." While he spoke, all the prisoners stood
silent with their arms at their sides. "This book, tell them," he
continued, "says all about it. Can any of them read?"

There were more than 20 who could.

The Englishman took several bound Testaments out of a hang-bag, and many
strong hands with their hard, black nails stretched out from beneath the
coarse shirt-sleeves towards him. He gave away two Testaments in this
cell.

The same thing happened in the second cell. There was the same foul air,
the same icon hanging between the windows, the same tub to the left of
the door, and they were all lying side by side close to one another, and
jumped up in the same manner and stood stretched full length with their
arms by their sides, all but three, two of whom sat up and one remained
lying, and did not even look at the newcomers; these three were also
ill. The Englishman made the same speech and again gave away two books.

In the third room four were ill. When the Englishman asked why the sick
were not put all together into one cell, the inspector said that they
did not wish it themselves, that their diseases were not infectious, and
that the medical assistant watched them and attended to them.

"He has not set foot here for a fortnight," muttered a voice.

The inspector did not say anything and led the way to the next cell.
Again the door was unlocked, and all got up and stood silent. Again the
Englishman gave away Testaments. It was the same in the fifth and sixth
cells, in those to the right and those to the left.

From those sentenced to hard labour they went on to the exiles.

From the exiles to those evicted by the Commune and those who followed
of their own free will.

Everywhere men, cold, hungry, idle, infected, degraded, imprisoned, were
shown off like wild beasts.

The Englishman, having given away the appointed number of Testaments,
stopped giving any more, and made no speeches. The oppressing sight, and
especially the stifling atmosphere, quelled even his energy, and he went
from cell to cell, saying nothing but "All right" to the inspector's
remarks about what prisoners there were in each cell.

Nekhludoff followed as in a dream, unable either to refuse to go on or
to go away, and with the same feelings of weariness and hopelessness.



CHAPTER XXVII.

KRYLTZOFF AT REST.

In one of the exiles' cells Nekhludoff, to his surprise, recognised the
strange old man he had seen crossing the ferry that morning. This old
man was sitting on the floor by the beds, barefooted, with only a dirty
cinder-coloured shirt on, torn on one shoulder, and similar trousers.
He looked severely and enquiringly at the newcomers. His emaciated body,
visible through the holes of his shirt, looked miserably weak, but in
his face was even more concentrated seriousness and animation than when
Nekhludoff saw him crossing the ferry. As in all the other cells, so
here also the prisoners jumped up and stood erect when the official
entered, but the old man remained sitting. His eyes glittered and his
brows frowned with wrath.

"Get up," the inspector called out to him.

The old man did not rise and only smiled contemptuously.

"Thy servants are standing before thee. I am not thy servant. Thou
bearest the seal--" The old man pointed to the inspector's forehead.

"Wha-a-t?" said the inspector threateningly, and made a step towards
him.

"I know this man," Nekhludoff hastened to say; "what is he imprisoned
for?"

"The police have sent him here because he has no passport. We ask them
not to send such, but they will do it," said the inspector, casting an
angry side look at the old man.

"And so it seems thou, too, art one of Antichrist's army?" the old man
said to Nekhludoff.

"No, I am a visitor," said Nekhludoff.

"What, hast thou come to see how Antichrist tortures men? There, look,
he has locked them up in a cage, a whole army of them. Men should eat
bread in the sweat of their brow. And he has locked them up with no work
to do, and feeds them like swine, so that they should turn into beasts."

"What is he saying?" asked the Englishman.

Nekhludoff told him the old man was blaming the inspector for keeping
men imprisoned.

"Ask him how he thinks one should treat those who do not keep to the
laws," said the Englishman.

Nekhludoff translated the question. The old man laughed in a strange
manner, showing his teeth.

"The laws?" he repeated with contempt. "He first robbed everybody, took
all the earth, all the rights away from men, killed all those who were
against him, and then wrote laws, forbidding robbery and murder. He
should have written these laws before."

Nekhludoff translated. The Englishman smiled. "Well, anyhow, ask him how
one should treat thieves and murderers at present?"

Nekhludoff again translated his question.

"Tell him he should take the seal of Antichrist off himself," the
old man said, frowning severely; "then there will be no thieves and
murderers. Tell him so."

"He is crazy," said the Englishman, when Nekhludoff had translated the
old man's words, and, shrugging his shoulders, he left the cell.

"Do thy business and leave them alone. Every one for himself. God knows
whom to execute, whom to forgive, and we do not know," said the old man.
"Every man be his own chief, then the chiefs will not be wanted. Go,
go!" he added, angrily frowning and looking with glittering eyes at
Nekhludoff, who lingered in the cell. "Hast thou not looked on long
enough how the servants of Antichrist feed lice on men? Go, go!"

When Nekhludoff went out he saw the Englishman standing by the open door
of an empty cell with the inspector, asking what the cell was for. The
inspector explained that it was the mortuary.

"Oh," said the Englishman when Nekhludoff had translated, and expressed
the wish to go in.

The mortuary was an ordinary cell, not very large. A small lamp hung on
the wall and dimly lit up sacks and logs of wood that were piled up in
one corner, and four dead bodies lay on the bedshelves to the right. The
first body had a coarse linen shirt and trousers on; it was that of a
tall man with a small beard and half his head shaved. The body was quite
rigid; the bluish hands, that had evidently been folded on the breast,
had separated; the legs were also apart and the bare feet were sticking
out. Next to him lay a bare-footed old woman in a white petticoat, her
head, with its thin plait of hair, uncovered, with a little, pinched
yellow face and a sharp nose. Beyond her was another man with something
lilac on. This colour reminded Nekhludoff of something. He came nearer
and looked at the body. The small, pointed beard sticking upwards, the
firm, well-shaped nose, the high, white forehead, the thin, curly hair;
he recognised the familiar features and could hardly believe his eyes.
Yesterday he had seen this face, angry, excited, and full of suffering;
now it was quiet, motionless, and terribly beautiful. Yes, it was
Kryltzoff, or at any rate the trace that his material existence had left
behind. "Why had he suffered? Why had he lived? Does he now understand?"
Nekhludoff thought, and there seemed to be no answer, seemed to be
nothing but death, and he felt faint. Without taking leave of the
Englishman, Nekhludoff asked the inspector to lead him out into the
yard, and feeling the absolute necessity of being alone to think over
all that had happened that evening, he drove back to his hotel.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

A NEW LIFE DAWNS FOR NEKHLUDOFF.

Nekhludoff did not go to bed, but went up and down his room for a long
time. His business with Katusha was at an end. He was not wanted,
and this made him sad and ashamed. His other business was not only
unfinished, but troubled him more than ever and demanded his activity.
All this horrible evil that he had seen and learned to know lately, and
especially to-day in that awful prison, this evil, which had killed
that dear Kryltzoff, ruled and was triumphant, and he could foreseen
possibility of conquering or even knowing how to conquer it. Those
hundreds and thousands of degraded human beings locked up in the noisome
prisons by indifferent generals, procureurs, inspectors, rose up in
his imagination; he remembered the strange, free old man accusing the
officials, and therefore considered mad, and among the corpses the
beautiful, waxen face of Kryltzoff, who had died in anger. And again the
question as to whether he was mad or those who considered they were in
their right minds while they committed all these deeds stood before him
with renewed force and demanded an answer.

Tired of pacing up and down, tired of thinking, he sat down on the sofa
near the lamp and mechanically opened the Testament which the Englishman
had given him as a remembrance, and which he had thrown on the table
when he emptied his pockets on coming in.

"It is said one can find an answer to everything here," he thought, and
opened the Testament at random and began reading Matt. xviii. 1-4: "In
that hour came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who then is greatest in
the Kingdom of Heaven? And He called to Him a little child, and set him
in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye turn
and become as little children, ye shall in nowise enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child
the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven."

"Yes, yes, that is true," he said, remembering that he had known the
peace and joy of life only when he had humbled himself.

"And whosoever shall receive one such little child in My name receiveth
Me, but whoso shall cause one of these little ones to stumble, it is
more profitable for him that a great millstone should be hanged about
his neck and that he should be sunk in the depths of the sea." (Matt.
xviii. 5, 6.)

"What is this for, 'Whosoever shall receive?' Receive where? And what
does 'in my name' mean?" he asked, feeling that these words did not tell
him anything. "And why 'the millstone round his neck and the depths of
the sea?' No, that is not it: it is not clear," and he remembered how
more than once in his life he had taken to reading the Gospels, and how
want of clearness in these passages had repulsed him. He went on to
read the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth verses about the occasions of
stumbling, and that they must come, and about punishment by casting men
into hell fire, and some kind of angels who see the face of the Father
in Heaven. "What a pity that this is so incoherent," he thought, "yet
one feels that there is something good in it."

"For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost," he continued to
read.

"How think ye? If any man have a hundred sheep and one of them go
astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine and go into the mountains
and seek that which goeth astray? And if so be that he find it, verily
I say unto you, he rejoiceth over it more than over the ninety and nine
which have not gone astray.

"Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in Heaven that one
of these little ones should perish."

"Yes, it is not the will of the Father that they should perish, and
here they are perishing by hundreds and thousands. And there is no
possibility of saving them," he thought.

"Then came Peter and said to him, How oft shall my brother offend me and
I forgive him? Until seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto
thee until seven times, but until seventy times seven.

"Therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven likened unto a certain king which
made a reckoning with his servants. And when he had begun to reckon, one
was brought unto him which owed him ten thousand talents. But forasmuch
as he had not wherewith to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and
his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
The servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have
patience with me; I will pay thee all. And the lord of that servant,
being moved with compassion, released him and forgave him the debt. But
that servant went out, and found one of his fellow-servants which owed
him a hundred pence; and he laid hold on him and took him by the
throat, saying, Pay what thou owest. So his fellow-servant fell down and
besought him, saying, Have patience with me and I will pay thee. And
he would not, but went and cast him into prison till he should pay that
which was due. So when his fellow-servants saw what was done, they were
exceeding sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done.
Then his lord called him unto him and saith to him, Thou wicked servant,
I forgave thee all that debt because thou besought me; shouldst not thou
also have mercy on thy fellow-servant as I had mercy on thee?"

"And is this all?" Nekhludoff suddenly exclaimed aloud, and the inner
voice of the whole of his being said, "Yes, it is all." And it happened
to Nekhludoff, as it often happens to men who are living a spiritual
life. The thought that seemed strange at first and paradoxical or
even to be only a joke, being confirmed more and more often by life's
experience, suddenly appeared as the simplest, truest certainty. In this
way the idea that the only certain means of salvation from the
terrible evil from which men were suffering was that they should always
acknowledge themselves to be sinning against God, and therefore unable
to punish or correct others, because they were dear to Him. It became
clear to him that all the dreadful evil he had been witnessing in
prisons and jails and the quiet self-satisfaction of the perpetrators of
this evil were the consequences of men trying to do what was impossible;
trying to correct evil while being evil themselves; vicious men were
trying to correct other vicious men, and thought they could do it by
using mechanical means, and the only consequence of all this was that
the needs and the cupidity of some men induced them to take up this
so-called punishment and correction as a profession, and have themselves
become utterly corrupt, and go on unceasingly depraving those whom they
torment. Now he saw clearly what all the terrors he had seen came from,
and what ought to be done to put a stop to them. The answer he could
not find was the same that Christ gave to Peter. It was that we should
forgive always an infinite number of times because there are no men who
have not sinned themselves, and therefore none can punish or correct
others.

"But surely it cannot be so simple," thought Nekhludoff, and yet he saw
with certainty, strange as it had seemed at first, that it was not only
a theoretical but also a practical solution of the question. The usual
objection, "What is one to do with the evil doers? Surely not let them
go unpunished?" no longer confused him. This objection might have a
meaning if it were proved that punishment lessened crime, or improved
the criminal, but when the contrary was proved, and it was evident that
it was not in people's power to correct each other, the only reasonable
thing to do is to leave off doing the things which are not only useless,
but harmful, immoral and cruel.

For many centuries people who were considered criminals have been
tortured. Well, and have they ceased to exist? No; their numbers have
been increased not alone by the criminals corrupted by punishment but
also by those lawful criminals, the judges, procureurs, magistrates
and jailers, who judge and punish men. Nekhludoff now understood
that society and order in general exists not because of these lawful
criminals who judge and punish others, but because in spite of men being
thus depraved, they still pity and love one another.

In hopes of finding a confirmation of this thought in the Gospel,
Nekhludoff began reading it from the beginning. When he had read the
Sermon on the Mount, which had always touched him, he saw in it for the
first time to-day not beautiful abstract thoughts, setting forth for
the most part exaggerated and impossible demands, but simple, clear,
practical laws. If these laws were carried out in practice (and this
was quite possible) they would establish perfectly new and surprising
conditions of social life, in which the violence that filled Nekhludoff
with such indignation would cease of itself. Not only this, but the
greatest blessing that is obtainable to men, the Kingdom of Heaven on
Earth would be established. There were five of these laws.

The first (Matt. v. 21-26), that man should not only do no murder,
but not even be angry with his brother, should not consider any one
worthless: "Raca," and if he has quarrelled with any one he should make
it up with him before bringing his gift to God--i.e., before praying.

The second (Matt. v. 27-32), that man should not only not commit
adultery but should not even seek for enjoyment in a woman's beauty, and
if he has once come together with a woman he should never be faithless
to her.

The third (Matt. 33-37), that man should never bind himself by oath.

The fourth (Matt. 38-42), that man should not only not demand an eye for
an eye, but when struck on one cheek should hold out the other, should
forgive an offence and bear it humbly, and never refuse the service
others demand of him.

The fifth (Matt. 43-48), that man should not only not hate his enemy and
not fight him, but love him, help him, serve him.

Nekhludoff sat staring at the lamp and his heart stood still. Recalling
the monstrous confusion of the life we lead, he distinctly saw what that
life could be if men were brought up to obey these rules, and rapture
such as he had long not felt filled his soul, just as if after long days
of weariness and suffering he had suddenly found ease and freedom.

He did not sleep all night, and as it happens to many and many a man who
reads the Gospels he understood for the first time the full meaning of
the words read so often before but passed by unnoticed. He imbibed all
these necessary, important and joyful revelations as a sponge imbibes
water. And all he read seemed so familiar and seemed to confirm, to form
into a conception, what he had known long ago, but had never realised
and never quite believed. Now he realised and believed it, and not
only realised and believed that if men would obey these laws they would
obtain the highest blessing they can attain to, he also realised and
believed that the only duty of every man is to fulfil these laws; that
in this lies the only reasonable meaning of life, that every stepping
aside from these laws is a mistake which is immediately followed by
retribution. This flowed from the whole of the teaching, and was most
strongly and clearly illustrated in the parable of the vineyard.

The husbandman imagined that the vineyard in which they were sent to
work for their master was their own, that all that was in was made
for them, and that their business was to enjoy life in this vineyard,
forgetting the Master and killing all those who reminded them of his
existence. "Are we not doing the same," Nekhludoff thought, "when we
imagine ourselves to be masters of our lives, and that life is given us
for enjoyment? This evidently is an incongruity. We were sent here by
some one's will and for some reason. And we have concluded that we live
only for our own joy, and of course we feel unhappy as labourers do when
not fulfilling their Master's orders. The Master's will is expressed in
these commandments. If men will only fulfil these laws, the Kingdom of
Heaven will be established on earth, and men will receive the greatest
good that they can attain to.

"'Seek ye first the Kingdom and His righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you.'

"And so here it is, the business of my life. Scarcely have I finished
one and another has commenced." And a perfectly new life dawned that
night for Nekhludoff, not because he had entered into new conditions of
life, but because everything he did after that night had a new and quite
different significance than before. How this new period of his life will
end time alone will prove.



[Transcriber's Note: Corrected "Are we do not doing the same," to "Are
we not doing the same," in third last paragraph.]

========================================
