========================================

BABY MINE

By Margaret Mayo


To my Helper and Husband




CHAPTER I

Even in college Alfred Hardy was a young man of fixed ideas and high
ideals and proud of it.

His friend, Jimmy Jinks, had few ideas and no ideals, and was glad of
it, and before half of their first college term had passed, Jimmy
had ridded himself of all such worries as making up his own mind or
directing his own morals. Alfred did all these things so much better,
argued Jimmy, furthermore, Alfred LIKED to do them--Jimmy owed it to his
friend to give him that pleasure.

The fact that Jimmy was several years Alfred's senior and twice his
size, in no way altered his opinion of Alfred's judgment, and through
their entire college course they agreed as one man in all their
discussions--or rather--in all Alfred's discussions.

But it was not until the close of their senior year that Alfred favoured
Jimmy with his views on matrimony.

Sitting alone in a secluded corner of the campus waiting for Alfred to
solve a problem in higher mathematics, Jimmy now recalled fragments of
Alfred's last conversation.

"No twelve dollar shoes and forty dollar hats for MY wife," his young
friend had raged and he condemned to Jimmy the wicked extravagance of
his own younger sisters. "The woman who gets me must be a home-maker.
I'll take her to the theatre occasionally, and now and then we'll have a
few friends in for the evening; but the fireside must be her magnet, and
I'll be right by her side each night with my books and my day's worries.
She shall be taken into my confidence completely; and I'll take good
care to let her know, before I marry her, just what I expect in return."

"Alfred certainly has the right idea about marriage," mused Jimmy, as
the toe of his boot shoved the gravel up and down the path. "There's
just one impractical feature about it." He was conscious of a slight
feeling of heresy when he admitted even ONE flaw in his friend's scheme
of things. "Where is Alfred to find such a wife?"

Jimmy ran through the list of unattached girls to whom Alfred had thus
far presented him. It was no doubt due to his lack of imagination, but
try as he would, he could not see any one of these girls sitting by the
fireside listening to Alfred's "worries" for four or five nights each
week. He recalled all the married women whom he had been obliged,
through no fault of his own, to observe.

True, all of them did not boast twelve dollar shoes or forty dollar
hats--for the very simple reason that the incomes or the tempers of
their husbands did not permit of it. In any case, Jimmy did not remember
having seen them spend many evenings by the fireside. Where then was
Alfred to find the exceptional creature who was to help "systematise his
life"? Jimmy was not above hoping that Alfred's search might be a long
one. He was content for his friend to go jogging along by his side,
theorising about marriage and taking no chances with facts. Having come
to this conclusion, he began to feel uneasy at Alfred's non-appearance.
Alfred had promised to meet him on this spot at four-thirty, and Alfred
had decided ideas about punctuality. It was now five-thirty. Ought Jimmy
to look for him, or would he be wiser to remain comfortably seated and
to try to digest another of his friend's theories?

While Jimmy was trying to decide this vexed question, his ear caught the
sound of a girlish titter. Turning in embarrassment toward a secluded
path just behind him, whom did he see coming toward him but Alfred, with
what appeared to be a bunch of daffodils; but as Alfred drew nearer,
Jimmy began to perceive at his elbow a large flower-trimmed hat,
and--"horrors!"--beneath it, with a great deal of filmy white and yellow
floating from it, was a small pink and white face.

Barely had Jimmy reversed himself and rearranged his round, astonished
features, when Alfred, beaming and buoyant, brought the bundle of fluff
to a full stop before him.

"Sorry to be late, old chap," said Alfred. "I have brought my excuse
with me. I want you to know Miss Merton." Then turning to the small
creature, whose head peeped just above his elbow, Alfred explained
to her graciously that Jimmy Jinks was his very best friend, present
company excepted, of course, and added that she and Jimmy would no doubt
"see a great deal of each other in the future."

In his embarrassment, Jimmy's eyes went straight to the young lady's
shoes. It was possible that there might be more expensive shoes in this
world, but Jimmy had certainly never seen daintier.

"I hope we didn't disturb you," a small voice was chirping; and innocent
and conventional as the remark surely was, Jimmy was certain of an
undercurrent of mischief in it. He glanced up to protest, but two
baby-blue eyes fixed upon him in apparent wonderment, made him certain
that anything he could say would seem rude or ridiculous; so, as usual
when in a plight, he looked to Alfred for the answer.

Slapping Jimmy upon the shoulder in a condescending spirit, Alfred
suggested that they all sit down and have a chat.

"Oh, how nice," chirped the small person.

Jimmy felt an irresistible desire to run, but the picture of himself,
in his very stout person, streaking across the campus to the giggled
delight of Miss Fluff, soon brought him submissively to the seat,
where he sat twiddling his straw hat between his fingers, and glancing
uncertainly at Alfred, who was thoughtful enough to sit next him.

"Goodness, one could almost dance out here, couldn't one?" said the
small person, named Zoie, as her eyes roved over the bit of level green
before them.

"Would you like to try?" asked Alfred, apparently agreeable to her every
caprice.

"I'd love it!" cried Zoie. "Come along." She sprang up and held out her
hands to him.

"I'm going to be unselfish," answered Alfred, "and let Jimmy have that
fun."

By this time, Jimmy had been seized with an intuitive feeling that his
friend was in immediate danger.

"Was this the young woman who was to sit opposite the fireside five
nights a week and systematise Alfred's life?"

Jimmy stared at the intruder blankly. For answer, two small hands were
thrust out toward him and an impatient little voice was commanding him
to "Come, dance." He heard Alfred's laughter. He had no intention of
accommodating the small person in this or any other matter, yet, before
he realised quite how it had happened, he was two-stepping up and down
the grass to her piping little voice; nor did she release him until the
perspiration came rolling from his forehead; and, horror of horrors, his
one-time friend, Alfred, seemed to find this amusing, and laughed louder
and louder when Jimmy sank by his side exhausted.

When Jimmy was again able to think consecutively, he concluded that
considerable conversation must have taken place between Alfred and
the small one, while he was recovering his breath and re-adjusting his
wilted neckwear. He was now thrown into a fresh panic by an exclamation
from the excitable Zoie.

"You must both meet my friend, Aggie Darling," she was saying. "I am
bringing her with me to the hop to-night. She is not at all like me.
You will like her dreadfully." She smiled at Jimmy as though she were
conferring a great favour upon him.

"Like her dreadfully," commented Jimmy to himself. "It was just the kind
of expression one might expect from a mind in such disorder as hers.
'Systematise Alfred's life,' indeed!"

There was more nonsensical chatter, or so it seemed to Jimmy, then Zoie
and Alfred rose to go, and Jimmy was told by both of them that he was to
put in an appearance at the Fraternity "hop" that night.

"I'll see you at dinner," called Alfred gaily over his shoulder and
Jimmy was left to grapple with his first disappointment at his friend's
lack of discrimination.

"It's her fault," concluded Jimmy, as he lifted himself heavily off
the bench and started down the campus, resolved to console himself with
food.



CHAPTER II

Now Jimmy had no intention of going to the "hop." He had tried to
tell Alfred so a dozen times during dinner, but each time he had been
interrupted by one of Alfred's enthusiastic rhapsodies about Zoie.

"Most marvellous girl I have ever met!" exclaimed Alfred over his soup.
"So sensible; so modest. And did you see how simply she dresses?" he
asked. Jimmy recalled his first vision of billowy fluff; but before he
could answer, Alfred had continued excitedly:

"I'll tell you what first attracted me toward her." He looked at Jimmy
as though he expected some especial mark of gratitude for the favour
about to be bestowed; then he explained with a serious weighing of his
words, "It was her love of children. I had barely been introduced to
her when she turned her back upon me and gave her whole attention to
Professor Peck's little boy Willie. I said to myself, 'any girl of that
age who prefers children to young chaps of my age, is the girl for me.'"

"I see," assented Jimmy lamely. It was his first remark during dinner.

"After that, I no longer hesitated. You know, Jimmy, I have decision."

"Yes, I have noticed," admitted Jimmy, without conviction.

"In fifteen minutes," said Alfred, "I had learned all about the young
lady's antecedents."

Having finished his soup, and resisted a childish impulse to tip the
plate and scrape the bottom of it, Jimmy was now looking anxiously
toward the door through which the roast ought to come.

"I'll tell you all about her," volunteered Alfred. But Jimmy's eyes
were upon Alfred's plate; his friend had not yet devoured more than two
spoonfuls of soup; at that rate, argued Jimmy, the roast would reach
them about the time that he was usually trying to make his dessert last
as long as possible.

"She is here with her aunt," continued Alfred. "They are on a short
visit to Professor Peck."

Jimmy approved of the "short."

"That's good," he murmured, hopeful that a separation from the minx
might restore his friend's reason.

"And Jimmy," exclaimed Alfred with glistening eyes, "what do you think?"

Jimmy thought a great deal but he forebore to say it, and Alfred
continued very enthusiastically.

"She lives right in the same town with us."

"What!" ejaculated Jimmy, and he felt his appetite going.

"Within a stone's throw of my house--and yours," added Alfred
triumphantly. "Think of our never having met her before!"

"I am thinking," said Jimmy.

"Of course she has been away from home a great deal," went on Alfred.
"She's been in school in the East; but there were the summers."

"So there were," assented Jimmy, thinking of his hitherto narrow
escapes.

"Her father is old John Merton," continued Alfred. "Merton the
stationer--you know him, Jimmy. Unfortunately, he has a great deal of
money; but that hasn't spoilt her. Oh no! She is just as simple and
considerate in her behaviour as if she were some poor little struggling
school teacher. She is the one for me, Jimmy. There is no doubt about
it, and I'll tell you a secret."

Jimmy looked at him blankly.

"I am going to propose to her this very night."

"Good Lord!" groaned Jimmy, as if his friend had been suddenly struck
down in the flower of his youth.

"That's why you simply must come with me to the hop," continued Alfred.
"I want you to take care of her friend Aggie, and leave me alone with
Zoie as much as possible."

"Zoie!" sniffed Jimmy. The name to him was as flippant as its owner.

"True, strong name," commented Alfred. "So simple, so direct, so like
her. I'll have to leave you now," he said, rising. "I must send her some
flowers for the dance." He turned at the door. Suppose I add a few from
you for Aggie."

"What!" exploded Jimmy.

"Just by way of introduction," called Alfred gaily. "It's a good idea."

Before Jimmy could protest further, he found himself alone for the
second time that day. He ate his roast in gloomy silence. It seemed dry
and tasteless. Even his favourite desert of plum pudding failed to rouse
him from his dark meditations, and he rose from the table dejected and
forlorn.

A few hours later, when Alfred led Jimmy into the ballroom, the latter
was depressed, not only by his friend's impending danger, but he felt
an uneasy foreboding as to his own future. With his college course
practically finished and Alfred attaching himself to unforeseen
entities, Jimmy had come to the ball with a curious feeling of having
been left suspended in mid-air.

Before he could voice his misgivings to Alfred, the young men were
surrounded by a circle of chattering females. And then it was that Jimmy
found himself looking into a pair of level brown eyes, and felt himself
growing hot and cold by turns. When the little knot of youths and
maidens disentangled itself into pairs of dancers, it became clear to
Jimmy that he had been introduced to Aggie, and that he was expected to
dance with her.

As a matter of fact, Jimmy had danced with many girls; true, it was
usually when there was no other man left to "do duty"; but still he
had done it. Why then should he feel such distressing hesitation about
placing his arm around the waist of this brown-eyed Diana? Try as he
would he could not find words to break the silence that had fallen
between them. She was so imposing; so self-controlled. It really seemed
to Jimmy that she should be the one to ask him to dance. As a matter
of fact, that was just what happened; and after the dance she suggested
that they sit in the garden; and in the garden, with the moonlight
barely peeping through the friendly overhanging boughs of the trees,
Jimmy found Aggie capable of a courage that filled him with amazement;
and later that night, when he and Alfred exchanged confidences, it
became apparent to the latter that Aggie had volunteered to undertake
the responsibility of outlining Jimmy's entire future.

He was to follow his father's wishes and take up a business career in
Chicago at once; and as soon as all the relatives concerned on both
sides had been duly consulted, he and Aggie were to embark upon
matrimony.

"Good!" cried Alfred, when Jimmy had managed to stammer his shame-faced
confession. "We'll make it a double wedding. I can be ready to-morrow,
so far as I'm concerned." And then followed another rhapsody upon the
fitness of Zoie as the keeper of his future home and hearth, and the
mother of his future sons and daughters. In fact, it was far into the
night when the two friends separated--separated in more than one sense,
as they afterward learned.

While Alfred and Jimmy were saying "good-night" to each other, Zoie and
Aggie in one of the pretty chintz bedrooms of Professor Peck's modest
home, were still exchanging mutual confidences.

"The thing I like about Alfred," said Zoie, as she gazed at the tip of
her dainty satin slipper, and turned her head meditatively to one side,
"is his positive nature. I've never before met any one like him. Do you
know," she added with a sly twinkle in her eye, "it was all I could do
to keep from laughing at him. He's so awfully serious." She giggled to
herself at the recollection of him; then she leaned forward to Aggie,
her small hands clasped across her knees and her face dimpling with
mischief. "He hasn't the remotest idea what I'm like."

Aggie studied her young friend with unmistakable reproach. "I MADE
Jimmy know what I'M like," she said. "I told him ALL my ideas about
everything."

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed Zoie in shocked surprise.

"He's sure to find out sooner or later," said Aggie sagely. "I think
that's the only sensible way to begin."

"If I'd told Alfred all MY ideas about things," smiled Zoie, "there'd
have BEEN no beginning."

"What do you mean?" asked Aggie, with a troubled look.

"Well, take our meeting," explained Zoie. "Just as we were introduced,
that horrid little Willie Peck caught his heel in a flounce of my skirt.
I turned round to slap him, but I saw Alfred looking, so I patted his
ugly little red curls instead. And what do you think? Alfred told me
to-night that it was my devotion to Willie that first made him adore
me."

"And you didn't explain to him?" asked Aggie in amazement.

"And lose him before I'd got him!" exclaimed Zoie.

"It might be better than losing him AFTER you've got him," concluded the
elder girl.

"Oh, Aggie," pouted Zoie, "I think you are horrid. You're just trying to
spoil all the fun of my engagement."

"I am not," cried Aggie, and the next moment she was sitting on the arm
of Zoie's chair.

"Goose!" she said, "how dare you be cross with me?"

"I am NOT cross," declared Zoie, and after the customary apologies from
Aggie, confidence was fully restored on both sides and Zoie continued
gaily: "Don't you worry about Alfred and me," she said as she kicked off
her tiny slippers and hopped into bed. "Just you wait until I get him.
I'll manage him all right."

"I dare say," answered Aggie; not without misgivings, as she turned off
the light.



CHAPTER III

The double wedding of four of Chicago's "Younger Set" had been
adequately noticed in the papers, the conventional "honeymoon" journey
had been made, and Alfred Hardy and Jimmy Jinks had now settled down to
the routine of their respective business interests.

Having plunged into his office work with the same vigour with which
he had attacked higher mathematics, Alfred had quickly gained the
confidence of the elders of his firm, and they had already begun to give
way to him in many important decisions. In fact, he was now practically
at the head of his particular department with one office doing well in
Chicago and a second office promising well in Detroit.

As for Jimmy, he had naturally started his business career with fewer
pyrotechnics; but he was none the less contented. He seldom saw his old
friend Alfred now, but Aggie kept more or less in touch with Zoie;
and over the luncheon table the affairs of the two husbands were often
discussed by their wives. It was after one of these luncheons that Aggie
upset Jimmy's evening repose by the fireside by telling him that she was
a wee bit worried about Zoie and Alfred.

"Alfred is so unreasonable," said Aggie, "so peevish."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Jimmy shortly. "If he's peevish he has some good
reason. You can be sure of that."

"You needn't get cross with me, Jimmy," said Aggie in a hurt voice.

"Why should I be cross with you?" snapped Jimmy. "It isn't YOUR fault
if Alfred's made a fool of himself by marrying the last person on earth
whom he should have married."

"I think he was very lucky to get her," argued Aggie in defence of her
friend.

"Oh, you do, do you?" answered Jimmy in a very aggrieved tone.

"She is one of the prettiest girls in Chicago," said Aggie.

"You're pretty too," answered Jimmy, "but it doesn't make an idiot of
you."

"It's TIME you said something nice to me," purred Aggie; and her arm
stole fondly around Jimmy's large neck.

"I don't know why it is," said Jimmy, shaking his head dejectedly, "but
every time Zoie Hardy's name is mentioned in this house it seems to stir
up some sort of a row between you and me."

"That's because you're so prejudiced," answered Aggie with a touch of
irritation.

"There you go again," said Jimmy.

"I didn't mean it!" interposed Aggie contritely. "Oh, come now, Jimmy,"
she pleaded, "let's trundle off to bed and forget all about it." And
they did.

But the next day, as Jimmy was heading for the La Salle restaurant to
get his luncheon, who should call to him airily from a passing taxi
but Zoie. It was apparent that she wished him to wait until she could
alight; and in spite of his disinclination to do so, he not only waited
but followed the taxi to its stopping place and helped the young woman
to the pavement.

"Oh, you darling!" exclaimed Zoie, all of a flutter, and looking exactly
like an animated doll. "You've just saved my life." She called to the
taxi driver to "wait."

"Are you in trouble?" asked the guileless Jimmy.

"Yes, dreadful," answered Zoie, and she thrust a half-dozen small
parcels into Jimmy's arms. "I have to be at my dressmaker's in half an
hour; and I haven't had a bite of lunch. I'm miles and miles from home;
and I can't go into a restaurant and eat just by myself without being
stared at. Wasn't it lucky that I saw you when I did?"

There was really very little left for Jimmy to say, so he said it; and a
few minutes later they were seated tete-a-tete in one of Chicago's most
fashionable restaurants, and Zoie the unconscious flirt was looking up
at Jimmy with apparently adoring eyes, and suggesting all the eatables
which he particularly abominated.

No sooner had the unfortunate man acquiesced in one thing and
communicated Zoie's wish to the waiter, than the flighty young person
found something else on the menu that she considered more tempting to
her palate. Time and again the waiter had to be recalled and the order
had to be given over until Jimmy felt himself laying up a store of
nervous indigestion that would doubtless last him for days.

When the coveted food at last arrived, Zoie had become completely
engrossed in the headgear of one of her neighbours, and it was only
after Jimmy had been induced to make himself ridiculous by craning his
neck to see things of no possible interest to him that Zoie at last gave
her attention to her plate.

In obeyance of Jimmy's order the waiter managed to rush the lunch
through within three-quarters of an hour; but when Jimmy and Zoie at
length rose to go he was so insanely irritated, that he declared they
had been in the place for hours; demanded that the waiter hurry his
bill; and then finally departed in high dudgeon without leaving the
customary "tip" behind him.

But all this was without its effect upon Zoie, who, a few moments
later rode away in her taxi, waving gaily to Jimmy who was now late for
business and thoroughly at odds with himself and the world.

As a result of the time lost at luncheon Jimmy missed an appointment
that had to wait over until after office hours, and as a result of this
postponement, he missed Aggie, who went to a friend's house for dinner,
leaving word for him to follow. For the first time in his life, Jimmy
disobeyed Aggie's orders, and, later on, when he "trundled off to bed"
alone, he again recalled that it was Zoie Hardy who was always causing
hard feeling between him and his spouse.

Some hours later, when Aggie reached home with misgivings because Jimmy
had not joined her, she was surprised to find him sleeping as peacefully
as a cherub. "Poor dear," she murmured, "I hope he wasn't lonesome." And
she stole away to her room.

The next morning when Aggie did not appear at the breakfast table, Jimmy
rushed to her room in genuine alarm. It was now Aggie's turn to sleep
peacefully; and he stole dejectedly back to the dining-room and for the
first time since their marriage, he munched his cold toast and sipped
his coffee alone.

So thoroughly was his life now disorganised, and so low were his spirits
that he determined to walk to his office, relying upon the crisp morning
air to brace him for the day's encounters. By degrees, he regained his
good cheer and as usual when in rising spirits, his mind turned toward
Aggie. The second anniversary of their wedding was fast approaching--he
began to take notice of various window displays. By the time he had
reached his office, the weightiest decision on his mind lay in choosing
between a pearl pendant and a diamond bracelet for his now adorable
spouse.

But a more difficult problem awaited him. Before he was fairly in his
chair, the telephone bell rang violently. Never guessing who was at the
other end of the wire, he picked up his receiver and answered.

"What?" he exclaimed in surprise. "Mrs. Hardy?" Several times he opened
his lips to ask a question, but it was apparent that the person at the
other end of the line had a great deal to say and very little time to
say it, and it was only after repeated attempts that he managed to get
in a word or so edgewise.

"What's happened?" he asked.

"Say nothing to anybody," was Zoie's noncommittal answer, "not even to
Aggie. Jump in a taxi and come as quickly as you can."

"But what IS it?" persisted Jimmy. The dull sound of the wire told him
that the person at the other end had "hung up."

Jimmy gazed about the room in perplexity. What was he to do? Why on
earth should he leave his letters unanswered and his mail topsy turvy to
rush forth in the shank of the morning at the bidding of a young woman
whom he abhorred. Ridiculous! He would do no such thing. He lit a cigar
and began to open a few letters marked "private." For the life of him he
could not understand one word that he read. A worried look crossed his
face.

"Suppose Zoie were really in need of help, Aggie would certainly never
forgive him if he failed her." He rose and walked up and down.

"Why was he not to tell Aggie?"

"Where was Alfred?" He stopped abruptly. His over excited imagination
had suggested a horrible but no doubt accurate answer. "Wedded to an
abomination like Zoie, Alfred had sought the only escape possible to a
man of his honourable ideals--he had committed suicide."

Seizing his coat and hat Jimmy dashed through the outer office without
instructing his astonished staff as to when he might possibly return.

"Family troubles," said the secretary to himself as he appropriated one
of Jimmy's best cigars.



CHAPTER IV

LESS than half an hour later, Jimmy's taxi stopped in front of the
fashionable Sherwood Apartments where Zoie had elected to live.
Ascending toward the fifth floor he scanned the face of the elevator boy
expecting to find it particularly solemn because of the tragedy that
had doubtless taken place upstairs. He was on the point of sending out
a "feeler" about the matter, when he remembered Zoie's solemn injunction
to "say nothing to anybody." Perhaps it was even worse than suicide. He
dared let his imagination go no further. By the time he had put out his
hand to touch the electric button at Zoie's front door, his finger was
trembling so that he wondered whether he could hit the mark. The result
was a very faint note from the bell, but not so faint that it escaped
the ear of the anxious young wife, who had been pacing up and down the
floor of her charming living room for what seemed to her ages.

"Hurry, hurry, hurry!" Zoie cried through her tears to her neat little
maid servant, then reaching for her chatelaine, she daubed her small
nose and flushed cheeks with powder, after which she nodded to Mary to
open the door.

To Jimmy, the maid's pert "good-morning" seemed to be in very bad taste
and to properly reprove her he assumed a grave, dignified air out of
which he was promptly startled by Zoie's even more unseemly greeting.

"Hello, Jimmy!" she snapped. Her tone was certainly not that of a
heart-broken widow. "It's TIME you got here," she added with an injured
air.

Jimmy gazed at Zoie in astonishment. She was never what he would have
called a sympathetic woman, but really----!

"I came the moment you 'phoned me," he stammered; "what is it? What's
the matter?"

"It's awful," sniffled Zoie. And she tore up and down the room
regardless of the fact that Jimmy was still unseated.

"Awful what?" questioned Jimmy.

"Worst I've ever had," sobbed Zoie.

"Is anything wrong with Alfred?" ventured Jimmy. And he braced himself
for her answer.

"He's gone," sobbed Zoie.

"Gone!" echoed Jimmy, feeling sure that his worst fears were about to be
realised. "Gone where?"

"I don't know," sniffled Zoie, "I just 'phoned his office. He isn't
there."

"Oh, is that all?" answered Jimmy, with a sigh of relief. "Just another
little family tiff," he was unable to conceal a feeling of thankfulness.
"What's up?"

Zoie measured Jimmy with a dangerous gleam in her eyes. She resented the
patronising tone that he was adopting. How dare he be cheerful when
she was so unhappy--and because of him, too? She determined that his
self-complacency should be short-lived.

"Alfred has found out that I lied about the luncheon," she said,
weighing her words and their effect upon Jimmy.

"What luncheon?" stuttered Jimmy, feeling sure that Zoie had suddenly
marked him for her victim, but puzzled as to what form her persecution
was about to take.

"What luncheon?" repeated Zoie, trying apparently to conceal her disgust
at his dulness. "OUR luncheon yesterday."

"Why did you LIE," asked Jimmy, his eyes growing rounder and rounder
with wonder.

"I didn't know he KNEW," answered Zoie innocently.

"Knew what?" questioned Jimmy, more and more befogged.

"That I'd eaten with a man," concluded Zoie impatiently. Then she turned
her back upon Jimmy and again dashed up and down the room occupied with
her own thoughts.

It was certainly difficult to get much understanding out of Zoie's
disjointed observations, but Jimmy was doing his best. He followed her
restless movements about the room with his eyes, and then ventured a
timid comment.

"He couldn't object to your eating with me."

"Oh, couldn't he?" cried Zoie, and she turned upon him with a look
of contempt. "If there's anything that he DOESN'T object to," she
continued, "I haven't found it out yet." And with that she threw herself
in a large arm chair near the table, and left Jimmy to draw his own
conclusions.

Jimmy looked about the room as though expecting aid from some unseen
source; then his eyes sought the floor. Eventually they crept to the tip
of Zoie's tiny slipper as it beat a nervous tattoo on the rug. To save
his immortal soul, Jimmy could never help being hypnotised by Zoie's
small feet. He wondered now if they had been the reason of Alfred's
first downfall. He recalled with a sigh of relief that Aggie's feet were
large and reassuring. He also recalled an appropriate quotation: "The
path of virtue is not for women with small feet," it ran. "Yes, Aggie's
feet are undoubtedly large," he concluded. But all this was not solving
Zoie's immediate problem; and an impatient cough from her made him
realise that something was expected of him.

"Why did you lunch with me," he asked, with a touch of irritation, "if
you thought he wouldn't like it?"

"I was hungry," snapped Zoie.

"Oh," grunted Jimmy, and in spite of his dislike of the small creature
his vanity resented the bald assertion that she had not lunched with him
for his company's sake.

"I wouldn't have made an engagement with you of course," she continued,
with a frankness that vanquished any remaining conceit that Jimmy might
have brought with him. "I explained to you how it was at the time. It
was merely a case of convenience. You know that."

Jimmy was beginning to see it more and more in the light of an
inconvenience.

"If you hadn't been in front of that horrid old restaurant just when I
was passing," she continued, "all this would never have happened. But
you were there, and you asked me to come in and have a bite with you;
and I did, and there you are."

"Yes, there I am," assented Jimmy dismally. There was no doubt about
where he was now, but where was he going to end? That was the question.
"See here," he exclaimed with fast growing uneasiness, "I don't like
being mixed up in this sort of thing."

"Of course you'd think of yourself first," sneered Zoie. "That's just
like a man."

"Well, I don't want to get your husband down on me," argued Jimmy
evasively.

"Oh, I didn't give YOU away," sneered Zoie. "YOU needn't worry," and she
fixed her eyes upon him with a scornful expression that left no doubt as
to her opinion that he was a craven coward.

"But you said he'd 'found out,'" stammered Jimmy.

"He's found out that I ate with a MAN," answered Zoie, more and more
aggrieved at having to employ so much detail in the midst of her
distress. "He doesn't know it was you."

"But Zoie----" protested Jimmy.

She lifted a small hand, begging him to spare her further questions.
It was apparent that she must explain each aspect of their present
difficulty, with as much patience as though Jimmy were in reality only a
child. She sank into her chair and then proceeded, with a martyred air.

"You see it was like this," she said. "Alfred came into the restaurant
just after we had gone out and Henri, the waiter who has taken care
of him for years, told him that I had just been in to luncheon with a
gentleman."

Jimmy shifted about on the edge of his chair, ill at ease.

"Now if Alfred had only told me that in the first place," she continued,
"I'd have known what to say, but he didn't. Oh no, he was as sweet as
could be all through breakfast and last night too, and then just as he
was leaving this morning, I said something about luncheon and he said,
quite casually, 'Where did you have luncheon YESTERDAY, my dear?' So I
answered quite carelessly, 'I had none, my love.' Well, I wish you could
have seen him. He called me dreadful things. He says I'm the one thing
he can't endure."

"What's that?" questioned Jimmy, wondering how Alfred could confine
himself to any "ONE thing."

"He says I'm a liar!" shrieked Zoie tearfully.

"Well, aren't you?" asked Jimmy.

"Of course I am," declared Zoie; "but why shouldn't I be?" She looked
at Jimmy with such an air of self-approval that for the life of him he
could find no reason to offer. "You know how jealous Alfred is," she
continued. "He makes such a fuss about the slightest thing that I've got
out of the habit of EVER telling the TRUTH." She walked away from
Jimmy as though dismissing the entire matter; he shifted his position
uneasily; she turned to him again with mock sweetness. "I suppose YOU
told AGGIE all about it?" she said.

Jimmy's round eyes opened wide and his jaw dropped lower. "I--I--don't
believe I did," he stammered weakly. "I didn't think of it again."

"Thank heaven for that!" concluded Zoie with tightly pressed lips. Then
she knotted her small white brow in deep thought.

Jimmy regarded her with growing uneasiness. "What are you up to now?" he
asked.

"I don't know yet," mused Zoie, "BUT YOU'RE NOT GOING TO TELL
AGGIE--that's ONE SURE thing." And she pinned him down with her eyes.

"I certainly will tell her," asserted Jimmy, with a wag of his very
round head. "Aggie is just the one to get you out of this."

"She's just the one to make things worse," said Zoie decidedly. Then
seeing Jimmy's hurt look, she continued apologetically: "Aggie MEANS
all right, but she has an absolute mania for mixing up in other people's
troubles. And you know how THAT always ends."

"I never deceived my wife in all my life," declared Jimmy, with an air
of self approval that he was far from feeling.

"Now, Jimmy," protested Zoie impatiently, "you aren't going to have
moral hydrophobia just when I need your help!"

"I'm not going to lie to Aggie, if that's what you mean," said Jimmy,
endeavouring not to wriggle under Zoie's disapproving gaze.

"Then don't," answered Zoie sweetly.

Jimmy never feared Zoie more than when she APPEARED to agree with him.
He looked at her now with uneasy distrust.

"Tell her the truth," urged Zoie.

"I will," declared Jimmy with an emphatic nod.

"And I'LL DENY IT," concluded Zoie with an impudent toss of her head.

"What!" exclaimed Jimmy, and he felt himself getting onto his feet.

"I've already denied it to Alfred," continued Zoie. "I told him I'd
never been in that restaurant without him in all my life, that the
waiter had mistaken someone else for me." And again she turned her back
upon Jimmy.

"But don't you see," protested Jimmy, "this would all be so very much
simpler if you'd just own up to the truth now, before it's too late?"

"It IS too late," declared Zoie. "Alfred wouldn't believe me now,
whatever I told him. He says a woman who lies once lies all the time.
He'd think I'd been carrying on with you ALL ALONG."

"Good Lord!" groaned Jimmy as the full realisation of his predicament
thrust itself upon him.

"We don't DARE tell him now," continued Zoie, elated by the demoralised
state to which she was fast reducing him. "For Heaven's sake, don't make
it any worse," she concluded; "it's bad enough as it is."

"It certainly is," agreed Jimmy, and he sank dejectedly into his chair.

"If you DO tell him," threatened Zoie from the opposite side of the
table, "I'll say you ENTICED me into the place."

"What!" shrieked Jimmy and again he found himself on his feet.

"I will," insisted Zoie, "I give you fair warning."

He stared at her in absolute horror. "I don't believe you've any
conscience at all," he said.

"I haven't," she sniffled. "I'm too miserable." And throwing herself
into the nearest armchair she wept copiously at the thought of her many
injuries.

Uncertain whether to fly or to remain, Jimmy gazed at her gloomily.
"Well, I'M not laughing myself to death," he said.

For answer Zoie turned upon him vehemently. "I just wish I'd never laid
eyes on you, Jimmy," she cried.

Jimmy was wishing the very same thing.

"If I cared about you," she sobbed, "it wouldn't be so bad; but to
think of losing my Alfred for----" words failed her and she trailed off
weakly,--"for nothing!"

"Thanks," grunted Jimmy curtly. In spite of himself he was always miffed
by the uncomplimentary way in which she disposed of him.

His sarcasm was lost upon Zoie. Having finished all she had to say to
him, she was now apparently bent upon indulging herself in a first class
fit of hysterics.

There are critical moments in all of our lives when our future happiness
or woe hangs upon our own decision. Jimmy felt intuitively that he was
face to face with such a moment, but which way to turn? that was the
question. Being Jimmy, and soft-hearted in spite of his efforts to
conceal it, he naturally turned the wrong way, in other words, towards
Zoie.

"Oh, come now," he said awkwardly, as he crossed to the arm of her
chair. "This will soon blow over."

Zoie only sobbed the louder.

"This isn't the first time you and Alfred have called it all off," he
reminded her.

Again she sobbed.

Jimmy could never remember quite how it happened. But apparently he
must have patted Zoie on the shoulder. At any rate, something or other
loosened the flood-gates of her emotion, and before Jimmy could possibly
escape from her vicinity she had wheeled round in her chair, thrown her
arms about him, and buried her tear-stained face against his waist-coat.

"Good Lord!" exclaimed Jimmy, for the third time that morning, as he
glanced nervously toward the door; but Zoie was exclaiming in her own
way and sobbing louder and louder; furthermore she was compelling Jimmy
to listen to an exaggerated account of her many disappointments in her
unreasonable husband. Seeing no possibility of escape, without resorting
to physical violence, Jimmy stood his ground, wondering what to expect
next. He did not have long to wonder.



CHAPTER V

WITHIN an hour from the time Alfred had entered his office that morning
he was leaving it, in a taxi, with his faithful secretary at his
side, and his important papers in a bag at his feet. "Take me to the
Sherwood," he commanded the driver, "and be quick."

As they neared Alfred's house, Johnson could feel waves of increasing
anger circling around his perturbed young employer and later when they
alighted from the taxi it was with the greatest difficulty that he could
keep pace with him.

Unfortunately for Jimmy, the outer door of the Hardy apartment had been
left ajar, and thus it was that he was suddenly startled from Zoie's
unwelcome embraces by a sharp exclamation.

"So!" cried Alfred, and he brought his fist down with emphasis on the
centre table at Jimmy's back.

Wheeling about, Jimmy beheld his friend face to face with him. Alfred's
lips were pressed tightly together, his eyes flashing fire. It was
apparent that he desired an immediate explanation. Jimmy turned to the
place where Zoie had been, to ask for help; like the traitress that she
was, he now saw her flying through her bedroom door. Again he glanced at
Alfred, who was standing like a sentry, waiting for the pass-word that
should restore his confidence in his friend.

"I'm afraid I've disturbed you," sneered Alfred.

"Oh, no, not at all," answered Jimmy, affecting a careless indifference
that he did not feel and unconsciously shaking hands with the waiting
secretary.

Reminded of the secretary's presence in such a distinctly family scene,
Alfred turned to him with annoyance.

"Go into my study," he said. "I'll be with you presently. Here's your
list," he added and he thrust a long memorandum into the secretary's
hand. Johnson retired as unobtrusively as possible and the two old
friends were left alone. There was another embarrassed silence which
Jimmy, at least, seemed powerless to break.

"Well?" questioned Alfred in a threatening tone.

"Tolerably well," answered Jimmy in his most pleasant but slightly
nervous manner. Then followed another pause in which Alfred continued to
eye his old friend with grave suspicion.

"The fact is," stammered Jimmy, "I just came over to bring Aggie----" he
corrected himself--"that is, to bring Zoie a little message from Aggie."

"It seemed to be a SAD one," answered Alfred, with a sarcastic smile, as
he recalled the picture of Zoie weeping upon his friend's sleeve.

"Oh no--no!" answered Jimmy, with an elaborate attempt at carelessness.

"Do you generally play the messenger during business hours?" thundered
Alfred, becoming more and more enraged at Jimmy's petty evasions.

"Just SOMETIMES," answered Jimmy, persisting in his amiable manner.

"Jimmy," said Alfred, and there was a solemn warning in his voice,
"don't YOU lie to me!"

Jimmy started as though shot. The consciousness of his guilt was strong
upon him. "I beg your pardon," he gasped, for the want of anything more
intelligent to say.

"You don't do it well," continued Alfred, "and you and I are old
friends."

Jimmy's round eyes fixed themselves on the carpet.

"My wife has been telling you her troubles," surmised Alfred.

Jimmy tried to protest, but the lie would not come.

"Very well," continued Alfred, "I'll tell you something too. I've done
with her." He thrust his hands in his pockets and began to walk up and
down.

"What a turbulent household," thought Jimmy and then he set out in
pursuit of his friend. "I'm sorry you've had a misunderstanding," he
began.

"Misunderstanding!" shouted Alfred, turning upon him so sharply that he
nearly tripped him up, "we've never had anything else. There was never
anything else for us TO have. She's lied up hill and down dale from the
first time she clinched her baby fingers around my hand--" he imitated
Zoie's dainty manner--"and said 'pleased to meet you!' But I've caught
her with the goods this time," he shouted, "and I've just about got
HIM."

"Him!" echoed Jimmy weakly.

"The wife-stealer," exclaimed Alfred, and he clinched his fists in
anticipation of the justice he would one day mete out to the despicable
creature.

Now Jimmy had been called many things in his time, he realised that he
would doubtless be called many more things in the future, but never by
the wildest stretch of imagination, had he ever conceived of himself in
the role of "wife-stealer."

Mistaking Jimmy's look of amazement for one of incredulity, Alfred
endeavoured to convince him.

"Oh, YOU'LL meet a wife-stealer sooner or later," he assured him. "You
needn't look so horrified."

Jimmy only stared at him and he continued excitedly: "She's had the
effrontery--the bad taste--the idiocy to lunch in a public restaurant
with the blackguard."

The mere sound of the word made Jimmy shudder, but engrossed in his own
troubles Alfred continued without heeding him.

"Henri, the head-waiter, told me," explained Alfred, and Jimmy
remembered guiltily that he had been very bumptious with the fellow.
"You know the place," continued Alfred, "the LaSalle--a restaurant where
I am known--where she is known--where my best friends dine--where Henri
has looked after me for years. That shows how desperate she is. She
must be mad about the fool. She's lost all sense of decency." And again
Alfred paced the floor.

"Oh, I wouldn't go as far as that," stammered Jimmy.

"Oh, wouldn't you?" cried Alfred, again turning so abruptly that Jimmy
caught his breath. Each word of Jimmy's was apparently goading him on to
greater anger.

"Now don't get hasty," Jimmy almost pleaded. "The whole thing is no
doubt perfectly innocent. Talk to her gently. Win her confidence. Get
her to tell you the truth."

"The truth!" shouted Alfred in derision. "Zoie! The truth!"

Jimmy feared that his young friend might actually become violent. Alfred
bore down upon him like a maniac.

"The truth!" he repeated wildly. "She wouldn't know the truth if she saw
it under a microscope. She's the most unconscionable little liar that
ever lured a man to the altar."

Jimmy rolled his round eyes with feigned incredulity.

"I found it out before we'd been married a month," continued Alfred.
"She used to sit evenings facing the clock. I sat with my back to it.
I used to ask her the time. Invariably she would lie half an hour,
backward or forward, just for practice. THAT was the BEGINNING. Here,
listen to some of these," he added, as he drew half a dozen telegrams
from his inner pocket, and motioned Jimmy to sit at the opposite side of
the table.

Jimmy would have preferred to stand, but it was not a propitious time to
consult his own preferences. He allowed himself to be bullied into the
chair that Alfred suggested.

Throwing himself into the opposite chair, Alfred selected various
exhibits from his collection of messages. "I just brought these up from
the office," he said. "These are some of the telegrams that she sent me
each day last week while I was away. This is Monday's." And he proceeded
to read with a sneering imitation of Zoie's cloy sweetness.

"'Darling, so lonesome without you. Cried all day. When are you coming
home to your wee sad wifie? Love and kisses. Zoie.'" Tearing the
defenceless telegram into bits, Alfred threw it from him and waited for
his friend's verdict.

"She sent that over the wire?" gasped Jimmy.

"Oh, that's nothing," answered Alfred. "That's a mild one." And he
selected another from the same pocket. "Here, listen to this. This is
what she REALLY did. This is from my secretary the same night."

"You spied upon her!" asked Jimmy, feeling more and more convinced that
his own deceptions would certainly be run to earth.

"I HAVE to spy upon her," answered Alfred, "in self-defence. It's the
only way I can keep her from making me utterly ridiculous." And he
proceeded to read from the secretary's telegram. "'Shopped all
morning. Lunched at Martingale's with man and woman unknown to
me--Martingale's,'" he repeated with a sneer--"'Motored through Park
with Mrs. Wilmer until five.' Mrs. Wilmer," he exclaimed, "there's a
woman I've positively forbidden her to speak to."

Jimmy only shook his head and Alfred continued to read.

"'Had tea with Mr. and Mrs. Thompson and young Ardesley at the Park
View.' Ardesley is a young cub," explained Alfred, "who spends his time
running around with married women while their husbands are away trying
to make a living for them."

"Shocking!" was the extent of Jimmy's comment, and Alfred resumed
reading.

"'Dinner and theatre same party. Supper at Wellingford. Home two A. M.'"
He looked at Jimmy, expecting to hear Zoie bitterly condemned. Jimmy
only stared at him blankly. "That's pretty good," commented Alfred, "for
the woman who 'CRIED' all day, isn't it?"

Still Jimmy made no answer, and Alfred brought his fist down upon the
table impatiently. "Isn't it?" he repeated.

"She was a bit busy THAT day," admitted Jimmy uneasily.

"The truth!" cried Alfred again, as he rose and paced about excitedly.
"Getting the truth out of Zoie is like going to a fire in the night. You
think it's near, but you never get there. And when she begins by saying
that she's going to tell you the 'REAL truth'"--he threw up his hands in
despair--"well, then it's time to leave home."



CHAPTER VI

There was another pause, then Alfred drew in his breath and bore down
upon Jimmy with fresh vehemence. "The only time I get even a semblance
of truth out of Zoie," he cried, "is when I catch her red-handed."
Again he pounded the table and again Jimmy winced. "And even then," he
continued, "she colours it so with her affected innocence and her plea
about just wishing to be a 'good fellow,' that she almost makes me doubt
my own eyes. She is an artist," he declared with a touch of enforced
admiration. "There's no use talking; that woman is an artist."

"What are you going to do?" asked Jimmy, for the want of anything better
to say.

"I am going to leave her," declared Alfred emphatically. "I am going
away."

A faint hope lit Jimmy's round childlike face. With Alfred away there
would be no further investigation of the luncheon incident.

"That might be a good idea," he said.

"It's THE idea," said Alfred; "most of my business is in Detroit anyhow.
I'm going to make that my headquarters and stay there."

Jimmy was almost smiling.

"As for Zoie," continued Alfred, "she can stay right here and go as far
as she likes."

"Not with me," thought Jimmy.

"But," shrieked Alfred, with renewed emphasis, "I'm going to find out
who the FELLOW is. I'll have THAT satisfaction!"

Jimmy's spirits fell.

"Henri knows the head-waiter of every restaurant in this town," said
Alfred, "that is, every one where she'd be likely to go; and he says
he'd recognise the man she lunched with if he saw him again."

Jimmy's features became suddenly distorted.

"The minute she appears anywhere with anybody," explained Alfred, "Henri
will be notified by 'phone. He'll identify the man and then he'll wire
me."

"What good will that do?" asked Jimmy weakly.

"I'll take the first train home," declared Alfred.

"For what?" questioned Jimmy.

"To shoot him!" exclaimed Alfred.

"What!" gasped Jimmy, almost losing his footing.

Alfred mistook Jimmy's concern for anxiety on his behalf.

"Oh, I'll be acquitted," he declared. "Don't you worry. I'll get my tale
of woe before the jury."

"But I say," protested Jimmy, too uneasy to longer conceal his real
emotions, "why kill this one particular chap when there are so many
others?"

"He's the only one she's ever lunched with, ALONE," said Alfred. "She's
been giddy, but at least she's always been chaperoned, except with him.
He's the one all right; there's no doubt about it. He's the beginning of
the end."

"His own end, yes," assented Jimmy half to himself. "Now, see here, old
man," he argued, "I'd give that poor devil a chance to explain."

"Explain!" shouted Alfred so sharply that Jimmy quickly retreated. "I
wouldn't believe him now if he were one of the Twelve Apostles."

"That's tough," murmured Jimmy as he saw the last avenue of honourable
escape closed to him.

"Tough!" roared Alfred, thinking of himself. "Hah."

"On the Apostles, I mean," explained Jimmy nervously.

Again Alfred paced up and down the room, and again Jimmy tried to think
of some way to escape from his present difficulty. It was quite apparent
that his only hope lay not in his own candor, but in Alfred's absence.
"How long do you expect to be away?" he asked.

"Only until I hear from Henri," said Alfred.

"Henri?" repeated Jimmy and again a gleam of hope shone on his dull
features. He had heard that waiters were often to be bribed. "Nice
fellow, Henri," he ventured cautiously. "Gets a large salary, no doubt?"

"Does he!" exclaimed Alfred, with a certain pride of proprietorship. "No
tips could touch Henri, no indeed. He's not that sort of a person."

Again the hope faded from Jimmy's round face.

"I look upon Henri as my friend," continued Alfred enthusiastically. "He
speaks every language known to man. He's been in every country in the
world. HENRI UNDERSTANDS LIFE."

"LOTS of people UNDERSTAND LIFE," commented Jimmy dismally, "but SOME
people don't APPRECIATE it. They value it too lightly, to MY way of
thinking."

"Ah, but you have something to live for," argued Alfred.

"I have indeed; a great deal," agreed Jimmy, more and more abused at the
thought of what he was about to lose.

"Ah, that's different," exclaimed Alfred. "But what have _I_?"

Jimmy was in no frame of mind to consider his young friend's assets, he
was thinking of his own difficulties.

"I'm a laughing stock," shouted Alfred. "I know it. A 'good thing' who
gives his wife everything she asks for, while she is running around
with--with my best friend, for all I know."

"Oh, no, no," protested Jimmy nervously. "I wouldn't say that."

"Even if she weren't running around," continued Alfred excitedly,
without heeding his friend's interruption, "what have we to look forward
to? What have we to look backward to?"

Again Jimmy's face was a blank.

Alfred answered his own question by lifting his arms tragically toward
Heaven. "One eternal round of wrangles and rows! A childless home! Do
you think she wants babies?" he cried, wheeling about on Jimmy, and
daring him to answer in the affirmative. "Oh, no!" he sneered. "All she
wants is a good time."

"Well," mumbled Jimmy, "I can't see much in babies myself, fat, little,
red worms."

Alfred's breath went from him in astonishment

"Weren't YOU ever a fat, little, red worm?" he hissed. "Wasn't _I_
ever a little, fat, red----" he paused in confusion, as his ear became
puzzled by the proper sequence of his adjectives, "a fat, red, little
worm," he stammered; "and see what we are now!" He thrust out his chest
and strutted about in great pride.

"Big red worms," admitted Jimmy gloomily.

But Alfred did not hear him. "You and I ought to have SONS on the way to
what we are," he declared, "and better."

"Oh yes, better," agreed Jimmy, thinking of his present plight. "Much
better."

"But HAVE we?" demanded Alfred.

Jimmy glanced about the room, as though expecting an answering
demonstration from the ceiling.

"Have YOU?" persisted Alfred.

Jimmy shook his head solemnly.

"Have _I_?" asked the irate husband.

Out of sheer absent mindedness Jimmy shrugged his shoulders.

As usual Alfred answered his own question. "Oh, no!" he raged. "YOU have
a wife who spends her time and money gadding about with----"

Jimmy's face showed a new alarm.

"--my wife," concluded Alfred.

Jimmy breathed a sigh of relief.

"I have a wife," said Alfred, "who spends her time and my money gadding
around with God knows whom. But I'll catch him!" he cried with new fury.
"Here," he said, pulling a roll of bills from his pocket. "I'll bet you
I'll catch him. How much do you want to bet?"

Undesirous of offering any added inducements toward his own capture,
Jimmy backed away both literally and figuratively from Alfred's
proposition.

"What's the use of getting so excited?" he asked.

Mistaking Jimmy's unwillingness to bet for a disinclination to take
advantage of a friend's reckless mood, Alfred resented the implied
insult to his astuteness.

"You think I can't catch him?" he exclaimed. "Let's see the colour of
your money," he demanded.

But before Jimmy could comply, an unexpected voice broke into the
argument and brought them both round with a start.



CHAPTER VII

"Good Heavens," exclaimed Aggie, who had entered the room while Alfred
was talking his loudest. "What a racket!"

Her eyes fell upon Jimmy who was teetering about uneasily just behind
Alfred. She stared at him in amazement. Was it possible that Jimmy, the
methodical, had left his office at this hour of the morning, and for
what?

Avoiding the question in Aggie's eyes, Jimmy pretended to be searching
for his pocket handkerchief--but always with the vision of Aggie in her
new Fall gown and her large "picture" hat at his elbow. Never before had
she appeared so beautiful to him, so desirable--suppose he should lose
her? Life spread before him as a dreary waste. He tried to look up at
her; he could not. He feared she would read his guilt in his eyes. "What
guilt?" he asked himself. There was no longer any denying the fact--a
secret had sprung up between them.

Annoyed at receiving no greeting, Aggie continued in a rather hurt
voice:

"Aren't you two going to speak to me?"

Alfred swallowed hard in an effort to regain his composure.

"Good-morning," he said curtly.

Fully convinced of a disagreement between the two old friends, Aggie
addressed herself in a reproachful tone to Jimmy.

"My dear," she said, "what are you doing here this time of day?"

Jimmy felt Alfred's steely eyes upon him. "Why!" he stammered. "Why, I
just came over to--bring your message."

"My message?" repeated Aggie in perplexity. "What message?"

Alfred's eyebrows drew themselves sharply together.

Jimmy had told so many lies this morning that another more or less could
not matter; moreover, this was not a time to hesitate.

"Why, the message you sent to Zoie," he answered boldly.

"But I sent no message to Zoie," said Aggie.

"What!" thundered Alfred, so loud that Aggie's fingers involuntarily
went to her ears. She was more and more puzzled by the odd behaviour of
the two.

"I mean yesterday's message," corrected Jimmy. And he assumed an
aggrieved air toward Aggie.

"You villain," exclaimed Aggie. "I told you to 'phone her yesterday
morning from the office."

"Yes, I know," agreed Jimmy placidly, "but I forgot it and I just came
over to explain." Alfred's fixed stare was relaxing and at last Jimmy
could breathe.

"Oh," murmured Aggie, with a wise little elevation of her eye-brows,
"then that's why Zoie didn't keep her luncheon appointment with me
yesterday."

Jimmy felt that if this were to go on much longer, he would utter one
wild shriek and give himself up for lost; but at present he merely
swallowed with an effort, and awaited developments.

It was now Alfred's turn to become excited.

"Oh, IS it!" he cried with hysterical laughter.

Aggie regarded him with astonishment. Was this her usually
self-controlled friend?

"Oh, no!" sneered Alfred with unmistakable pity for her credulity.
"That's not why my wife didn't eat luncheon with you. She may TELL you
that's why. She undoubtedly will; but it's NOT why. Oh, no!" and running
his hands through his hair, Alfred tore up and down the room.

"What do you mean by that?" Aggie asked in amazement.

"Your dear husband Jimmy will doubtless explain," answered Alfred with
a slur on the "dear." Then he turned toward the door of his study. "Pray
excuse me--I'M TOO BUSY," and with that he strode out of the room and
banged the study door behind him.

"Goodness gracious!" gasped Aggie. She looked after Alfred, then at
Jimmy. She was the picture of consternation. "What's the matter with
him?" she asked.

"Just another little family tiff," answered Jimmy, trying to assume a
nonchalant manner.

"Not about YOU!" gasped Aggie.

"Me!" cried Jimmy, his equilibrium again upset. "Certainly not!" he
declared. "What an idea!"

"Yes, wasn't it?" answered Aggie. "That just shows how silly one can
be. I almost thought Alfred was going to say that Zoie had lunched with
you."

"Me?" again echoed Jimmy, and he wondered if everybody in the world had
conspired to make him the target of their attention. He caught Aggie's
eye and tried to laugh carelessly. "That would have been funny, wouldn't
it?" he said.

"Yes, wouldn't it," repeated Aggie, and he thought he detected a slight
uneasiness in her voice.

"Speaking of lunch," added Jimmy quickly, "I think, dearie, that I'll
come home for lunch in the future."

"What?" exclaimed Aggie in great amazement.

"Those downtown places upset my digestion," explained Jimmy quickly.

"Isn't this very SUDDEN," she asked, and again Jimmy fancied that there
was a shade of suspicion in her tone.

His face assumed a martyred expression. "Of course, dear," he said, "if
you insist upon my eating downtown, I'll do it; but I thought you'd be
glad to have me at home."

Aggie turned to him with real concern. "Why, Jimmy," she said, "what's
the matter with you?" She took a step toward him and anxiously studied
his face. "I never heard you talk like that before. I don't think you're
well."

"That's just what I'm telling you," insisted Jimmy vehemently, excited
beyond all reason by receiving even this small bit of sympathy. "I'm
ill," he declared. No sooner had he made the declaration than he began
to believe in it. His doleful countenance increased Aggie's alarm.

"My angel-face," she purred, and she took his chubby cheeks in her
hands and looked down at him fondly. "You know I ALWAYS want you to come
home." She stooped and kissed Jimmy's pouting lips. He held up his face
for more. She smoothed the hair from his worried brow and endeavoured
to cheer him. "I'll run right home now," she said, "and tell cook to get
something nice and tempting for you! I can see Zoie later."

"It doesn't matter," murmured Jimmy, as he followed her toward the door
with a doleful shake of his head. "I don't suppose I shall ever enjoy my
luncheon again--as long as I live."

"Nonsense," cried Aggie, "come along."



CHAPTER VIII

WHEN Alfred returned to the living room he was followed by his
secretary, who carried two well-filled satchels. His temper was not
improved by the discovery that he had left certain important papers
at his office. Dispatching his man to get them and to meet him at the
station with them, he collected a few remaining letters from the drawer
of the writing table, then uneasy at remaining longer under the same
roof with Zoie, he picked up his hat, and started toward the hallway.
For the first time his eye was attracted by a thick layer of dust and
lint on his coat sleeve. Worse still, there was a smudge on his cuff.
If there was one thing more than another that Alfred detested it was
untidiness. Putting his hat down with a bang, he tried to flick the dust
from his sleeve with his pocket handkerchief; finding this impossible,
he removed his coat and began to shake it violently.

It was at this particular moment that Zoie's small face appeared
cautiously from behind the frame of the bedroom door. She was quick to
perceive Alfred's plight. Disappearing from view for an instant, she
soon reappeared with Alfred's favourite clothes-brush. She tiptoed into
the room.

Barely had Alfred drawn his coat on his shoulders, when he was startled
by a quick little flutter of the brush on his sleeve. He turned
in surprise and beheld Zoie, who looked up at him as penitent and
irresistible as a newly-punished child.

"Oh," snarled Alfred, and he glared at her as though he would enjoy
strangling her on the spot.

"Alfred," pouted Zoie, and he knew she was going to add her customary
appeal of "Let's make up." But Alfred was in no mood for nonsense. He
thrust his hands in his pockets and made straight for the outer doorway.

Smiling to herself as she saw him leaving without his hat, Zoie slipped
it quickly beneath a flounce of her skirt. No sooner had Alfred reached
the sill of the door than his hand went involuntarily to his head; he
turned to the table where he had left his hat. His face wore a puzzled
look. He glanced beneath the table, in the chair, behind the table,
across the piano, and then he began circling the room with pent up rage.
He dashed into his study and out again, he threw the chairs about with
increasing irritation, then giving up the search, he started hatless
toward the hallway. It was then that a soft babyish voice reached his
ear.

"Have you lost something, dear?" cooed Zoie.

Alfred hesitated. It was difficult to lower his dignity by answering
her, but he needed his headgear. "I want my hat," he admitted shortly.

"Your hat?" repeated Zoie innocently and she glanced around the room
with mild interest. "Maybe Mary took it."

"Mary!" cried Alfred, and thinking the mystery solved, he dashed toward
the inner hallway.

"Let ME get it, dear," pleaded Zoie, and she laid a small detaining hand
upon his arm as he passed.

"Stop it!" commanded Alfred hotly, and he shook the small hand from his
sleeve as though it had been something poisonous.

"But Allie," protested Zoie, pretending to be shocked and grieved.

"Don't you 'but Allie' me," cried Alfred, turning upon her sharply. "All
I want is my hat," and again he started in search of Mary.

"But--but--but Allie," stammered Zoie, as she followed him.

"But--but--but," repeated Alfred, turning on her in a fury. "You've
butted me out of everything that I wanted all my life, but you're not
going to do it again."

"You see, you said it yourself," laughed Zoie.

"Said WHAT," roared Alfred.

"But," tittered Zoie.

The remnants of Alfred's self-control were forsaking him. He clinched
his fists hard in a final effort toward restraint. "You'd just as well
stop all these baby tricks," he threatened between his teeth, "they're
not going to work. THIS time my mind is made up."

"Then why are you afraid to talk to me?" asked Zoie sweetly.

"Who said I was afraid?" demanded Alfred hotly.

"You ACT like it," declared Zoie, with some truth on her side. "You
don't want----" she got no further.

"All I want," interrupted Alfred, "is to get out of this house once and
for all and to stay out of it." And again he started in pursuit of his
hat.

"Why, Allie," she gazed at him with deep reproach. "You liked this place
so much when we first came here."

Again Alfred picked at the lint on his coat sleeve. Edging her way
toward him cautiously she ventured to touch his sleeve with the brush.

"I'll attend to that myself," he said curtly, and he sank into the
nearest chair to tie a refractory shoe lace.

"Let me brush you, dear," pleaded Zoie. "I don't wish you to start out
in the world looking unbrushed," she pouted. Then with a sly emphasis
she added teasingly, "The OTHER women might not admire you that way."

Alfred broke his shoe string then and there. While he stooped to tie a
knot in it, Zoie managed to perch on the arm of his chair.

"You know, Allie," she continued coaxingly, "no one could ever love you
as I do."

Again Alfred broke his shoe lace.

"Oh, Allie!" she exclaimed with a little ripple of childish laughter,
"do you remember how absurdly poor we were when we were first married,
and how you refused to take any help from your family? And do you
remember that silly old pair of black trousers that used to get so thin
on the knees and how I used to put shoe-blacking underneath so the white
wouldn't show through?" By this time her arm managed to get around his
neck.

"Stop it!" shrieked Alfred as though mortal man could endure no more.
"You've used those trousers to settle every crisis in our lives."

Zoie gazed at him without daring to breathe; even she was aghast at his
fury, but only temporarily. She recovered herself and continued sweetly:

"If everything is SETTLED," she argued, "where's the harm in talking?"

"We've DONE with talking," declared Alfred. "From this on, I act."
And determined not to be cheated out of this final decision, he again
started for the hall door.

"Oh, Allie!" cried Zoie in a tone of sharp alarm.

In spite of himself Alfred turned to learn the cause of her anxiety.

"You haven't got your overshoes on," she said.

Speechless with rage, Alfred continued on his way, but Zoie moved before
him swiftly. "I'll get them for you, dear," she volunteered graciously.

"Stop!" thundered Alfred. They were now face to face.

"I wish you wouldn't roar like that," pouted Zoie, and the pink tips of
her fingers were thrust tight against her ears.

Alfred drew in his breath and endeavoured for the last time to repress
his indignation. "Either you can't, or you won't understand that it is
extremely unpleasant for me to even talk to you--much less to receive
your attentions."

"Very likely," answered Zoie, unperturbed. "But so long as I am your
lawful wedded wife----" she emphasised the "lawful"--"I shan't let any
harm come to you, if _I_ can help it." She lifted her eyes to heaven
bidding it to bear witness to her martyrdom and looking for all the
world like a stained glass saint.

"Oh, no!" shouted Alfred, almost hysterical at his apparent failure to
make himself understood. "You wouldn't let any harm come to me. Oh, no.
You've only made me the greatest joke in Chicago," he shouted. "You've
only made me such a laughing stock that I have to leave it. That's
all--that's all!"

"Leave Chicago!" exclaimed Zoie incredulously. Then regaining her
self-composure, she edged her way close to him and looked up into his
eyes in baby-like wonderment. "Why, Allie, where are we going?" Her
small arm crept up toward his shoulder. Alfred pushed it from him
rudely.

"WE are not going," he asserted in a firm, measured voice. "_I_ am
going. Where's my hat?" And again he started in search of his absent
headgear.

"Oh, Allie!" she exclaimed, and this time there was genuine alarm in her
voice, "you wouldn't leave me?"

"Wouldn't I, though?" sneered Alfred. Before he knew it, Zoie's arms
were about him--she was pleading desperately.

"Now see here, Allie, you may call me all the names you like," she cried
with great self-abasement, "but you shan't--you SHAN'T go away from
Chicago."

"Oh, indeed?" answered Alfred as he shook himself free of her. "I
suppose you'd like me to go on with this cat and dog existence. You'd
like me to stay right here and pay the bills and take care of you, while
you flirt with every Tom, Dick and Harry in town."

"It's only your horrid disposition that makes you talk like that,"
whimpered Zoie. "You know very well that I never cared for anybody but
you."

"Until you GOT me, yes," assented Alfred, "and NOW you care for
everybody BUT me." She was about to object, but he continued quickly.
"Where you MEET your gentlemen friends is beyond me. _I_ don't introduce
them to you."

"I should say not," agreed Zoie, and there was a touch of vindictiveness
in her voice. "The only male creature that you ever introduced to me was
the family dog."

"I introduce every man who's fit to meet you," declared Alfred with an
air of great pride.

"That doesn't speak very well for your acquaintances," snipped Zoie.
Even HER temper was beginning to assert itself.

"I won't bicker like this," declared Alfred.

"That's what you always say, when you can't think of an answer,"
retorted Zoie.

"You mean when I'm tired of answering your nonsense!" thundered Alfred.



CHAPTER IX

Realising that she was rapidly losing ground by exercising her advantage
over Alfred in the matter of quick retort, Zoie, with her customary
cunning, veered round to a more conciliatory tone. "Well," she cooed,
"suppose I DID eat lunch with a man?"

"Ah!" shrieked Alfred, as though he had at last run his victim to earth.

She retreated with her fingers crossed. "I only said suppose," she
reminded him quickly. Then she continued in a tone meant to draw from
him his heart's most secret confidence. "Didn't you ever eat lunch with
any woman but me?"

"Never!" answered Alfred firmly.

There was an unmistakable expression of pleasure on Zoie's small face,
but she forced back the smile that was trying to creep round her lips,
and sidled toward Alfred, with eyes properly downcast. "Then I'm very
sorry I did it," she said solemnly, "and I'll never do it again."

"So!" cried Alfred with renewed indignation. "You admit it?"

"Just to please you, dear," explained Zoie sweetly, as though she were
doing him the greatest possible favour.

"To please me?" gasped Alfred. "Do you suppose it pleases me to know
that you are carrying on the moment my back is turned, making a fool of
me to my friends?"

"Your friends?" cried Zoie with a sneer. This time it was her turn to be
angry. "So! It's your FRIENDS that are worrying you!" In her excitement
she tossed Alfred's now damaged hat into the chair just behind her. He
was far too overwrought to see it. "_I_ haven't done you any harm," she
continued wildly. "It's only what you think your friends think."

"You haven't done me any harm?" repeated Alfred, in her same tragic key,
"Oh no! Oh no! You've only cheated me out of everything I expected to
get out of life! That's all!"

Zoie came to a full stop and waited for him to enumerate the various
treasures that he had lost by marrying her. He did so.

"Before we were married," he continued, "you pretended to adore
children. You started your humbugging the first day I met you. I refer
to little Willie Peck."

A hysterical giggle very nearly betrayed her. Alfred continued:

"I was fool enough to let you know that I admire women who like
children. From that day until the hour that I led you to the altar,
you'd fondle the ugliest little brats that we met in the street, but the
moment you GOT me----"

"Alfred!" gasped Zoie. This was really going too far.

"Yes, I repeat it!" shouted Alfred, pounding the table with his fist for
emphasis. "The moment you GOT me, you declared that all children were
horrid little insects, and that someone ought to sprinkle bug-powder on
them."

"Oh!" protested Zoie, shocked less by Alfred's interpretation of her
sentiments, than by the vulgarity with which he expressed them.

"On another occasion," declared Alfred, now carried away by the recital
of his long pent up wrongs, "you told me that all babies should be put
in cages, shipped West, and kept in pens until they got to be of an
interesting age. 'Interesting age!'" he repeated with a sneer, "meaning
old enough to take YOU out to luncheon, I suppose."

"I never said any such thing," objected Zoie.

"Well, that was the idea," insisted Alfred. "I haven't your glib way of
expressing myself."

"You manage to express yourself very well," retorted Zoie. "When
you have anything DISAGREEABLE to say. As for babies," she continued
tentatively, "I think they are all very well in their PLACE, but they
were NEVER meant for an APARTMENT."

"I offered you a house in the country," shouted Alfred.

"The country!" echoed Zoie. "How could I live in the country, with
people being murdered in their beds every night? Read the papers."

"Always an excuse," sighed Alfred resignedly. "There always HAS been
and there always would be if I'd stay to listen. Well, for once," he
declared, "I'm glad that we have no children. If we had, I might feel
some obligation to keep up this farce of a marriage. As it is," he
continued, "YOU are free and _I_ am free." And with a courtly wave of
his arm, he dismissed Zoie and the entire subject, and again he started
in pursuit of Mary and his hat.

"If it's your freedom you wish," pouted Zoie with an abused air, "you
might have said so in the first place."

Alfred stopped in sheer amazement at the cleverness with which the
little minx turned his every statement against him.

"It's not very manly of you," she continued, "to abuse me just because
you've found someone whom you like better."

"That's not true," protested Alfred hotly, "and you know it's not true."
Little did he suspect the trap into which she was leading him.

"Then you DON'T love anybody more than you do me?" she cried eagerly,
and she gazed up at him with adoring eyes.

"I didn't say any such thing," hedged Alfred.

"Then you DO," she accused him.

"I DON'T," he declared in self defence.

With a cry of joy, she sprang into his arms, clasped her fingers tightly
behind his neck, and rained impulsive kisses upon his unsuspecting face.

For an instant, Alfred looked down at Zoie, undecided whether to
strangle her or to return her embraces. As usual, his self-respect won
the day for him and, with a determined effort, he lifted her high in the
air, so that she lost her tenacious hold of him, and sat her down with
a thud in the very same chair in which she had lately dropped his hat.
Having acted with this admirable resolution, he strode majestically
toward the inner hall, but before he could reach it, Zoie was again
on her feet, in a last vain effort to conciliate him. Turning, Alfred
caught sight of his poor battered hat. This was the final spur to
action. Snatching it up with one hand, and throwing his latchkey on the
table with the other, he made determinedly for the outer door.

Screaming hysterically, Zoie caught him just as he reached the threshold
and threw the whole weight of her body upon him.

"Alfred," she pleaded, "if you REALLY love me, you CAN'T leave me like
this!" Her emotion was now genuine. He looked down at her gravely--then
into the future.

"There are other things more important than what YOU call 'love,'" he
said, very solemnly.

"There is such a thing as a soul, if you only knew it. And you have hurt
mine through and through."

"But how, Alfred, how?" asked the small person, and there was a frown of
genuine perplexity on her tiny puckered brow. "What have I REALLY DONE,"
She stroked his hand fondly; her baby eyes searched his face.

"It isn't so much what people DO to us that counts," answered Alfred in
a proud hurt voice. "It's how much they DISAPPOINT us in what they do. I
expected better of YOU," he said sadly.

"I'll DO better," coaxed Zoie, "if you'll only give me a chance."

He was half inclined to believe her.

"Now, Allie," she pleaded, perceiving that his resentment was dying and
resolved to, at last, adopt a straight course, "if you'll only listen,
I'll tell you the REAL TRUTH."

Unprepared for the electrical effect of her remark, Zoie found herself
staggering to keep her feet. She gazed at Alfred in amazement. His arms
were lifted to Heaven, his breath was coming fast.

"'The REAL TRUTH!'" he gasped, then bringing his crushed hat down on his
forehead with a resounding whack, he rushed from her sight.

The clang of the closing elevator door brought Zoie to a realisation of
what had actually happened. Determined that Alfred should not escape
her she rushed to the hall door and called to him wildly. There was no
answer. Running back to the room, she threw open the window and threw
herself half out of it. She was just in time to see Alfred climb into
a passing taxi. "Alfred!" she cried. Then automatically she flew to the
'phone. "Give me 4302 Main," she called and she tried to force back her
tears. "Is this Hardy & Company?" she asked.

"Well, this is Mrs. Hardy," she explained.

"I wish you'd ring me up the moment my husband comes in." There was a
slight pause, then she clutched the receiver harder. "Not COMING back?"
she gasped. "Gone!--to Detroit?" A short moan escaped her lips. She
let the receiver fall back on the hook and her head went forward on her
outstretched arms.



CHAPTER X

When Jimmy came home to luncheon that day, Aggie succeeded in getting a
general idea of the state of affairs in the Hardy household. Of course
Jimmy didn't tell the whole truth. Oh, no--far from it. In fact, he
appeared to be aggravatingly ignorant as to the exact cause of the Hardy
upheaval. Of ONE thing, however, he was certain. "Alfred was going to
quit Chicago and leave Zoie to her own devices."

"Jimmy!" cried Aggie. "How awful!" and before Jimmy was fairly out of
the front gate, she had seized her hat and gloves and rushed to the
rescue of her friend.

Not surprised at finding Zoie in a state of collapse, Aggie opened her
arms sympathetically to receive the weeping confidences that she was
sure would soon come.

"Zoie dear," she said as the fragile mite rocked to and fro. "What is
it?" She pressed the soft ringlets from the girl's throbbing forehead.

"It's Alfred," sobbed Zoie. "He's gone!"

"Yes, I know," answered Aggie tenderly. "Isn't it awful? Jimmy just told
me."

"Jimmy told you WHAT?" questioned Zoie, and she lifted her head and
regarded Aggie with sudden uneasiness. Her friend's answer raised Jimmy
considerably in Zoie's esteem. Apparently he had not breathed a word
about the luncheon.

"Why, Jimmy told me," continued Aggie, "that you and Alfred had had
another tiff, and that Alfred had gone for good."

"For GOOD!" echoed Zoie and her eyes were wide with terror. "Did Alfred
tell Jimmy that?"

Aggie nodded.

"Then he MEANS it!" cried Zoie, at last fully convinced of the strength
of Alfred's resolve. "But he shan't," she declared emphatically. "I
won't let him. I'll go after him. He has no right----" By this time she
was running aimlessly about the room.

"What did you do to him?" asked Aggie, feeling sure that Zoie was as
usual at fault.

"Nothing," answered Zoie with wide innocent eyes.

"Nothing?" echoed Aggie, with little confidence in her friend's ability
to judge impartially about so personal a matter.

"Absolutely nothing," affirmed Zoie. And there was no doubting that she
at least believed it.

"What does he SAY," questioned Aggie diplomatically.

"He SAYS I 'hurt his soul.' Whatever THAT is," answered Zoie, and
her face wore an injured expression. "Isn't that a nice excuse," she
continued, "for leaving your lawful wedded wife?" It was apparent that
she expected Aggie to rally strongly to her defence. But at present
Aggie was bent upon getting facts.

"HOW did you hurt him?" she persisted.

"I ate lunch," said Zoie with the face of a cherub.

"With whom?" questioned Aggie slyly. She was beginning to scent the
probable origin of the misunderstanding.

"It's of no consequence," answered Zoie carelessly; "I wouldn't have
wiped my feet on the man." By this time she had entirely forgotten
Aggie's proprietorship in the source of her trouble.

"But who WAS the man?" urged Aggie, and in her mind, she had already
condemned him as a low, unprincipled creature.

"What does that matter?" asked Zoie impatiently. "It's ANY man with
Alfred--you know that--ANY man!"

Aggie sank in a chair and looked at her friend in despair. "Why DO you
do these things," she said wearily, "when you know how Alfred feels
about them?"

"You talk as though I did nothing else," answered Zoie with an aggrieved
tone. "It's the first time since I've been married that I've ever eaten
lunch with any man but Alfred. I thought you'd have a little sympathy
with me," she whimpered, "instead of putting me on the gridiron like
everyone else does."

"Everyone else?" questioned Aggie, with recurring suspicion.

"I mean Alfred," explained Zoie. "HE'S 'everyone else' to me." And then
with a sudden abandonment of grief, she threw herself prostrate at her
friend's knees. "Oh, Aggie, what can I do?" she cried.

But Aggie was not satisfied with Zoie's fragmentary account of her
latest escapade. "Is that the only thing that Alfred has against you?"
she asked.

"That's the LATEST," sniffled Zoie, in a heap at Aggie's feet. And then
she continued in a much aggrieved tone, "You know he's ALWAYS rowing
because we haven't as many babies as the cook has cats."

"Well, why don't you get him a baby?" asked the practical, far-seeing
Aggie.

"It's too late NOW," moaned Zoie.

"Not at all," reassured Aggie. "It's the very thing that would bring him
back."

"How COULD I get one?" questioned Zoie, and she looked up at Aggie with
round astonished eyes.

"Adopt it," answered Aggie decisively.

Zoie regarded her friend with mingled disgust and disappointment. "No,"
she said with a sigh and a shake of her head, "that wouldn't do any
good. Alfred's so fussy. He always wants his OWN things around."

"He needn't know," declared Aggie boldly.

"What do you mean?" whispered Zoie.

Drawing herself up with an air of great importance, and regarding the
wondering young person at her knee with smiling condescension, Aggie
prepared to make a most interesting disclosure.

"There was a long article in the paper only this morning," she told
Zoie, "saying that three thousand husbands in this VERY CITY are
fondling babies not their own."

Zoie turned her small head to one side, the better to study Aggie's
face. It was apparent to the latter that she must be much more explicit.

"Babies adopted in their absence," explained Aggie, "while they were on
trips around the country."

A dangerous light began to glitter in Zoie's eyes.

"Aggie!" she cried, bringing her small hands together excitedly, "do you
think I COULD?"

"Why not?" asked Aggie, with a very superior air. Zoie's enthusiasm was
increasing her friend's admiration of her own scheme. "This same paper
tells of a woman who adopted three sons while her husband was in Europe,
and he thinks each one of them is his."

"Where can we get some?" cried Zoie, now thoroughly enamoured of the
idea.

"You can always get TONS of them at the Children's Home," answered Aggie
confidently.

"I can't endure babies," declared Zoie, "but I'd do ANYTHING to get
Alfred back. Can we get one TO-DAY?" she asked.

Aggie looked at her small friend with positive pity. "You don't WANT one
TO-DAY," she explained.

Zoie rolled her large eyes inquiringly.

"If you were to get one to-day," continued Aggie, "Alfred would know it
wasn't yours, wouldn't he?"

A light of understanding began to show on Zoie's small features.

"There was none when he left this morning," added Aggie.

"That's true," acquiesced Zoie.

"You must wait awhile," counselled Aggie, "and then get a perfectly new
one."

But Zoie had never been taught to wait.

"Now Aggie----" she began.

Aggie continued without heeding her.

"After a few months," she explained, "when Alfred's temper has had time
to cool, we'll get Jimmy to send him a wire that he has an heir."

"A few months!" exclaimed Zoie, as though Aggie had suggested an
eternity. "I've never been away from Alfred that long in all my life."

Aggie was visibly annoyed. "Well, of course," she said coldly, as she
rose to go, "if you can get Alfred back WITHOUT that----"

"But I can't!" cried Zoie, and she clung to her friend as to her last
remaining hope.

"Then," answered Aggie, somewhat mollified by Zoie's complete
submission. "THIS is the only way. The President of the Children's Home
is a great friend of Jimmy's," she said proudly.

It was at this point that Zoie made her first practical suggestion.
"Then we'll LET JIMMY GET IT," she declared.

"Of course," agreed Aggie enthusiastically, as though they would be
according the poor soul a rare privilege. "Jimmy gives a hundred
dollars to the Home every Christmas,"--additional proof why he should be
selected for this very important office.

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed Zoie with shocked surprise. "If Alfred were to
give a hundred dollars to a Baby's Home, I should suspect him."

"Don't be silly!" snapped Aggie curtly. In spite of her firm faith in
Jimmy's innocence, she was undoubtedly annoyed by Zoie's unpleasant
suggestion.

There was an instant's pause, then putting disagreeable thoughts from
her mind, Aggie turned to Zoie with renewed enthusiasm.

"We must get down to business," she said, "we'll begin on the baby's
outfit at once."

"Its what?" queried Zoie.

"Its clothes," explained Aggie.

"Oh, what fun!" exclaimed Zoie, and she clapped her hands merrily like a
very small child. A moment later she stopped with sudden misgiving.

"But, Aggie," she said fearfully, "suppose Alfred shouldn't come back
after I've got the baby? I'd be a widow with a child."

"Oh, he's sure to come back!" answered Aggie, with a confident air.
"He'll take the first train, home."

"I believe he will," assented Zoie joyfully. All her clouds were again
dispelled. "Aggie," she cried impulsively, "you are a darling. You have
just saved my life." And she clasped her arms so tightly around Aggie's
neck that her friend was in danger of being suffocated.

Releasing herself Aggie continued with a ruffled collar and raised
vanity: "You can write him an insinuating letter now and then, just to
lead up to the good news gradually."

Zoie tipped her small head to one side and studied her friend
thoughtfully. "Do you know, Aggie," she said, with frank admiration, "I
believe you are a better liar than I am."

"I'm NOT a liar," objected Aggie vehemently, "at least, not often," she
corrected. "I've never lied to Jimmy in all my life." She drew herself
up with conscious pride. "And Jimmy has NEVER LIED TO ME."

"Isn't that nice," sniffed Zoie and she pretended to be searching for
her pocket-handkerchief.

But Aggie did not see her. She was glancing at the clock.

"I must go now," she said. And she started toward the door.

"But, Aggie----" protested Zoie, unwilling to be left alone.

"I'll run in again at tea time," promised Aggie.

"I don't mind the DAYS," whined Zoie, "but when NIGHT comes I just MUST
have somebody's arms around me."

"Zoie!" gasped Aggie, both shocked and alarmed.

"I can't help it," confessed Zoie; "the moment it gets dark I'm just
scared stiff."

"That's no way for a MOTHER to talk," reproved Aggie.

"A mother!" exclaimed Zoie, horrified at the sudden realisation that
this awful appellation would undoubtedly pursue her for the rest of
her life. "Oh, don't call me that," she pleaded. "You make me feel a
thousand years old."

"Nonsense," laughed Aggie, and before Zoie could again detain her she
was out of the room.

When the outside door had closed behind her friend, Zoie gazed about
the room disconsolately, but her depression was short-lived. Remembering
Aggie's permission about the letter, she ran quickly to the writing
table, curled her small self up on one foot, placed a brand new pen in
the holder, then drew a sheet of paper toward her and, with shoulders
hunched high and her face close to the paper after the manner of a
child, she began to pen the first of a series of veiled communications
that were ultimately to fill her young husband with amazement.



CHAPTER XI

When Jimmy reached his office after his unforeseen call upon Zoie, his
subsequent encounter with Alfred, and his enforced luncheon at home
with Aggie, he found his mail, his 'phone calls, and his neglected
appointments in a state of hopeless congestion, and try as he would, he
could not concentrate upon their disentanglement. Growing more and more
furious with the long legged secretary who stood at the corner of his
desk, looking down upon him expectantly, and waiting for his tardy
instructions, Jimmy rose and looked out of the window. He could feel
Andrew's reproachful eyes following him.

"Shall Miss Perkins take your letters now?" asked Andrew, and he
wondered how late the office staff would be kept to-night to make up for
the time that was now being wasted.

Coming after repeated wounds from his nearest and dearest, Andrew's
implied reproach was too much for Jimmy's overwrought nerves. "Get out!"
he answered unceremoniously. And when Andrew could assure himself that
he had heard aright, he stalked out of the door with his head high in
the air.

Jimmy looked after his departing secretary with positive hatred. It was
apparent to him that the whole world was against him. He had been
too easy he decided. His family, friends, and business associates
had undoubtedly lost all respect for him. From this day forth he was
determined to show himself to be a man of strong mettle.

Having made this important decision and having convinced himself that he
was about to start on a new life, Jimmy strode to the door of the office
and, without disturbing the injured Andrew, he called sharply to Miss
Perkins to come at once and take his letters.

Poor Jimmy! Again he tried in vain to concentrate upon the details of
the "cut-glass" industry. Invariably his mind would wander back to the
unexpected incidents of the morning. Stopping suddenly in the middle of
a letter to a competing firm, he began pacing hurriedly up and down the
room.

Had she not feared that her chief might misconstrue any suggestion from
her as an act of impertinence, Miss Perkins, having learned all the
company's cut-glass quotations by rote, could easily have supplied the
remainder of the letter. As it was, she waited impatiently, tapping the
corner of the desk with her idle pencil. Jimmy turned at the sound, and
glanced at the pencil with unmistakable disapproval. Miss Perkins waited
in silence. After one or two more uneasy laps about the room, Jimmy went
to his 'phone and called his house number.

"It's undoubtedly domestic trouble," decided Miss Perkins, and she
wondered whether it would be delicate of her, under the circumstances,
to remain in the room.

From her employer's conversation at the 'phone, it was clear to Miss
Perkins that Mrs. Jinks was spending the afternoon with Mrs Hardy,
but why this should have so annoyed MR. Jinks was a question that Miss
Perkins found it difficult to answer. Was it possible that Mr. Jinks's
present state of unrest could be traced to the door of the beautiful
young wife of his friend? "Oh dear," thought Miss Perkins, "how
scandalous!"

"That will do," commanded Jimmy, interrupting Miss Perkins's interesting
speculations, and he nodded toward the door.

"But----" stammered Miss Perkins, as she glanced at the unfinished
letters.

"I'll call you when I need you," answered Jimmy gruffly. Miss Perkins
left the room in high dudgeon.

"I'LL show them," said Jimmy to himself, determined to carry out his
recent resolve to be firm.

Then his mind wend back to his domestic troubles. "Suppose, that Zoie,
after imposing secrecy upon him, should change that thing called her
'mind' and confide in Aggie about the luncheon?" Jimmy was positively
pale. He decided to telephone to Zoie's house and find out how affairs
were progressing. At the 'phone he hesitated. "If Aggie HAS found out
about the luncheon," he argued, "my 'phoning to Zoie's will increase her
suspicions. If Zoie has told her nothing, she'll wonder why I'm 'phoning
to Zoie's house. There's only one thing to do," he decided. "I must wait
and say nothing. I can tell from Aggie's face when I meet her at dinner
whether Zoie has betrayed me."

Having arrived at this conclusion, Jimmy resolved to get home as early
as possible, and again Miss Perkins was called to his aid.

The flurry with which Jimmy despatched the day's remaining business
confirmed both Miss Perkins and Andrew in their previous opinion that
"the boss" had suddenly "gone off his head." And when he at last left
the office and banged the door behind him there was a general sigh of
relief from his usually tranquil staff.

Instead of walking, as was his custom, Jimmy took a taxi to his home but
alas, to his surprise he found no wife.

"Did Mrs. Jinks leave any word?" he inquired from the butler.

"None at all," answered that unperturbed creature; and Jimmy felt sure
that the attitude of his office antagonists had communicated itself to
his household servants.

When Jimmy's anxious ear at last caught the rustle of a woman's dress in
the hallway, his dinner had been waiting half an hour, and he had
worked himself into a state of fierce antagonism toward everything and
everybody.

At the sound of Aggie's voice however, his heart began to pound with
fear. "Had she found him out for the weak miserable deceiver that he
was? Would she tell him that they were going to separate forever?"

Aggie's first words were reassuring. "Awfully sorry to be so late,
dear," she said.

Jimmy felt her kiss upon his chubby cheek and her dear arms about his
neck. He decided forthwith to tell her everything, and never, never
again to run the risk of deceiving her; but before he could open his
lips, she continued gaily:

"I've brought Zoie home with me, dear. There's no sense in her eating
all alone, and she's going to have ALL her dinners with us." Jimmy
groaned. "After dinner," continued Aggie, "you and I can take her to
the theatre and all those places and keep her cheered until Alfred comes
home."

"Home?" repeated Jimmy in alarm. Was it possible that Alfred had already
relented?

"Oh, he doesn't know it yet," explained Aggie, "but he's coming. We'll
tell you all about it at dinner." And they did.

While waiting for Aggie, Jimmy had thought himself hungry, but once
the two women had laid before him their "nefarious baby-snatching
scheme"--food lost its savour for him, and one course after another was
taken away from him untouched.

Each time that Jimmy ventured a mild objection to his part in the plan,
as scheduled by them, he met the threatening eye of Zoie; and by the
time that the three left the table he was so harassed and confused by
the chatter of the two excited women, that he was not only reconciled
but eager to enter into any scheme that might bring Alfred back, and
free him of the enforced companionship of Alfred's nerve-racking wife.
True, he reflected, it was possible that Alfred, on his return, might
discover him to be the culprit who lunched with Zoie and might carry out
his murderous threat; but even such a fate was certainly preferable to
interminable evenings spent under the same roof with Zoie.

"All YOU need do, Jimmy," explained Aggie sweetly, when the three of
them were comfortably settled in the library, "is to see your friend
the Superintendent of the Babies' Home, and tell him just what kind of a
baby we shall need, and when we shall need it."

"Can't we see it ourselves?" chimed in Zoie.

"Oh yes, indeed," said Aggie confidently, and she turned to Jimmy with
a matter-of-fact tone. "You'd better tell the Superintendent to have
several for us to look at when the time arrives."

"Yes, that's better," agreed Zoie.

As for Jimmy, he had long ceased to make any audible comment, but
internally he was saying to himself: "man of strong mettle, indeed!"

"We'll attend to all the clothes for the child," said Aggie generously
to Jimmy.

"I want everything to be hand-made," exclaimed Zoie enthusiastically.

"We can make a great many of the things ourselves, evenings," said
Aggie, "while we sit here and talk to Jimmy."

"I thought we were going OUT evenings!" objected Zoie.

Jimmy rolled his eyes toward her like a dumb beast of burden.

"MOST evenings," assented Aggie. "And then toward the last, you know,
Zoie----" she hesitated to explain further, for Jimmy was already
becoming visibly embarrassed.

"Oh, yes, that's true," blushed Zoie.

There was an awkward pause, then Aggie turned again toward Jimmy, who
was pretending to rebuild the fire. "Oh yes, one more thing," she said.
"When everything is quite ready for Alfred's return, we'll allow you,
Jimmy dear, to wire him the good news."

"Thanks, so much," said Jimmy.

"I wish it were time to wire now," said Zoie pensively, and in his mind,
Jimmy fervently agreed with that sentiment.

"The next few months will slip by before you know it," declared Aggie
cheerfully. "And by the way, Zoie," she added, "why should you go back
to your lonesome flat to-night?"

Zoie began to feel for her pocket handkerchief--Jimmy sat up to receive
the next blow. "Stay here with us," suggested Aggie. "We'll be so glad
to have you." She included Jimmy in her glance. "Won't we, dear?" she
asked.

When the two girls went upstairs arm in arm that night, Jimmy remained
in his chair by the fire, too exhausted to even prepare for bed. "A man
of mettle!" he said again to himself.

This had certainly been the longest day of his life.



CHAPTER XII

WHEN Aggie predicted that the few months of waiting would pass quickly
for Zoie, she was quite correct. They passed quickly for Aggie as well;
but how about Jimmy? When he afterward recalled this interval in his
life, it was always associated with long strands of lace winding around
the legs of the library chairs, white things lying about in all the
places where he had once enjoyed sitting or lying, late dinners, lonely
breakfasts, and a sense of isolation from Aggie.

One evening when he had waited until he was out of all patience with
Aggie, he was told by his late and apologetical spouse that she had been
helping Zoie to redecorate her bedroom to fit the coming occasion.

"It is all done in pink and white," explained Aggie, and then followed
detailed accounts of the exquisite bed linens, the soft lovely hangings,
and even the entire relighting of the room.

"Why pink?" asked Jimmy, objecting to any scheme of Zoie's on general
principles.

"It's Alfred's favourite colour," explained Aggie. "Besides, it's so
becoming," she added.

Jimmy could not help feeling that this lure to Alfred's senses was
absolutely indecent, and he said so.

"Upon my word," answered Aggie, quite affronted, "you are getting as
unreasonable as Alfred himself." Then as Jimmy prepared to sulk, she
added coaxingly, "I was GOING to tell you about Zoie's lovely new
negligee, and about the dear little crib that just matches it.
Everything is going to be in harmony."

"With Zoie in the house?" asked Jimmy sceptically.

"I can't think why you've taken such a dislike to that helpless child,"
said Aggie.

A few days later, while in the midst of his morning's mail, Jimmy was
informed that it was now time for him to conduct Aggie and Zoie to the
Babies' Home to select the last, but most important, detail for
their coming campaign. According to instructions, Jimmy had been in
communication with the amused Superintendent of the Home, and he now led
the two women forth with the proud consciousness that he, at least, had
attended properly to his part of the business. By the time they reached
the Children's Home, several babies were on view for their critical
inspection.

Zoie stared into the various cribs containing the wee, red mites with
puckered faces. "Oh dear!" she exclaimed, "haven't you any white ones?"

"These are supposed to be white," said the Superintendent, with an
indulgent smile, "the black ones are on the other side of the room."

"Black ones!" cried Zoie in horror, and she faced about quickly as
though expecting an attack from their direction.

"Which particular one of these would you recommend?" asked the practical
Aggie of the Superintendent as she surveyed the first lot.

"Well, it's largely a matter of taste, ma'am," he answered. "This seems
a healthy little chap," he added, and seizing the long white clothes
of the nearest infant, he drew him across his arm and held him out for
Aggie's inspection.

"Let's see," cried Zoie, and she stood on tiptoe to peep over the
Superintendent's elbow.

As for Jimmy, he stood gloomily apart. This was an ordeal for which
he had long been preparing himself, and he was resolved to accept it
philosophically.

"I don't think much of that one," snipped Zoie. And in spite of himself.
Jimmy felt his temper rising.

Aggie turned to him with a smile. "Which one do YOU prefer, Jimmy?"

"It's not MY affair," answered Jimmy curtly.

"Since when?" asked Zoie.

Aggie perceived trouble brewing, and she turned to pacify Jimmy. "Which
one do you think your FRIEND ALFRED would like?" she persisted.

"If I were in his place----" began Jimmy hotly.

"Oh, but you AREN'T," interrupted Zoie; then she turned to the
Superintendent. "What makes some of them so much larger than others?"
she asked, glancing at the babies he had CALLED "white."

"Well, you see they're of different ages," explained the Superintendent
indulgently.

"We told Mr. Jinks they must all be of the same age," said Zoie with a
reproachful look at Jimmy.

"What age is that?" asked the Superintendent.

"I should say a week old," said Aggie.

"Then this is the one for you," decided the Superintendent, designating
his first choice.

"I think we'd better take the Superintendent's advice," said Aggie
complacently.

Zoie looked around the room with a dissatisfied air. Was it possible
that all babies were as homely as these?

"You know, Zoie," explained Aggie, divining her thought, "they get
better looking as they grow older."

"They couldn't look worse!" was Zoie's disgusted comment.

"Fetch it home, Jimmy," said Aggie.

"What!" exclaimed Jimmy, who had considered his mission completed.

"You don't expect US to carry it, do you?" asked Aggie in a hurt voice.

The Superintendent settled the difficulty temporarily by informing them
that the baby could not possibly leave the home until the mother had
signed the necessary papers for its release.

"I thought all those details had been attended to," said Aggie, and
again the two women surveyed Jimmy with grieved disappointment.

"I'll get the mother's signature the first thing in the morning,"
volunteered the Superintendent.

"Very well," said Zoie, "and in the meantime, I'll send some new clothes
for it," and with a lofty farewell to the Superintendent, she and Aggie
followed Jimmy down stairs to the taxi.

"Now," said Zoie, when they were properly seated, "let's stop at a
telegraph office and let Jimmy send a wire to Alfred."

"Wait until we get the baby," cautioned Aggie.

"We'll have it the first thing in the morning," argued Zoie.

"Jimmy can send him a night-letter," compromised Aggie, "that way Alfred
won't get the news until morning."

A few minutes later, the taxi stopped in front of Jimmy's office and
with a sigh of thanksgiving he hurried upstairs to his unanswered mail.



CHAPTER XIII

When Alfred Hardy found himself on the train bound for Detroit, he tried
to assure himself that he had done the right thing in breaking away
from an association that had kept him for months in a constant state of
ferment. His business must come first, he decided. Having settled this
point to his temporary satisfaction, he opened his afternoon paper
and leaned back in his seat, meaning to divert his mind from personal
matters, by learning what was going on in the world at large.

No sooner had his eye scanned the first headline than he was startled by
a boisterous greeting from a fellow traveller, who was just passing down
the aisle.

"Hello, Hardy!" cried his well meaning acquaintance. "Where are you
bound for?"

"Detroit," answered Alfred, annoyed by the sudden interruption.

"Where's the missus?" asked the intruder.

"Chicago," was Alfred's short reply.

"THAT'S a funny thing," declared the convivial spirit, not guessing how
funny it really was. "You know," he continued, so loud that everyone in
the vicinity could not fail to hear him, "the last time I met you two,
you were on your honeymoon--on THIS VERY TRAIN," and with that the
fellow sat himself down, uninvited, by Alfred's side and started on a
long list of compliments about "the fine little girl" who had in his
opinion done Alfred a great favour when she consented to tie herself to
a "dull, money-grubbing chap" like him.

"So," thought Alfred, "this is the way the world sees us." And he began
to frame inaudible but desperate defences of himself. Again he told
himself that he was right; but his friend's thoughtless words had
planted an uncomfortable doubt in his mind, and when he left the
train to drive to his hotel, he was thinking very little about the new
business relations upon which he was entering in Detroit, and very much
about the domestic relations which he had just severed in Chicago.

Had he been merely a "dull money-grubber"? Had he left his wife too much
alone? Was she not a mere child when he married her? Could he not, with
more consideration, have made of her a more understanding companion?
These were questions that were still unanswered in his mind when he
arrived at one of Detroit's most enterprising hotels.

But later, having telephoned to his office and found that several
matters of importance were awaiting his decision, he forced himself to
enter immediately upon his business obligations.

As might have been expected, Alfred soon won the respect and serious
consideration of most of his new business associates, and this in a
measure so mollified his hurt pride, that upon rare occasions he was
affable enough to accept the hospitality of their homes. But each
excursion that he made into the social life of these new friends, only
served to remind him of the unsettled state of his domestic affairs.

"How your wife must miss you!" his hostess would remark before they were
fairly seated at table.

"They tell me she is so pretty," his vis-a-vis would exclaim.

"When is she going to join you?" the lady on his left would ask.

Then his host would laugh and tell the "dear ladies" that in HIS
opinion, Alfred was afraid to bring his wife to Detroit, lest he might
lose her to a handsomer man.

Alfred could never quite understand why remarks such as this annoyed him
almost to the point of declaring the whole truth. His LEAVING Zoie, and
his "losing" her, as these would-be comedians expressed it, were
two separate and distinct things in his mind, and he felt an almost
irresistible desire to make this plain to all concerned.

But no sooner did he open his lips to do so, than a picture of Zoie in
all her child-like pleading loveliness, arose to dissuade him. He could
imagine his dinner companions all pretending to sympathise with him,
while they flayed poor Zoie alive. She would never have another chance
to be known as a respectable woman, and compared to most women of
his acquaintance, she WAS a respectable woman. True, according to
old-fashioned standards, she had been indiscreet, but apparently the
present day woman had a standard of her own. Alfred found his eye
wandering round the table surveying the wives of his friends. Was there
one of them, he wondered, who had never fibbed to her husband, or eaten
a simple luncheon unchaperoned by him? Of one thing he was certain,
there was not one of them so attractive as Zoie. Might she not be
forgiven, to some extent, if her physical charms had made her a source
of dangerous temptation to unprincipled scoundrels like the one with
whom she had no doubt lunched? Then, too, had she not offered at the
moment of his departure to tell him the "real truth"? Might this not
have been the one occasion upon which she would have done so? "She seemed
so sincere," he ruminated, "so truly penitent." Then again, how generous
it was of her to persist in writing to him with never an answer from
him to encourage her. If she cared for him so little as he had once
imagined, why should she wish to keep up even a presence of fondness?
Her letters indicated an undying devotion.

These were some of the thoughts that were going through Alfred's mind
just three months after his departure from Chicago, and all the while
his hostess was mentally dubbing him a "dull person."

"What an abstracted man he is!" she said before he was down the front
steps.

"Is he really so clever in business?" a woman friend inquired.

"It's hard to believe, isn't it?" commented a third, and his host
apologised for the absent Alfred by saying that he was no doubt worried
about a particular business decision that had to be made the next
morning.

But it was not the responsibility of this business decision that was
knotting Alfred's brow, as he walked hurriedly toward the hotel, where
he had told his office boy to leave the last mail. This had been
the longest interval that Zoie had ever let slip without writing. He
recalled that her last letters had hinted at a "slight indisposition."
In fact, she had even mentioned "seeing the doctor"--"Good Heavens!" he
thought, "Suppose she were really ill? Who would look after her?"

When Alfred reached his rooms, the boy had not yet arrived. He crossed
to the library table and took from the drawer all the letters thus far
received from Zoie. He read them consecutively. "How could he have been
so stupid as not to have realised sooner that her illness--whatever it
was--had been gradually creeping upon her from the very first day of his
departure?"

The boy arrived with the mail. It contained no letter from Zoie and
Alfred went to bed with an uneasy mind.

The next morning he was down at his office early, still no letter from
Zoie.

Refusing his partner's invitation to lunch, Alfred sat alone in his
office, glad to be rid of intrusive eyes. "He would write to Jimmy
Jinks," he decided, "and find out whether Zoie were in any immediate
danger."

Not willing to await the return of his stenographer, or to acquaint her
with his personal affairs, Alfred drew pen and paper toward him and sat
helplessly before it. How could he inquire about Zoie without appearing
to invite a reconciliation with her? While he was trying to answer
this vexed question, a sharp knock came at the door. He turned to see a
uniformed messenger holding a telegram toward him. Intuitively he felt
that it contained some word about Zoie. His hand trembled so that he
could scarcely sign for the message before opening it.

A moment later the messenger boy was startled out of his lethargy by a
succession of contradictory exclamations.

"No!" cried Alfred incredulously as he gazed in ecstasy at the telegram.
"Yes!" he shouted, excitedly, as he rose from his chair. "Where's a
time table?" he asked the astonished boy, and he began rummaging rapidly
through the drawers of his desk.

"Any answer?" inquired the messenger.

"Take this," said Alfred. And he thrust a bill into the small boy's
hand.

"Yes, sir," answered the boy and disappeared quickly, lest this madman
might reconsider his generosity.

Alfred threw down the time table in despair. "No train for Chicago until
night," he cried; but his mind was working fast. The next moment he was
at the telephone, asking for the Division Superintendent of the railway
line.

When Alfred's partner returned from luncheon he found a curt note
informing him that Alfred had left on a special for Chicago and would
"write."

"I'll bet it's his wife!" said the partner.



CHAPTER XIV

During the evening of the same day that Alfred was enjoying such
pleasurable emotions, Zoie and Aggie were closeted in the pretty pink
and white bedroom that the latter had tried to describe to Jimmy. On
a rose-coloured couch in front of the fire sat Aggie threading ribbons
through various bits of soft white linen, and in front of her, at the
foot of a rose-draped bed, knelt Zoie. She was trying the effect of
a large pink bow against the lace flounce of an empty but inviting
bassinette.

"How's that?" she called to Aggie, as she turned her head to one side
and surveyed the result of her experiment with a critical eye.

Aggie shot a grudging glance at the bassinette. "I wish you wouldn't
bother me every moment," she said. "I'll never get all these things
finished."

Apparently Zoie decided that the bow was properly placed, for she
applied herself to sewing it fast to the lining. In her excitement she
gave the thread a vicious pull. "Oh, dear, oh dear, my thread is always
breaking!" she sighed in vexation.

"You're excited," said Aggie.

"Wouldn't YOU be excited," questioned Zoie'"if you were expecting a baby
and a husband in the morning?"

"I suppose I should," admitted Aggie.

For a time the two friends sewed in silence, then Zoie looked up with
sudden anxiety.

"You're SURE Jimmy sent the wire?" she asked.

"I saw him write it," answered Aggie, "while I was in the office
to-day."

"When will Alfred get it?" demanded Zoie eagerly.

"Oh, he won't GET it until to-morrow morning," said Aggie. "I told you
that to-day. It's a night message."

"I wonder what he'll be doing when he gets it?" mused Zoie. There was a
suspicion of a smile around her lips.

"What will he do AFTER he gets it?" questioned Aggie.

Looking up at her friend in alarm, Zoie suddenly ceased sewing. "You
don't mean he won't come?" she gasped.

"Of course I don't," answered Aggie. "He's only HUMAN if he is a
husband."

There was a sceptical expression around Zoie's mouth, but she did not
pursue the subject. "How do you suppose that red baby will ever look in
this pink basket?" she asked. And then with a regretful little sigh, she
declared that she wished she'd "used blue."

"I didn't think the baby that we chose was so horribly red," said Aggie.

"Red!" cried Zoie, "it's magenta." And again her thread broke. "Oh,
darn!" she exclaimed in annoyance, and once more rethreaded her needle.
"I couldn't look at it," she continued with a disgusted little pucker of
her face. "I wish they had let us take it this afternoon so I could have
got used to it before Alfred gets here."

"Now don't be silly," scolded Aggie. "You know very well that the
Superintendent can't let it leave the home until its mother signs the
papers. It will be here the first thing in the morning. You'll have all
day to get used to it before Alfred gets here."

"ALL DAY," echoed Zoie, and the corners of her mouth began to droop.
"Won't Alfred be here before TO-MORROW NIGHT?"

Aggie was becoming exasperated by Zoie's endless questions. "I told
you," she explained wearily, "that the wire won't be delivered until
to-morrow morning, it will take Alfred eight hours to get here, and
there may not be a train just that minute."

"Eight long hours," sighed Zoie dismally. And Aggie looked at her
reproachfully, forgetting that it is always the last hour that
is hardest to bear. Zoie resumed her sewing resignedly. Aggie was
meditating whether she should read her young friend a lecture on the
value of patience, when the telephone began to ring violently.

Zoie looked up from her sewing with a frown. "You answer it, will you,
Aggie?" she said. "I can't let go this thread."

"Hello," called Aggie sweetly over the 'phone; then she added in
surprise, "Is this you, Jimmy dear?" Apparently it was; and as Zoie
watched Aggie's face, with its increasing distress she surmised that
Jimmy's message was anything but "dear."

"Good heavens!" cried Aggie over the telephone, "that's awful!"

"Isn't Alfred coming?" was the first question that burst from Zoie's
lips.

Aggie motioned to Zoie to be quiet. "TO-NIGHT!" she exclaimed.

"To-night!" echoed Zoie joyfully; and without waiting for more details
and with no thought beyond the moment, she flew to her dressing table
and began arranging her hair, powdering her face, perfuming her lips,
and making herself particularly alluring for the prodigal husband's
return.

Now the far-sighted Aggie was experiencing less pleasant sensations at
the phone. "A special?" she was saying to Jimmy. "When did Alfred GET
the message?" There was a slight pause. Then she asked irritably, "Well,
didn't you mark it 'NIGHT message'?" From the expression on Aggie's face
it was evident that he had not done so. "But, Jimmy," protested Aggie,
"this is dreadful! We haven't any baby!" Then calling to him to wait a
minute, and leaving the receiver dangling, she crossed the room to
Zoie, who was now thoroughly engrossed in the making of a fresh toilet.
"Zoie!" she exclaimed excitedly, "Jimmy made a mistake."

"Of course he'd do THAT," answered Zoie carelessly.

"But you don't understand," persisted Aggie. "They sent the 'NIGHT
message' TO-DAY. Alfred's coming on a special. He'll be here tonight."

"Thank goodness for that!" cried Zoie, and the next instant she was
waltzing gaily about the room.

"That's all very well," answered Aggie, as she followed Zoie with
anxious eyes, "but WHERE'S YOUR BABY?"

"Good heavens!" cried Zoie, and for the first time she became conscious
of their predicament. She gazed at Aggie in consternation. "I forgot all
about it," she said, and then asked with growing anxiety, "What can we
DO?"

"Do?" echoed Aggie, scarcely knowing herself what answer to make, "we've
got to GET it--TO-NIGHT. That's all!"

"But," protested Zoie, "how CAN we get it when the mother hasn't signed
the papers yet?"

"Jimmy will have to arrange that with the Superintendent of the Home,"
answered Aggie with decision, and she turned toward the 'phone to
instruct Jimmy accordingly.

"Yes, that's right," assented Zoie, glad to be rid of all further
responsibility, "we'll let Jimmy fix it."

"Say, Jimmy," called Aggie excitedly, "you'll have to go straight to the
Children's Home and get that baby just as quickly as you can. There's
some red tape about the mother signing papers, but don't mind about
that. Make them give it to you to-night. Hurry, Jimmy. Don't waste a
minute."

There was evidently a protest from the other end of the wire, for Aggie
added impatiently, "Go on, Jimmy, do! You can EAT any time." And with
that she hung up the receiver.

"Its clothes," called Zoie frantically. "Tell him about the clothes. I
sent them this evening."

"Never mind about the clothes," answered Aggie. "We're lucky if we get
the baby."

"But I have to mind," persisted Zoie. "I gave all its other things to
the laundress. I wanted them to be nice and fresh. And now the horrid
old creature hasn't brought them back yet."

"You get into your OWN things," commanded Aggie.

"Where's my dressing gown?" asked Zoie, her elation revived by the
thought of her fine raiment, and with that she flew to the foot of the
bed and snatched up two of the prettiest negligees ever imported from
Paris. "Which do you like better?" she asked, as she held them both
aloft, "the pink or the blue?"

"It doesn't matter," answered Aggie wearily. "Get into SOMETHING, that's
all."

"Then unhook me," commanded Zoie gaily, as she turned her back to Aggie,
and continued to admire the two "creations" on her arm. So pleased was
she with the picture of herself in either of the garments that she began
humming a gay waltz and swaying to the rhythm.

"Stand still," commanded Aggie, but her warning was unnecessary, for at
that moment Zoie was transfixed by a horrible fear.

"Suppose," she said in alarm, "that Jimmy can't GET the baby?"

"He's GOT to get it," answered Aggie emphatically, and she undid the
last stubborn hook of Zoie's gown and put the girl from her. "There,
now, you're all unfastened," she said, "hurry and get dressed."

"You mean undressed," laughed Zoie, as she let her pretty evening gown
fall lightly from her shoulders and drew on her pink negligee. "Oh,
Aggie!" she exclaimed, as she caught sight of her reflection in the
mirror, "isn't it a love? And you know," she added. "Alfred just adores
pink."

"Silly!" answered Aggie, but in spite of herself, she was quite thrilled
by the picture of the exquisite young creature before her. Zoie had
certainly never looked more irresistible. "Can't you get some of that
colour out of your cheeks," asked Aggie in despair. "You look like a
washerwoman."

"I'll put on some cold cream and powder," answered Zoie. She flew to her
dressing table; and in a moment there was a white cloud in her immediate
vicinity. She turned to Aggie to inquire the result. Again the 'phone
rang. "Who's that?" she exclaimed in alarm.

"I'll see," answered Aggie.

"It couldn't be Alfred, could it?" asked Zoie with mingled hope and
dread.

"Of course not," answered Aggie, as she removed the receiver from the
hook. "Alfred wouldn't 'phone, he would come right up."



CHAPTER XV

Discovering that it was merely Jimmy "on the wire," Zoie's uneasiness
abated, but Aggie's anxiety was visibly increasing.

"Where ARE you?" she asked of her spouse. "The Children's Home!" she
repeated, then followed further explanations from Jimmy which were
apparently not satisfactory. "Oh, Jimmy!" cried his disturbed wife, "it
can't be! That's horrible!"

"What is it?" shrieked Zoie, trying to get her small ear close enough to
the receiver to catch a bit of the obviously terrifying message.

"Wait a minute," called Aggie into the 'phone. Then she turned to Zoie
with a look of despair. "The mother's changed her mind," she explained;
"she won't give up the baby."

"Good Lord!" cried Zoie, and she sank into the nearest chair. For an
instant the two women looked at each other with blank faces. "What can
we DO," asked Zoie.

Aggie did not answer immediately. This was indeed a serious predicament;
but presently Zoie saw her friend's mouth becoming very resolute, and
she surmised that Aggie had solved the problem. "We'll have to get
ANOTHER baby, that's all," decided Aggie. "There must be OTHER babies."

"Where?" asked Zoie.

"There, in the Children's Home," answered Aggie with great confidence,
and she returned to the 'phone.

Zoie crossed to the bed and knelt at its foot in search of her little
pink slippers.

"Oh, Aggie," she sighed, "the others were all so red!"

But Aggie did not heed her protest. "Listen, Jimmy," she called in the
'phone, "can't you get another baby?" There was a pause, then Aggie
commanded hotly, "Well, GET in the business!" Another pause and then
Aggie continued very firmly, "Tell the Superintendent that we JUST MUST
have one."

Zoie stopped in the act of putting on her second slipper and called a
reminder to Aggie. "Tell him to get a HE one," she said, "Alfred wants a
boy."

"Take what you can get!" answered Aggie impatiently, and again she gave
her attention to the 'phone. "What!" she cried, with growing despair,
and Zoie waited to hear what had gone wrong now. "Nothing under three
months," explained Aggie.

"Won't that do?" asked Zoie innocently.

"Do!" echoed Aggie in disgust. "A three-months' old baby is as big as a
whale."

"Well, can't we say it GREW UP?" asked Zoie, priding herself on her
power of ready resource.

"Overnight, like a mushroom?" sneered Aggie.

Almost vanquished by her friend's new air of cold superiority, Zoie
was now on the verge of tears. "Somebody must have a new baby," she
faltered. "Somebody ALWAYS has a new baby."

"For their own personal USE, yes," admitted Aggie, "but who has a new
baby for US?"

"How do I know?" asked Zoie helplessly. "You're the one who ought to
know. You got me into this, and you've GOT to get me out of it. Can you
imagine," she asked, growing more and more unhappy, "what would happen
to me if Alfred were to come home now and not find a baby? He wouldn't
forgive a LITTLE lie, what would he do with a WHOPPER like this?" Then
with sudden decision, she rushed toward the 'phone. "Let me talk to
Jimmy," she said, and the next moment she was chattering so rapidly and
incoherently over the 'phone that Aggie despaired of hearing one word
that she said, and retired to the next room to think out a new plan of
action.

"Say, Jimmy," stammered Zoie into the 'phone, "you've GOT to get me a
baby. If you don't, I'll kill myself! I will, Jimmy, I will. You got me
into this, Jimmy," she reminded him. "You've GOT to get me out of it."
And then followed pleadings and coaxings and cajolings, and at length,
a pause, during which Jimmy was apparently able to get in a word or so.
His answer was not satisfactory to Zoie. "What!" she shrieked, tiptoeing
to get her lips closer to the receiver; then she added with conviction,
"the mother has no business to change her mind."

Apparently Jimmy maintained that the mother had changed it none the
less.

"Well, take it away from her," commanded Zoie. "Get it quick, while she
isn't looking." Then casting a furtive glance over her shoulder to make
sure that Aggie was still out of the room, she indulged in a few dark
threats to Jimmy, also some vehement reminders of how he had DRAGGED her
into that horrid old restaurant and been the immediate cause of all the
misfortunes that had ever befallen her.

Could Jimmy have been sure that Aggie was out of ear-shot of Zoie's
conversation, the argument would doubtless have kept up indefinitely--as
it was--the result was a quick acquiescence on his part and by the time
that Aggie returned to the room, Zoie was wreathed in smiles.

"It's all right," she said sweetly. "Jimmy's going to get it."

Aggie looked at her sceptically. "Goodness knows I hope so," she said,
then added in despair, "Look at your cheeks. They're flaming."

Once more the powder puff was called into requisition, and Zoie turned a
temporarily blanched face to Aggie. "Is that better?" she asked.

"Very much," answered Aggie, "but how about your hair?"

"What's the matter with it?" asked Zoie. Her reflection betrayed a
coiffure that might have turned Marie Antoinette green with envy.

"Would anybody think you'd been in bed for days?" asked Aggie.

"Alfred likes it that way," was Zoie's defence.

"Turn around," said Aggie, without deigning to argue the matter further.
And she began to remove handfuls of hairpins from the yellow knotted
curls.

"What are you doing?" exclaimed Zoie, as she sprayed her white neck and
arms with her favourite perfume.

Aggie did not answer.

Zoie leaned forward toward the mirror to smooth out her eyebrows with
the tips of her perfumed fingers. "Good gracious," she cried in horror
as she caught sight of her reflection. "You're not going to put my hair
in a pigtail!"

"That's the way invalids always have their hair," was Aggie's laconic
reply, and she continued to plait the obstinate curls.

"I won't have it like that!" declared Zoie, and she shook herself free
from Aggie's unwelcome attentions and proceeded to unplait the hateful
pigtail. "Alfred would leave me."

Aggie shrugged her shoulders.

"If you're going to make a perfect fright of me," pouted Zoie, "I just
won't see him."

"He isn't coming to see YOU," reminded Aggie. "He's coming to see the
baby."

"If Jimmy doesn't come soon, I'll not HAVE any baby," answered Zoie.

"Get into bed," said Aggie, and she proceeded to turn down the soft lace
coverlets.

"Where did I put my cap?" asked Zoie. Her eyes caught the small knot of
lace and ribbons for which she was looking, and she pinned it on top of
her saucy little curls.

"In you go," said Aggie, motioning to the bed.

"Wait," said Zoie impressively, "wait till I get my rose lights on the
pillow." She pulled the slender gold chain of her night lamp; instantly
the large white pillows were bathed in a warm pink glow--she studied
the effect very carefully, then added a lingerie pillow to the two
more formal ones, kicked off her slippers and hopped into bed. One more
glance at the pillows, then she arranged the ribbons of her negligee to
fall "carelessly" outside the coverlet, threw one arm gracefully above
her head, half-closed her eyes, and sank languidly back against her
pillows.

"How's that?" she breathed faintly.

Controlling her impulse to smile, Aggie crossed to the dressing-table
with a business-like air and applied to Zoie's pink cheeks a third
coating of powder.

Zoie sat bolt upright and began to sneeze. "Aggie," she said, "I just
hate you when you act like that." But suddenly she was seized with a new
idea.

"I wonder," she mused as she looked across the room at the soft, pink
sofa bathed in firelight, "I wonder if I shouldn't look better on that
couch under those roses."

Aggie was very emphatic in her opinion to the contrary. "Certainly not!"
she said.

"Then," decided Zoie with a mischievous smile, "I'll get Alfred to carry
me to the couch. That way I can get my arms around his neck. And once
you get your arms around a man's neck, you can MANAGE him."

Aggie looked down at the small person with distinct disapproval. "Now,
don't you make too much fuss over Alfred," she continued. "YOU'RE the
one who's to do the forgiving. Don't forget that! What's more," she
reminded Zoie, "you're very, very weak." But before she had time to
instruct Zoie further there was a sharp, quick ring at the outer door.

The two women glanced at each other inquiringly. The next instant a
man's step was heard in the hallway.

"How is she, Mary?" demanded someone in a voice tense with anxiety.

"It's Alfred!" exclaimed Zoie.

"And we haven't any baby!" gasped Aggie.

"What shall I do?" cried Zoie.

"Lie down," commanded Aggie, and Zoie had barely time to fall back
limply on the pillows when the excited young husband burst into the
room.



CHAPTER XVI

When Alfred entered Zoie's bedroom he glanced about him in bewilderment.
It appeared that he was in an enchanted chamber. Through the dim rose
light he could barely perceive his young wife. She was lying white and
apparently lifeless on her pillows. He moved cautiously toward the bed,
but Aggie raised a warning finger. Afraid to speak, he grasped Aggie's
hand and searched her face for reassurance; she nodded toward Zoie,
whose eyes were closed. He tiptoed to the bedside, sank on his knees and
reverently kissed the small hand that hung limply across the side of the
bed.

To Alfred's intense surprise, his lips had barely touched Zoie's
fingertips when he felt his head seized in a frantic embrace. "Alfred,
Alfred!" cried Zoie in delight; then she smothered his face with kisses.
As she lifted her head to survey her astonished husband, she caught
the reproving eye of Aggie. With a weak little sigh, she relaxed her
tenacious hold of Alfred, breathed his name very faintly, and sank back,
apparently exhausted, upon her pillows.

"It's been too much for her," said the terrified young husband, and he
glanced toward Aggie in anxiety.

Aggie nodded assent.

"How pale she looks," added Alfred, as he surveyed the white face on the
pillows.

"She's so weak, poor dear," sympathised Aggie, almost in a whisper.

Alfred nodded his understanding to Aggie. It was then that his attention
was for the first time attracted toward the crib.

"My boy!" he exclaimed. And again Zoie forgot Aggie's warning and
sat straight up in bed. But Alfred did not see her. He was making
determinedly for the crib, his heart beating high with the pride of
possession.

Throwing back the coverlets of the bassinette, Alfred stared at the
empty bed in silence, then he quickly turned to the two anxious women.
"Where is he?" he asked, his eyes wide with terror.

Zoie's lips opened to answer, but no words came.

Alfred's eyes turned to Aggie. The look on her face increased his worst
fears. "Don't tell me he's----" he could not bring himself to utter the
word. He continued to look helplessly from one woman to the other.

In vain Zoie again tried to answer. Aggie also made an unsuccessful
attempt to speak. Then, driven to desperation by the strain of the
situation, Zoie declared boldly: "He's out."

"Out?" echoed Alfred in consternation.

"With Jimmy," explained Aggie, coming to Zoie's rescue as well as she
knew how.

"Jimmy!" repeated Alfred in great astonishment.

"Just for a breath of air," explained Zoie sweetly She had now entirely
regained her self-possession.

"Isn't he very young to be out at night?" asked Alfred with a puzzled
frown.

"We told Jimmy that," answered Aggie, amazed at the promptness
with which each succeeding lie presented itself. "But you see," she
continued, "Jimmy is so crazy about the child that we can't do anything
with him."

"Jimmy crazy about my baby?" exclaimed Alfred incredulously. "He always
said babies were 'little red worms.'"

"Not this one," answered Zoie sweetly.

"No, indeed," chimed in Aggie. "He acts as though he owned it."

"Oh, DOES he?" exclaimed Alfred hotly. "I'll soon put a stop to that,"
he declared. "Where did he take him?"

Again the two women looked at each other inquiringly, then Aggie
stammered evasively.

"Oh, j-just downstairs--somewhere."

"I'll LOOK j-just downstairs somewhere," decided Alfred, and he snatched
up his hat and started toward the door.

"Alfred!" cried Zoie in alarm.

Coming back to her bedside to reassure her, Alfred was caught in a
frantic embrace. "I'll be back in a minute, dear," he said, but Zoie
clung to him and pleaded desperately.

"You aren't going to leave me the very first thing?"

Alfred hesitated. He had no wish to be cruel to Zoie, but the thought of
Jimmy out in the street with his baby at this hour of the night was not
to be borne.

Zoie renewed her efforts at persuasion. "Now, dearie," she said, "I
wish you'd go get shaved and wash up a bit. I don't wish baby to see you
looking so horrid."

"Yes, do, Alfred," insisted Aggie. "He's sure to be here in a minute."

"My boy won't care HOW his father looks," declared Alfred proudly, and
Zoie told Aggie afterward that his chest had momentarily expanded three
inches.

"But _I_ care," persisted Zoie. "First impressions are so important."

"Now, Zoie," cautioned Aggie, as she crossed toward the bed with
affected solicitude. "You mustn't excite yourself."

Zoie was quick to understand the suggested change in her tactics, and
again she sank back on her pillows apparently ill and faint.

Utterly vanquished by the dire result of his apparently inhuman
thoughtlessness, Alfred glanced at Aggie, uncertain as to how to repair
the injury.

Aggie beckoned to him to come away from the bed.

"Let her have her own way," she whispered with a significant glance
toward Zoie.

Alfred nodded understandingly and put a finger to his lips to signify
that he would henceforth speak in hushed tones, then he tiptoed back to
the bed and gently stroked the curls from Zoie's troubled forehead.

"There now, dear," he whispered, "lie still and rest and I'll go shave
and wash up a bit."

Zoie sighed her acquiescence.

"Mind," he whispered to Aggie, "you are to call me the moment my boy
comes," and then he slipped quietly into the bedroom.

No sooner had Alfred crossed the threshold, than Zoie sat up in bed and
called in a sharp whisper to Aggie, "What's keeping them?" she asked.

"I can't imagine," answered Aggie, also in whisper.

"If I had Jimmy here," declared Zoie vindictively, "I'd wring his little
fat neck," and slipping her little pink toes from beneath the covers,
she was about to get out of bed, when Aggie, who was facing Alfred's
bedroom door, gave her a warning signal.

Zoie had barely time to get back beneath the covers, when Alfred
re-entered the room in search of his satchel. Aggie found it for him
quickly.

Alfred glanced solicitously at Zoie's closed eyes. "I'm so sorry," he
apologised to Aggie, and again he slipped softly out of the room.

Aggie and Zoie drew together for consultation.

"Suppose Jimmy can't get the baby," whispered Zoie.

"In that case, he'd have 'phoned," argued Aggie.

"Let's 'phone to the Home," suggested Zoie, "and find----" She was
interrupted by Alfred's voice.

"Say, Aggie," called Alfred from the next room.

"Yes?" answered Aggie sweetly, and she crossed to the door and waited.

"Hasn't he come yet?" called Alfred impatiently.

"Not yet, Alfred," said Aggie, and she closed the door very softly, lest
Alfred should hear her.

"I never knew Alfred could be so silly!" snapped Zoie.

"Sh! sh!" warned Aggie, and she glanced anxiously toward Alfred's door.

"He doesn't care a bit about me!" complained Zoie. "It's all that horrid
old baby that he's never seen."

"If Jimmy doesn't come soon, he never WILL see it," declared Aggie, and
she started toward the window to look out.

Just then there was a short quick ring of the bell. The two women
glanced at each other with mingled hope and fear. Then their eyes sought
the door expectantly.



CHAPTER XVII

With the collar of his long ulster pushed high and the brim of his derby
hat pulled low, Jimmy Jinks crept cautiously into the room. When he at
length ceased to glance over his shoulder and came to a full stop, Aggie
perceived a bit of white flannel hanging beneath the hem of his tightly
buttoned coat.

"You've GOT it!" she cried.

"Where is it?" asked Zoie.

"Give it to me," demanded Aggie.

Jimmy stared at them as though stupefied, then glanced uneasily over his
shoulder, to make sure that no one was pursuing him. Aggie unbuttoned
his ulster, seized a wee mite wrapped in a large shawl, and clasped it
to her bosom with a sigh of relief. "Thank heaven!" she exclaimed, then
crossed quickly to the bassinette and deposited her charge.

In the meantime, having thrown discretion to the wind, Zoie had hopped
out of bed. As usual, her greeting to Jimmy was in the nature of a
reproach. "What kept you?" she demanded crossly.

"Yes," chimed in Aggie, who was now bending over the crib. "What made
you so long?"

"See here!" answered Jimmy hotly, "if you two think you can do any
better, you're welcome to the job," and with that he threw off his
overcoat and sank sullenly on the couch.

"Sh! sh!" exclaimed Zoie and Aggie, simultaneously, and they glanced
nervously toward Alfred's bedroom door.

Jimmy looked at them without comprehending why he should "sh." They did
not bother to explain. Instead, Zoie turned her back upon him.

"Let's see it," she said, peeping into the bassinette. And then with a
little cry of disgust she again looked at Jimmy reproachfully. "Isn't it
ugly?" she said. Jimmy's contempt for woman's ingratitude was too
deep for words, and he only stared at her in injured silence. But his
reflections were quickly upset when Alfred called from the next room, to
inquire again about Baby.

"Alfred's here!" whispered Jimmy, beginning to realise the meaning of
the women's mysterious behaviour.

"Sh! sh!" said Aggie again to Jimmy, and Zoie flew toward the bed,
almost vaulting over the footboard in her hurry to get beneath the
covers.

For the present Alfred did not disturb them further. Apparently he was
still occupied with his shaving, but just as Jimmy was about to ask for
particulars, the 'phone rang. The three culprits glanced guiltily at
each other.

"Who's that?" whispered Zoie in a frightened voice.

Aggie crossed to the 'phone. "Hello," she called softly. "The Children's
Home?" she exclaimed.

Jimmy paused in the act of sitting and turned his round eyes toward the
'phone.

Aggie's facial expression was not reassuring. "But we can't," she was
saying; "that's impossible."

"What is it?" called Zoie across the foot of the bed, unable longer to
endure the suspense.

Aggie did not answer. She was growing more and more excited. "A thief!"
she cried wildly, over the 'phone. "How dare you call my husband a
thief!"

Jimmy was following the conversation with growing interest.

"Wait a minute," said Aggie, then she left the receiver hanging by the
cord and turned to the expectant pair behind her. "It's the Children's
Home," she explained. "That awful woman says Jimmy STOLE her baby!"

"What!" exclaimed Zoie as though such depravity on Jimmy's part were
unthinkable. Then she looked at him accusingly, and asked in low,
measured tones, "DID you STEAL HER BABY, JIMMY?"

"Didn't you tell me to?" asked Jimmy hotly. "Not literally," corrected
Aggie.

"How else COULD I steal a baby?" demanded Jimmy.

Zoie looked at the unfortunate creature as if she could strangle him,
and Aggie addressed him with a threat in her voice.

"Well, the Superintendent says you've got to bring it straight back."

"I'd like to see myself!" said Jimmy.

"He sha'n't bring it back," declared Zoie. "I'll not let him!"

"What shall I tell the Superintendent?" asked Aggie, "he's holding the
wire."

"Tell him he can't have it," answered Zoie, as though that were the end
of the whole matter.

"Well," concluded Aggie, "he says if Jimmy DOESN'T bring it back the
mother's coming after it."

"Good Lord!" exclaimed Zoie.

As for Jimmy, he bolted for the door. Aggie caught him by the sleeve as
he passed. "Wait, Jimmy," she said peremptorily. There was a moment of
awful indecision, then something approaching an idea came to Zoie.

"Tell the Superintendent that it isn't here," she whispered to Aggie
across the footboard. "Tell him that Jimmy hasn't got here yet."

"Yes," agreed Jimmy, "tell him I haven't got here yet."

Aggie nodded wisely and returned to the 'phone. "Hello," she called
pleasantly; then proceeded to explain. "Mr. Jinks hasn't got here yet."
There was a pause, then she added in her most conciliatory tone, "I'll
tell him what you say when he comes in." Another pause, and she hung up
the receiver with a most gracious good-bye and turned to the others with
increasing misgivings. "He says he won't be responsible for that mother
much longer--she's half-crazy."

"What right has she to be crazy?" demanded Zoie in an abused voice.
"She's a widow. She doesn't need a baby."

"Well," decided Aggie after careful deliberation, "you'd better take it
back, Jimmy, before Alfred sees it."

"What?" exclaimed Zoie in protest. And again Jimmy bolted, but again he
failed to reach the door.



CHAPTER XVIII

His face covered with lather, and a shaving brush in one hand, Alfred
entered the room just as his friend was about to escape.

"Jimmy!" exclaimed the excited young father, "you're back."

"Oh, yes--yes," admitted Jimmy nervously, "I'm back."

"My boy!" cried Alfred, and he glanced toward the crib. "He's here!"

"Yes--yes," agreed Aggie uneasily, as she tried to place herself between
Alfred and the bassinette. "He's here, but you mayn't have him, Alfred."

"What?" exclaimed Alfred, trying to put her out of the way.

"Not yet," protested Aggie, "not just yet."

"Give him to me," demanded Alfred, and thrusting Aggie aside, he took
possession of the small mite in the cradle.

"But--but, Alfred," pleaded Aggie, "your face. You'll get him all wet."

Alfred did not heed her. He was bending over the cradle in an ecstasy.
"My boy!" he cried, "my boy!" Lifting the baby in his arms he circled
the room cooing to him delightedly.

"Was he away from home when his fadder came? Oh, me, oh, my! Coochy!
Coochy! Coochy!" Suddenly he remembered to whom he owed this wondrous
treasure and forgetful of the lather on his unshaven face he rushed
toward Zoie with an overflowing heart. "My precious!" he exclaimed, and
he covered her cheek with kisses.

"Go away!" cried Zoie in disgust and she pushed Alfred from her and
brushed the hateful lather from her little pink check.

But Alfred was not to be robbed of his exaltation, and again he circled
the room, making strange gurgling sounds to Baby.

"Did a horrid old Jimmy take him away from fadder?" he said
sympathetically, in the small person's ear; and he glanced at Jimmy with
frowning disapproval. "I'd just like to see him get you away from me
again!" he added to Baby, as he tickled the mite's ear with the end of
his shaving brush. "Oh, me! oh, my!" he exclaimed in trepidation, as he
perceived a bit of lather on the infant's cheek. Then lifting the boy
high in his arms and throwing out his chest with great pride, he looked
at Jimmy with an air of superiority. "I guess I'm bad, aye?" he said.

Jimmy positively blushed. As for Zoie, she was growing more and more
impatient for a little attention to herself.

"Rock-a-bye, Baby," sang Alfred in strident tones and he swung the child
high in his arms.

Jimmy and Aggie gazed at Alfred as though hypnotised. They kept time to
his lullaby out of sheer nervousness. Suddenly Alfred stopped, held the
child from him and gazed at it in horror. "Good heavens!" he exclaimed.
The others waited breathlessly. "Look at that baby's face," commanded
Alfred.

Zoie and Aggie exchanged alarmed glances, then Zoie asked in
trepidation, "What's the matter with his face?"

"He's got a fever," declared Alfred. And he started toward the bed to
show the child to its mother.

"Go away!" shrieked Zoie, waving Alfred off in wild alarm.

"What?" asked Alfred, backing from her in surprise.

Aggie crossed quickly to Alfred's side and looked over his shoulder at
the boy. "I don't see anything wrong with its face," she said.

"It's scarlet!" persisted Alfred.

"Oh," said Jimmy with a superior air, "they're always like that."

"Nothing of the sort," snorted Alfred, and he glared at Jimmy
threateningly. "You've frozen the child parading him around the
streets."

"Let me have him, Alfred," begged Aggie sweetly; "I'll put him in his
crib and keep him warm."

Reluctantly Alfred released the boy. His eyes followed him to the crib
with anxiety. "Where's his nurse?" he asked, as he glanced first from
one to the other.

Zoie and Jimmy stared about the room as though expecting the desired
person to drop from the ceiling. Then Zoie turned upon her unwary
accomplice.

"Jimmy," she called in a threatening tone, "where IS his nurse?"

"Does Jimmy take the nurse out, too?" demanded Alfred, more and more
annoyed by the privileges Jimmy had apparently been usurping in his
absence.

"Never mind about the nurse," interposed Aggie. "Baby likes me better
anyway. I'll tuck him in," and she bent fondly over the crib, but Alfred
was not to be so easily pacified.

"Do you mean to tell me," he exclaimed excitedly, "that my boy hasn't
any nurse?"

"We HAD a nurse," corrected Zoie, "but--but I had to discharge her."

Alfred glanced from one to the other for an explanation.

"Discharge her?" he repeated, "for what?"

"She was crazy," stammered Zoie.

Alfred's eyes sought Aggie's for confirmation. She nodded. He directed
his steady gaze toward Jimmy. The latter jerked his head up and down in
nervous assent.

"Well," said Alfred, amazed at their apparent lack of resource, "why
didn't you get ANOTHER nurse?"

"Aggie is going to stay and take care of baby to-night," declared Zoie,
and then she beamed upon Aggie as only she knew how. "Aren't you, dear?"
she asked sweetly.

"Yes, indeed," answered Aggie, studiously avoiding Jimmy's eye.

"Baby is going to sleep in the spare room with Aggie and Jimmy," said
Zoie.

"What!" exclaimed Jimmy, too desperate to care what Alfred might infer.

Ignoring Jimmy's implied protest, Zoie continued sweetly to Alfred:

"Now, don't worry, dear; go back to your room and finish your shaving."

"Finish shaving?" repeated Alfred in a puzzled way. Then his hand went
mechanically to his cheek and he stared at Zoie in astonishment. "By
Jove!" he exclaimed, "I had forgotten all about it. That shows you how
excited I am." And with a reluctant glance toward the cradle, he went
quickly from the room, singing a high-pitched lullaby.

Just as the three conspirators were drawing together for consultation,
Alfred returned to the room. It was apparent that there was something
important on his mind.

"By the way," he said, glancing from one to another, "I forgot to
ask--what's his name?"

The conspirators looked at each other without answering. To Alfred their
delay was annoying. Of course his son had been given his father's name,
but he wished to HEAR someone say so.

"Baby's, I mean," he explained impatiently.

Jimmy felt instinctively that Zoie's eyes were upon him. He avoided her
gaze.

"Jimmy!" called Zoie, meaning only to appeal to him for a name.

"Jimmy!" thundered the infuriated Alfred. "You've called my boy 'Jimmy'?
Why 'Jimmy'?"

For once Zoie was without an answer.

After waiting in vain for any response, Alfred advanced upon the
uncomfortable Jimmy.

"You seem to be very popular around here," he sneered.

Jimmy shifted uneasily from one foot to the other and studied the
pattern of the rug upon which he was standing.

After what seemed an age to Jimmy, Alfred turned his back upon his old
friend and started toward his bedroom. Jimmy peeped out uneasily from
his long eyelashes. When Alfred reached the threshold, he faced about
quickly and stared again at Jimmy for an explanation. It seemed to Jimmy
that Alfred's nostrils were dilating. He would not have been surprised
to see Alfred snort fire. He let his eyes fall before the awful
spectacle of his friend's wrath. Alfred's upper lip began to curl. He
cast a last withering look in Jimmy's direction, retired quickly from
the scene and banged the door.

When Jimmy again had the courage to lift his eyes he was confronted by
the contemptuous gaze of Zoie, who was sitting up in bed and regarding
him with undisguised disapproval.

"Why didn't you tell him what the baby's name is?" she demanded.

"How do _I_ know what the baby's name is?" retorted Jimmy savagely.

"Sh! sh!" cautioned Aggie as she glanced nervously toward the door
through which Alfred had just passed.

"What does it matter WHAT the baby's name is so long as we have to send
it back?"

"I'll NOT send it back," declared Zoie emphatically, "at least not until
morning. That will give Jimmy a whole night to get another one."

"Another!" shrieked Jimmy. "See here, you two can't be changing babies
every five minutes without Alfred knowing it. Even HE has SOME sense."

"Nonsense!" answered Aggie shortly. "You know perfectly well that all
young babies look just alike. Their own mothers couldn't tell them
apart, if it weren't for their clothes."

"But where can we GET another?" asked Zoie.

Before Aggie could answer, Alfred was again heard calling from the next
room. Apparently all his anger had subsided, for he inquired in the most
amiable tone as to what baby might be doing and how he might be feeling.
Aggie crossed quickly to the door, and sweetly reassured the anxious
father, then she closed the door softly and turned to Zoie and Jimmy
with a new inspiration lighting her face. "I have it," she exclaimed
ecstatically.

Jimmy regarded his spouse with grave suspicion.

"Now see here," he objected, "every time YOU 'HAVE IT,' I DO IT. The
NEXT time you 'HAVE IT' YOU DO IT!"

The emphasis with which Jimmy made his declaration deserved
consideration, but to his amazement it was entirely ignored by both
women. Hopping quickly out of bed, without even glancing in his
direction, Zoie gave her entire attention to Aggie. "What is it?" she
asked eagerly.

"There must be OTHER babies' Homes," said Aggie, and she glanced at
Jimmy from her superior height.

"They aren't open all night like corner drug stores," growled Jimmy.

"Well, they ought to be," decided Zoie.

"And surely," argued Aggie, "in an extraordinary case--like----"

"This was an 'extraordinary case,'" declared Jimmy, "and you saw what
happened this time, and the Superintendent is a friend of mine--at least
he WAS a friend of mine." And with that Jimmy sat himself down on the
far corner of the couch and proceeded to ruminate on the havoc that
these two women had wrought in his once tranquil life.

Zoie gazed at Jimmy in deep disgust; her friend Aggie had made an
excellent suggestion, and instead of acting upon it with alacrity, here
sat Jimmy sulking like a stubborn child.

"I suppose," said Zoie, as her eyebrows assumed a bored angle, "there
are SOME babies in the world outside of Children's Homes."

"Of course," was Aggie's enthusiastic rejoinder; "there's one born every
minute."

"But I was born BETWEEN minutes," protested Jimmy.

"Who's talking about you?" snapped Zoie.

Again Aggie exclaimed that she "had it."

"She's got it twice as bad," groaned Jimmy, and he wondered what new
form her persecution of him was about to take.

"Where is the morning paper?" asked Aggie, excitedly.

"We can't advertise NOW," protested Zoie. "It's too late for that."

"Sh! Sh!" answered Aggie, as she snatched the paper quickly from
the table and began running her eyes up and down its third page.
"Married--married," she murmured, and then with delight she found
the half column for which she was searching. "Born," she exclaimed
triumphantly. "Here we are! Get a pencil, Zoie, and we'll take down all
the new ones."

"Of course," agreed Zoie, clapping her hands in glee, "and Jimmy can get
a taxi and look them right up."

"Oh, CAN he?" shouted Jimmy as he rose with clenched fists. "Now you
two, see here----"

Before Jimmy could complete his threat, there was a sharp ring of the
door bell. He looked at the two women inquiringly.

"It's the mother," cried Zoie in a hoarse whisper.

"The mother!" repeated Jimmy in terror and he glanced uncertainly from
one door to the other.

"Cover up the baby!" called Zoie, and drawing Jimmy's overcoat quickly
from his arm, Aggie threw it hurriedly over the cradle.

For an instant Jimmy remained motionless in the centre of the room,
hatless, coatless, and shorn of ideas. A loud knock on the door decided
him and he sank with trembling knees behind the nearest armchair, just
as Zoie made a flying leap into the bed and prepared to draw the cover
over her head.

The knock was repeated and Aggie signalled to Zoie to answer it.

"Come in!" called Zoie very faintly.



CHAPTER XIX

From his hiding-place Jimmy peeped around the edge of the armchair and
saw what seemed to be a large clothes basket entering the room. Closer
inspection revealed the small figure of Maggie, the washerwoman's
daughter, propelling the basket, which was piled high with freshly
laundered clothing. Jimmy drew a long sigh of relief, and unknotted his
cramped limbs.

"Shall I lay the things on the sofa, mum?" asked Maggie as she placed
her basket on the floor and waited for Zoie's instructions.

"Yes, please," answered Zoie, too exhausted for further comment.

Taking the laundry piece by piece from the basket, Maggie made excuses
for its delay, while she placed it on the couch. Deaf to Maggie's
chatter, Zoie lay back languidly on her pillows; but she soon heard
something that lifted her straight up in bed.

"Me mother is sorry she had to kape you waitin' this week," said Maggie
over her shoulder; "but we've got twins at OUR house."

"Twins!" echoed Zoie and Aggie simultaneously. Then together they stared
at Maggie as though she had been dropped from another world.

Finding attention temporarily diverted from himself, Jimmy had begun to
rearrange both his mind and his cravat when he felt rather than saw that
his two persecutors were regarding him with a steady, determined gaze.
In spite of himself, Jimmy raised his eyes to theirs.

"Twins!" was their laconic answer.

Now, Jimmy had heard Maggie's announcement about the bountiful supply
of offspring lately arrived at her house, but not until he caught the
fanatical gleam in the eyes of his companions did he understand the
part they meant him to play in their next adventure. He waited for no
explanation--he bolted toward the door.

"Wait, Jimmy," commanded Aggie. But it was not until she had laid firm
hold of him that he waited.

Surprised by such strange behaviour on the part of those whom she
considered her superiors, Maggie looked first at Aggie, then at Jimmy,
then at Zoie, uncertain whether to go or to stay.

"Anythin' to go back, mum?" she stammered.

Zoie stared at Maggie solemnly from across the foot of the bed.
"Maggie," she asked in a deep, sepulchral tone, "where do you live?"

"Just around the corner on High Street, mum," gasped Maggie. Then,
keeping her eyes fixed uneasily on Zoie she picked up her basket and
backed cautiously toward the door.

"Wait!" commanded Zoie; and Maggie paused, one foot in mid-air. "Wait in
the hall," said Zoie.

"Yes'um," assented Maggie, almost in a whisper. Then she nodded her
head jerkily, cast another furtive glance at the three persons who were
regarding her so strangely, and slipped quickly through the door.

Having crossed the room and stealthily closed the door, Aggie returned
to Jimmy, who was watching her with the furtive expression of a trapped
animal.

"It's Providence," she declared, with a grave countenance.

Jimmy looked up at Aggie with affected innocence, then rolled his round
eyes away from her. He was confronted by Zoie, who had approached from
the opposite side of the room.

"It's Fate," declared Zoie, in awe-struck tones.

Jimmy was beginning to wriggle, but he kept up a last desperate presence
of not understanding them.

"You needn't tell me I'm going to take the wash to the old lady," he
said, "for I'm not going to do it."

"It isn't the WASH," said Aggie, and her tone warned him that she
expected no nonsense from him.

"You know what we are thinking about just as well as we do," said Zoie.
"I'll write that washerwoman a note and tell her we must have one of
those babies right now." And with that she turned toward her desk and
began rummaging amongst her papers for a pencil and pad. "The luck of
these poor," she murmured.

"The luck of US," corrected Aggie, whose spirits were now soaring. Then
she turned to Jimmy with growing enthusiasm. "Just think of it, dear,"
she said, "Fate has sent us a baby to our very door."

"Well," declared Jimmy, again beginning to show signs of fight, "if
Fate has sent a baby to the door, you don't need me," and with that he
snatched his coat from the crib.

"Wait, Jimmy," again commanded Aggie, and she took his coat gently but
firmly from him.

"Now, see here," argued Jimmy, trying to get free from his strong-minded
spouse, "you know perfectly well that that washerwoman isn't going to
let us have that baby."

"Nonsense," called Zoie over her shoulder, while she scribbled a hurried
note to the washerwoman. "If she won't let us have it 'for keeps,' I'll
just 'rent it.'"

"Good Lord!" exclaimed Jimmy in genuine horror. "Warm, fresh,
palpitating babies rented as you would rent a gas stove!"

"That's all a pose," declared Aggie, in a matter-of-fact tone. "You
think babies 'little red worms,' you've said so."

Jimmy could not deny it.

"She'll be only too glad to rent it," declared Zoie, as she glanced
hurriedly through the note just written, and slipped it, together with
a bill, into an envelope. "I'll pay her anything. It's only until I can
get another one."

"Another!" shouted Jimmy, and his eyes turned heavenward for help. "An
endless chain with me to put the links together!"

"Don't be so theatrical," said Aggie, irritably, as she took up Jimmy's
coat and prepared to get him into it.

"Why DO you make such a fuss about NOTHING," sighed Zoie.

"Nothing?" echoed Jimmy, and he looked at her with wondering eyes.
"I crawl about like a thief in the night snatching babies from their
mother's breasts, and you call THAT nothing?"

"You don't have to 'CRAWL,'" reminded Zoie, "you can take a taxi."

"Here's your coat, dear," said Aggie graciously, as she endeavoured to
slip Jimmy's limp arms into the sleeves of the garment.

"You can take Maggie with you," said Zoie, with the air of conferring a
distinct favour upon him.

"And the wash on my lap," added Jimmy sarcastically.

"No," said Zoie, unruffled by Jimmy's ungracious behaviour. "We'll send
the wash later."

"That's very kind of you," sneered Jimmy, as he unconsciously allowed
his arms to slip into the sleeves of the coat Aggie was urging upon him.

"All you need to do," said Aggie complacently, "is to get us the baby."

"Yes," said Jimmy, "and what do you suppose my friends would say if they
were to see me riding around town with the wash-lady's daughter and a
baby on my lap? What would YOU say?" he asked Aggie, "if you didn't know
the facts?"

"Nobody's going to see you," answered Aggie impatiently; "it's only
around the corner. Go on, Jimmy, be a good boy."

"You mean a good thing," retorted Jimmy without budging from the spot.

"How ridiculous!" exclaimed Zoie; "it's as easy as can be."

"Yes, the FIRST one SOUNDED easy, too," said Jimmy.

"All you have to do," explained Zoie, trying to restrain her rising
intolerance of his stupidity, "is to give this note to Maggie's mother.
She'll give you her baby, you bring it back here, we'll give you THIS
one, and you can take it right back to the Home."

"And meet the other mother," concluded Jimmy with a shake of his head.

There was a distinct threat in Zoie's voice when she again addressed the
stubborn Jimmy and the glitter of triumph was in her eyes.

"You'd better meet here THERE than HERE," she warned him; "you know what
the Superintendent said."

"That's true," agreed Aggie with an anxious face. "Come now," she
pleaded, "it will only take a minute; you can do the whole thing before
you have had time to think."

"Before I have had time to think," repeated Jimmy excitedly. "That's how
you get me to do everything. Well, this time I've HAD time to think and
I don't think I will!" and with that he threw himself upon the couch,
unmindful of the damage to the freshly laundered clothes.

"Get up," cried Zoie.

"You haven't time to sit down," said Aggie.

"I'll TAKE time," declared Jimmy. His eyes blinked ominously and he
remained glued to the couch.

There was a short silence; the two women gazed at Jimmy in despair.
Remembering a fresh grievance, Jimmy turned upon them.

"By the way," he said, "do you two know that I haven't had anything to
eat yet?"

"And do you know," said Zoie, "that Alfred may be back at any minute? He
can't stay away forever."

"Not unless he has cut his throat," rejoined Jimmy, "and that's what I'd
do if I had a razor."

Zoie regarded Jimmy as though he were beyond redemption. "Can't you ever
think of anybody but yourself?" she asked, with a martyred air.

Had Jimmy been half his age, Aggie would have felt sure that she saw him
make a face at her friend for answer. As it was, she resolved to make
one last effort to awaken her unobliging spouse to a belated sense of
duty.

"You see, dear," she said, "you might better get the washerwoman's baby
than to go from house to house for one," and she glanced again toward
the paper.

"Yes," urged Zoie, "and that's just what you'll HAVE to do, if you don't
get this one."

Jimmy's head hung dejectedly. It was apparent that his courage was
slipping from him. Aggie was quick to realise her opportunity, and
before Jimmy could protect himself from her treacherous wiles, she had
slipped one arm coyly about his neck.

"Now, Jimmy," she pleaded as she pressed her soft cheek to his throbbing
temple, and toyed with the bay curl on his perspiring forehead, "wont
you do this little teeny-weepy thing just for me?"

Jimmy's lips puckered in a pout; he began to blink nervously. Aggie
slipped her other arm about his neck.

"You know," she continued with a baby whine, "I got Zoie into this, and
I've just got to get her out of it. You're not going to desert me,
are you, Jimmy? You WILL help me, won't you, dear?" Her breath was on
Jimmy's cheek; he could feel her lips stealing closer to his. He had not
been treated to much affection of late. His head drooped lower--he began
to twiddle the fob on his watch chain. "Won't you?" persisted Aggie.

Jimmy studied the toes of his boots.

"Won't you?" she repeated, and her soft eyelashes just brushed the tip
of his retrousee nose.

Jimmy's head was now wagging from side to side.

"Won't you?" she entreated a fourth time, and she kissed him full on the
lips.

With a resigned sigh, Jimmy rose mechanically from the heap of crushed
laundry and held out his fat chubby hand.

"Give me the letter," he groaned.

"Here you are," said Zoie, taking Jimmy's acquiescence as a matter of
course; and she thrust the letter into the pocket of Jimmy's ulster.
"Now, when you get back with the baby," she continued, "don't come in
all of a sudden; just wait outside and whistle. You CAN WHISTLE, can't
you?" she asked with a doubtful air.

For answer, Jimmy placed two fingers between his lips and produced a
shrill whistle that made both Zoie and Aggie glance nervously toward
Alfred's bedroom door.

"Yes, you can WHISTLE," admitted Zoie, then she continued her
directions. "If Alfred is not in the room, I'll raise the shade and you
can come right up."

"And if he is in the room?" asked Jimmy with a fine shade of sarcasm.

"If he IS in the room," explained Zoie, "you must wait outside until I
can get rid of him."

Jimmy turned his eyes toward Aggie to ask if it were possible that she
still approved of Zoie's inhuman plan. For answer Aggie stroked his coat
collar fondly.

"We'll give you the signal the moment the coast is clear," she said,
then she hurriedly buttoned Jimmy's large ulster and wound a muffler
about his neck. "There now, dear, do go, you're all buttoned up," and
with that she urged him toward the door.

"Just a minute," protested Jimmy, as he paused on the threshold. "Let me
get this right, if the shade is up, I stay down."

"Not at all," corrected Aggie and Zoie in a breath. "If the shade is up,
you come up."

Jimmy cast another martyred look in Zoie's direction.

"You won't hurry will you?" he said, "you know it is only twenty-three
below zero and I haven't had anything to eat yet--and----"

"Yes, we know," interrupted the two women in chorus, and then Aggie
added wearily, "go on, Jimmy; don't be funny."

"Funny?" snorted Jimmy. "With a baby on my lap and the wash lady's
daughter, I won't be funny, oh no!"

It is doubtful whether Jimmy would not have worked himself into another
state of open rebellion had not Aggie put an end to his protests by
thrusting him firmly out of the room and closing the door behind him.
After this act of heroic decision on her part, the two women listened
intently, fearing that he might return; but presently they heard the
bang of the outer door, and at last they drew a long breath of relief.
For the first time since Alfred's arrival, Aggie was preparing to sink
into a chair, when she was startled by a sharp exclamation from Zoie.

"Good heavens," cried Zoie, "I forgot to ask Maggie."

"Ask her what?" questioned Aggie.

"Boys or girls," said Zoie, with a solemn look toward the door through
which Jimmy had just disappeared.

"Well," decided Aggie, after a moment's reflection, "it's too late now.
Anyway," she concluded philosophically, "we couldn't CHANGE it."



CHAPTER XX

With more or less damage to himself consequent on his excitement, Alfred
completed his shaving and hastened to return to his wife and the babe.
Finding the supposedly ill Zoie careering about the centre of the room
expostulating with Aggie, the young man stopped dumbfounded on the
threshold.

"Zoie," he cried in astonishment. "What are you doing out of bed?"

For an instant the startled Zoie gazed at him stupefied.

"Why, I--I----" Her eyes sought Aggie's for a suggestion; there was no
answer there. It was not until her gaze fell upon the cradle that she
was seized by the desired inspiration.

"I just got up to see baby," she faltered, then putting one hand giddily
to her head, she pretended to sway.

In an instant Alfred's arms were about her. He bore her quickly to the
bed. "You stay here, my darling," he said tenderly. "I'll bring baby
to you," and after a solicitous caress he turned toward baby's crib and
bent fondly over the little one. "Ah, there's father's man," he said.
"Was he lonesome baby? Oh, goodis g'acious," then followed an incoherent
muttering of baby talk, as he bore the youngster toward Zoie's bed.
"Come, my precious," he called to Zoie, as he sank down on the edge of
the bed. "See mother's boy."

"Mother!" shrieked Zoie in horror. It had suddenly dawned upon her that
this was the name by which Alfred would no doubt call her for the rest
of her life. She almost detested him.

But Alfred did not see the look of disgust on Zoie's face. He was wholly
absorbed by baby.

"What a funny face," he cooed as he pinched the youngster's cheek.
"Great Scott, what a grip," he cried as the infant's fingers closed
around his own. "Will you look at the size of those hands," he
exclaimed.

Zoie and Aggie exchanged worried glances; the baby had no doubt
inherited his large hands from his mother.

"Say, Aggie," called Alfred, "what are all of these little specks
on baby's forehead?" He pointed toward the infant's brow. "One, two,
three," he counted.

Zoie was becoming more and more uncomfortable at the close proximity of
the little stranger.

"Oh," said Aggie, with affected carelessness as she leaned over Alfred's
shoulder and glanced at baby's forehead. "That is just a little rash."

"A rash!" exclaimed Alfred excitedly, "that's dangerous, isn't it? We'd
better call up the doctor." And he rose and started hurriedly toward the
telephone, baby in arms.

"Don't be silly," called Zoie, filled with vague alarm at the thought of
the family physician's appearance and the explanations that this might
entail.

Stepping between Alfred and the 'phone, Aggie protested frantically.
"You see, Alfred," she said, "it is better to have the rash OUT, it
won't do any harm unless it turns IN."

"He's perfectly well," declared Zoie, "if you'll only put him in his
crib and leave him alone."

Alfred looked down at his charge. "Is that right, son?" he asked, and he
tickled the little fellow playfully in the ribs. "I'll tell you what,"
he called over his shoulder to Zoie, "he's a fine looking boy." And then
with a mysterious air, he nodded to Aggie to approach. "Whom does he
look like?" he asked.

Again Zoie sat up in anxiety. Aggie glanced at her, uncertain what
answer to make.

"I--I hadn't thought," she stammered weakly.

"Go on, go on," exclaimed the proud young father, "you can't tell me
that you can look at that boy and not see the resemblance."

"To whom?" asked Aggie, half fearfully.

"Why," said Alfred, "he's the image of Zoie."

Zoie gazed at the puckered red face in Alfred's arms. "What!" she
shrieked in disgust, then fall back on her pillows and drew the lace
coverlet over her face.

Mistaking Zoie's feeling for one of embarrassment at being over-praised,
Alfred bore the infant to her bedside. "See, dear," he persisted, "see
for yourself, look at his forehead."

"I'd rather look at you," pouted Zoie, peeping from beneath the
coverlet, "if you would only put that thing down for a minute."

"Thing?" exclaimed Alfred, as though doubting his own ears. But before
he could remonstrate further, Zoie's arms were about his neck and she
was pleading jealously for his attention.

"Please, Alfred," she begged, "I have scarcely had a look at you, yet."

Alfred shook his head and turned to baby with an indulgent smile. It was
pleasant to have two such delightful creatures bidding for his entire
attention.

"Dear me," he said to baby. "Dear me, tink of mudder wanting to look at
a big u'gy t'ing like fadder, when she could look at a 'itty witty t'ing
like dis," and he rose and crossed to the crib where he deposited the
small creature with yet more gurgling and endearing.

Zoie's dreams of rapture at Alfred's home coming had not included such
divided attention as he was now showing her and she was growing more and
more desperate at the turn affairs had taken. She resolved to put a stop
to his nonsense and to make him realise that she and no one else was the
lode star of his existence. She beckoned to Aggie to get out of the
room and to leave her a clear field and as soon as her friend had gone
quietly into the next room, she called impatiently to Alfred who was
still cooing rapturously over the young stranger. Finding Alfred deaf
to her first entreaty, Zoie shut her lips hard, rearranged her pretty
head-dress, drew one fascinating little curl down over her shoulder,
reknotted the pink ribbon of her negligee, and then issued a final and
imperious order for her husband to attend her.

"Yes, yes, dear," answered Alfred, with a shade of impatience. "I'm
coming, I'm coming." And bidding a reluctant farewell to the small
person in the crib, he crossed to her side.

Zoie caught Alfred's hand and drew him down to her; he smiled
complacently.

"Well," he said in the patronising tone that Zoie always resented. "How
is hubby's little girl?"

"It's about time," pouted Zoie, "that you made a little fuss over me for
a change."

"My own!" murmured Alfred. He stooped to kiss the eager lips, but just
as his young wife prepared to lend herself to his long delayed embrace,
his mind was distracted by an uneasy thought. "Do you think that Baby
is----"

He was not permitted to finish the sentence.

Zoie drew him back to her with a sharp exclamation.

"Think of ME for a while," she commanded.

"My darling," expostulated Alfred with a shade of surprise at her
vehemence. "How could I think of anyone else?" Again he stooped to
embrace her and again his mind was directed otherwise. "I wonder if Baby
is warm enough," he said and attempted to rise.

"Wonder about ME for a while," snapped Zoie, clinging to him
determinedly.

Again Alfred looked at her in amazement. Was it possible there was
anything besides Baby worth wondering about? Whether there was or not,
Zoie was no longer to be resisted and with a last regretful look at the
crib, he resigned himself to giving his entire attention to his spoiled
young wife.

Gratified by her hard-won conquest, Zoie now settled herself in Alfred's
arms.

"You haven't told me what you did all the time that you were away," she
reminded him.

"Oh, there was plenty to do," answered Alfred.

"Did you think of me every minute?" she asked jealously.

"That would be telling," laughed Alfred, as he pinched her small pink
ear.

"I wish to be 'told,'" declared Zoie; "I don't suppose you realise it,
but if I were to live a THOUSAND YEARS, I'd never be quite sure what you
did during those FEW MONTHS."

"It was nothing that you wouldn't have been proud of," answered Alfred,
with an unconscious expansion of his chest.

"Do you love me as much as ever?" asked Zoie.

"Behave yourself," answered Alfred, trying not to appear flattered
by the discovery that his absence had undoubtedly caused her great
uneasiness.

"Well, SAY it!" demanded Zoie.

"You know I do," answered Alfred, with the diffidence of a school boy.

"Then kiss me," concluded Zoie, with an air of finality that left Alfred
no alternative.

As a matter of fact, Alfred was no longer seeking an alternative. He was
again under the spell of his wife's adorable charms and he kissed her
not once, but many times.

"Foolish child," he murmured, then he laid her tenderly against the
large white pillows, remonstrating with her for being so spoiled, and
cautioning her to be a good little girl while he went again to see about
Baby.

Zoie clung to his hand and feigned approaching tears.

"You aren't thinking of me at all?" she pouted. "And kisses are no
good unless you put your whole mind on them. Give me a real kiss!" she
pleaded.

Again Alfred stooped to humour the small importunate person who was so
jealous of his every thought, but just as his lips touched her forehead
his ear was arrested by a sound as yet new both to him and to Zoie. He
lifted his head and listened.

"What was that?" he asked.

"I don't know," answered Zoie, wondering if the cat could have got into
the room.

A redoubled effort on the part of the young stranger directed their
attention in the right direction.

"My God!" exclaimed Alfred tragically, "it's Baby. He's crying." And
with that, he rushed to the crib and clasped the small mite close to his
breast, leaving Zoie to pummel the pillows in an agony of vexation.

After vain cajoling of the angry youngster, Alfred bore him excitedly to
Zoie's bedside.

"You'd better take him, dear," he said.

To the young husband's astonishment, Zoie waved him from her in terror,
and called loudly for Aggie. But no sooner had Aggie appeared on the
scene, than a sharp whistle was heard from the pavement below.

"Pull down the shade!" cried Zoie frantically.

Aggie hastened toward the window.

Attributing Zoie's uneasiness to a caprice of modesty, Alfred turned
from the cradle to reassure her.

"No one can see in way up here," he said.

To Zoie's distress, the lowering of the shade was answered by a yet
shriller whistle from the street below.

"Was it 'up' or 'down'?" cried Zoie to Aggie in an agony of doubt, as
she tried to recall her instructions to Jimmy.

"I don't know," answered Aggie. "I've forgotten."

Another impatient whistle did not improve their memory. Alarmed by
Zoie's increasing excitement, and thinking she was troubled merely by
a sick woman's fancy that someone might see through the window, Alfred
placed the babe quickly in its cradle and crossed to the young wife's
bed.

"It was up, dear," he said. "You had Aggie put it down."

"Then I want it up," declared the seemingly perverse Zoie.

"But it was up," argued Alfred.

A succession of emotional whistles set Zoie to pounding the pillows.

"Put it down!" she commanded.

"But Zoie----" protested Alfred.

"Did I say 'up' or did I say 'down'?" moaned the half-demented Zoie,
while long whistles and short whistles, appealing whistles and impatient
whistles followed each other in quick succession.

"You said down, dear," persisted Alfred, now almost as distracted as his
wife.

Zoie waved him from the room. "I wish you'd get out of here," she cried;
"you make me so nervous that I can't think at all."

"Of course, dear," murmured Alfred, "if you wish it." And with a hurt
and perplexed expression on his face he backed quickly from the room.



CHAPTER XXI

When Zoie's letter asking for the O'Flarety twin had reached that young
lady's astonished mother, Mrs. O'Flarety felt herself suddenly lifted to
a position of importance.

"Think of the purty Mrs. Hardy a wantin' my little Bridget," she
exclaimed, and she began to dwell upon the romantic possibilities of
her offspring's future under the care of such a "foine stylish lady and
concluded by declaring it 'a lucky day entoirely.'"

Jimmy had his misgivings about it being Bridget's "LUCKY day," but it
was not for him to delay matters by dwelling upon the eccentricities
of Zoie's character, and when Mrs. O'Flarety had deposited Bridget in
Jimmy's short arms and slipped a well filled nursing bottle into his
overcoat pocket, he took his leave hastily, lest the excited woman add
Bridget's twin to her willing offering.

Once out of sight of the elated mother, Jimmy thrust the defenceless
Bridget within the folds of his already snug ulster, buttoned the
garment in such places as it would meet, and made for the taxi which,
owing to the upset condition of the street, he had been obliged to
abandon at the corner.

Whether the driver had obtained a more promising "fare" or been run
in by the police, Jimmy never knew. At any rate it was in vain that he
looked for his vehicle. So intense was the cold that it was impossible
to wait for a chance taxi; furthermore, the meanness of the district
made it extremely unlikely that one would appear, and glancing guiltily
behind him to make sure that no one was taking cognisance of his strange
exploit, Jimmy began picking his way along dark lanes and avoiding the
lighted thoroughfare on which the "Sherwood" was situated, until he was
within a block of his destination.

Panting with haste and excitement, he eventually gained courage to
dash through a side street that brought him within a few doors of the
"Sherwood." Again glancing behind him, he turned the well lighted corner
and arrived beneath Zoie's window to find one shade up and one down. In
his perplexity he emitted a faint whistle. Immediately he saw the other
shade lowered. Uncertain as to what arrangement he had actually made
with Zoie, he ventured a second whistle. The result was a hysterical
running up and down of the shade which left him utterly bewildered as to
what disposition he was supposed to make of the wobbly bit of humanity
pressed against his shirt front.

Reaching over his artificially curved figure to grasp a bit of white
that trailed below his coat, he looked up to see a passing policeman
eyeing him suspiciously.

"Taking the air?" asked the policeman.

"Ye-yes," mumbled Jimmy with affected nonchalence and he knocked the
heels of his boots together in order to keep his teeth from chattering.
"It's a fi-fine ni-night for air," he stuttered.

"Is it?" said the policeman, and to Jimmy's horror, he saw the fellow's
eyes fix themselves on the bit of white.

"Go-good-night," stammered Jimmy hurriedly, and trying to assume an
easy stride in spite of the uncomfortable addition to his already rotund
figure, he slipped into the hotel, where avoiding the lighted elevator,
he laboured quickly, up the stairs.

At the very moment when Zoie was driving Alfred in consternation from
the room, Jimmy entered it uninvited.

"Get out," was the inhospitable greeting received simultaneously from
Zoie and Aggie, and without waiting for further instructions he "got."

Fortunately for all concerned, Alfred, who was at the same moment
departing by way of the bedroom door, did not look behind him; but it
was some minutes before Aggie who had followed Jimmy into the hall could
persuade him to return.

After repeated and insistent signals both from Aggie and Zoie, Jimmy's
round red face appeared cautiously around the frame of the door. It bore
unmistakable indications of apoplexy. But the eyes of the women were not
upon Jimmy's face, they too had caught sight of the bit of white that
hung below his coat, and dragging him quickly into the room and closing
the door, Aggie proceeded without inquiry or thanks to unbutton his coat
and to take from beneath it the small object for which she and Zoie had
been eagerly waiting.

"Thank Heaven!" sighed Zoie, as she saw Aggie bearing the latest
acquisition to Alfred's rapidly increasing family safely toward the
crib.

Suddenly remembering something in his right hand coat pocket, Jimmy
called to Aggie, who turned to him and waited expectantly. After
characteristic fumbling, he produced a well filled nursing bottle.

"What's that?" asked Zoie.

"For HER," grunted Jimmy, and he nodded toward the bundle in Aggie's
arms.

"HER!" cried Zoie and Aggie in chorus. Zoie shut her lips hard and gazed
at him with contempt.

"I might have known you'd get the wrong kind," she said.

What Jimmy thought about the ingratitude of woman was not to be
expressed in language. He controlled himself as well as he could and
merely LOOKED the things that he would like to have said.

"Well, it can't be helped now," decided the philosophic Aggie; "here,
Jimmy," she said, "you hold 'HER' a minute and I'll get you the other
one."

Placing the small creature in Jimmy's protesting arms, Aggie turned
toward the cradle to make the proposed exchange when she was startled by
the unexpected return of Alfred.

Thanks to the ample folds of Jimmy's ulster, he was able to effectually
conceal his charge and he started quickly toward the hall, but in making
the necessary detour around the couch he failed to reach the door before
Alfred, who had chosen a more direct way.

"Hold on, Jimmy," exclaimed Alfred good-naturedly, and he laid a
detaining hand on his friend's shoulder. "Where are you going?"

"I'll be back," stammered Jimmy weakly, edging his way toward the door,
and contriving to keep his back toward Alfred.

"Wait a minute," said Alfred jovially, as he let his hand slip onto
Jimmy's arm, "you haven't told me the news yet."

"I'll tell you later," mumbled Jimmy, still trying to escape. But
Alfred's eye had fallen upon a bit of white flannel dangling below
the bottom of Jimmy's ulster, it travelled upward to Jimmy's unusually
rotund figure.

"What have you got there?" he demanded to know, as he pointed toward the
centre button of Jimmy's overcoat.

"Here?" echoed Jimmy vapidly, glancing at the button in question, "why,
that's just a little----" There was a faint wail from the depths of
the ulster. Jimmy began to caper about with elephantine tread. "Oochie,
coochie, oochie," he called excitedly.

"What's the matter with you?" asked Alfred. The wail became a shriek.
"Good Heavens!" cried the anxious father, "it's my boy." And with that
he pounced upon Jimmy, threw wide his ulster and snatched from his arms
Jimmy's latest contribution to Zoie's scheme of things.

As Aggie had previously remarked, all young babies look very much alike,
and to the inexperienced eye of this new and overwrought father, there
was no difference between the infant that he now pressed to his breast,
and the one that, unsuspected by him, lay peacefully dozing in the crib,
not ten feet from him. He gazed at the face of the newcomer with the
same ecstasy that he had felt in the possession of her predecessor. But
Zoie and Aggie were looking at each other with something quite different
from ecstasy.

"My boy," exclaimed Alfred, with deep emotion, as he clasped the tiny
creature to his breast. Then he turned to Jimmy. "What were you doing
with my baby?" he demanded hotly.

"I--I was just taking him out for a little walk!" stammered Jimmy.

"You just try," threatened Alfred, and he towered over the intimidated
Jimmy. "Are you crazy?"

Jimmy was of the opinion that he must be crazy or he would never have
found himself in such a predicament as this, but the anxious faces of
Zoie and Aggie, denied him the luxury of declaring himself so. He sank
mutely on the end of the couch and proceeded to sulk in silence.

As for Aggie and Zoie, they continued to gaze open-mouthed at Alfred,
who was waltzing about the room transported into a new heaven of delight
at having snatched his heir from the danger of another night ramble with
Jimmy.

"Did a horrid old Jimmy spoil his 'itty nap'?" he gurgled to Baby. Then
with a sudden exclamation of alarm, he turned toward the anxious women.
"Aggie!" he cried, as he stared intently into Baby's face. "Look--his
rash! It's turned IN!"

Aggie pretended to glance over Alfred's shoulder.

"Why so it has," she agreed nervously.

"What shall we do?" cried the distraught Alfred.

"It's all right now," counselled Aggie, "so long as it didn't turn in
too suddenly."

"We'd better keep him warm, hadn't we?" suggested Alfred, remembering
Aggie's previous instructions on a similar occasion. "I'll put him in
his crib," he decided, and thereupon he made a quick move toward the
bassinette.

Staggering back from the cradle with the unsteadiness of a drunken man
Alfred called upon the Diety. "What is THAT?" he demanded as he pointed
toward the unexpected object before him.

Neither Zoie, Aggie, nor Jimmy could command words to assist Alfred's
rapidly waning powers of comprehension, and it was not until he had
swept each face for the third time with a look of inquiry that Zoie
found breath to stammer nervously, "Why--why--why, that's the OTHER
one."

"The other one?" echoed Alfred in a dazed manner; then he turned to
Aggie for further explanation.

"Yes," affirmed Aggie, with an emphatic nod, "the other one."

An undescribable joy was dawning on Alfred's face.

"You don't mean----" He stared from the infant in his arms to the one in
the cradle, then back again at Aggie and Zoie. The women solemnly nodded
their heads. Even Jimmy unblushingly acquiesced. Alfred turned toward
Zoie for the final confirmation of his hopes.

"Yes, dear," assented Zoie sweetly, "that's Alfred."

What Jimmy and the women saw next appeared to be the dance of a whirling
dervish; as a matter of fact, it was merely a man, mad with delight,
clasping two infants in long clothes and circling the room with them.

When Alfred could again enunciate distinctly, he rushed to Zoie's side
with the babes in his arms.

"My darling," he exclaimed, "why didn't you tell me?"

"I was ashamed," whispered Zoie, hiding her head to shut out the sight
of the red faces pressed close to hers.

"My angel!" cried Alfred, struggling to control his complicated
emotions; then gazing at the precious pair in his arms, he cast his eyes
devoutly toward heaven, "Was ever a man so blessed?"

Zoie peeped from the covers with affected shyness.

"You love me just as much?" she queried.

"I love you TWICE as much," declared Alfred, and with that he sank
exhausted on the foot of the bed, vainly trying to teeter one son on
each knee.



CHAPTER XXII

When Jimmy gained courage to turn his eyes in the direction of the
family group he had helped to assemble, he was not reassured by the
reproachful glances that he met from Aggie and Zoie. It was apparent
that in their minds, he was again to blame for something. Realising that
they dared not openly reproach him before Alfred, he decided to make his
escape while his friend was still in the room. He reached for his hat
and tiptoed gingerly toward the door, but just as he was congratulating
himself upon his decision, Alfred called to him with a mysterious air.

"Jimmy," he said, "just a minute," and he nodded for Jimmy to approach.

It must have been Jimmy's guilty conscience that made him powerless
to disobey Alfred's every command. Anyway, he slunk back to the fond
parent's side, where he ultimately allowed himself to be inveigled into
swinging his new watch before the unattentive eyes of the red-faced
babes on Alfred's knees.

"Lower, Jimmy, lower," called Alfred as Jimmy absent-mindedly allowed
the watch to swing out of the prescribed orbit. "Look at the darlings,
Jimmy, look at them," he exclaimed as he gazed at the small creatures
admiringly.

"Yes, look at them, Jimmy," repeated Zoie, and she glared at Jimmy
behind Alfred's back.

"Don't you wish you had one of them, Jimmy?'" asked Alfred.

"Well, _I_ wish he had," commented Zoie, and she wondered how she was
ever again to detach either of them from Alfred's breast.

Before she could form any plan, the telephone rang loud and
persistently. Jimmy glanced anxiously toward the women for instructions.

"I'll answer it," said Aggie with suspicious alacrity, and she crossed
quickly toward the 'phone. The scattered bits of conversation that Zoie
was able to gather from Aggie's end of the wire did not tend to soothe
her over-excited nerves. As for Alfred, he was fortunately so engrossed
with the babies that he took little notice of what Aggie was saying.

"What woman?" asked Aggie into the 'phone. "Where's she from?" The
answer was evidently not reassuring. "Certainly not," exclaimed Aggie,
"don't let her come up; send her away. Mrs. Hardy can't see anyone at
all." Then followed a bit of pantomime between Zoie and Aggie, from
which it appeared that their troubles were multiplying, then Aggie again
gave her attention to the 'phone. "I don't know anything about her," she
fibbed, "that woman must have the wrong address." And with that she hung
up the receiver and came towards Alfred, anxious to get possession of
his two small charges and to get them from the room, lest the mother who
was apparently downstairs should thrust herself into their midst.

"What's the trouble, Aggie?" asked Alfred, and he nodded toward the
telephone.

"Oh, just some woman with the wrong address," answered Aggie with
affected carelessness. "You'd better let me take the babies now,
Alfred."

"Take them where?" asked Alfred with surprise.

"To bed," answered Aggie sweetly, "they are going to sleep in the next
room with Jimmy and me." She laid a detaining hand on Jimmy's arm.

"What's the hurry?" asked Alfred a bit disgruntled.

"It's very late," argued Aggie.

"Of course it is," insisted Zoie. "Please, Alfred," she pleaded, "do let
Aggie take them."

Alfred rose reluctantly. "Mother knows best," he sighed, but ignoring
Aggie's outstretched arms, he refused to relinquish the joy of himself
carrying the small mites to their room, and he disappeared with the two
of them, singing his now favourite lullaby.

When Alfred had left the room, Jimmy, who was now seated comfortably in
the rocker, was rudely startled by a sharp voice at either side of him.

"Well!" shrieked Zoie, with all the disapproval that could be got into
the one small word.

"You're very clever, aren't you?" sneered Aggie at Jimmy's other elbow.

Jimmy stared from one to the other.

"A nice fix you've got me into NOW," reproved Zoie.

"Why didn't you get out when you had the chance?" demanded Aggie.

"You would take your own sweet time, wouldn't you," said Zoie.

"What did I tell you?" asked Aggie.

"What does he care?" exclaimed Zoie, and she walked up and down the room
excitedly, oblivious of the disarrangement of her flying negligee. "He's
perfectly comfortable."

"Oh yes," assented Jimmy, as he sank back into the rocker and
began propelling himself to and fro. "I never felt better," but a
disinterested observer would have seen in him the picture of discomfort.

"You're going to feel a great deal WORSE," he was warned by Aggie. "Do
you know who that was on the telephone?" she asked.

Jimmy looked at her mutely.

"The mother!" said Aggie emphatically

"What!" exclaimed Jimmy.

"She's down stairs," explained Aggie.

Jimmy had stopped rocking--his face now wore an uneasy expression.

"It's time you showed a little human intelligence," taunted Zoie, then
she turned her back upon him and continued to Aggie, "what did she say?"

"She says," answered Aggie, with a threatening glance toward Jimmy,
"that she won't leave this place until Jimmy gives her baby back."

"Let her have her old baby," said Jimmy. "I don't want it."

"You don't want it?" snapped Zoie indignantly, "what have YOU got to do
with it?"

"Oh nothing, nothing," acquiesced Jimmy meekly, "I'm a mere detail."

"A lot you care what becomes of me," exclaimed Zoie reproachfully; then
she turned to Aggie with a decided nod. "Well, I want it," she asserted.

"But Zoie," protested Aggie in astonishment, "you can't mean to keep
BOTH of them?"

"I certainly DO," said Zoie.

"What?" cried Aggie and Jimmy in concert.

"Jimmy has presented Alfred with twins," continued Zoie testily, "and
now, he has to HAVE twins."

Jimmy's eyes were growing rounder and rounder.

"Do you know," continued Zoie, with a growing sense of indignation,
"what would happen to me if I told Alfred NOW that he WASN'T the father
of twins? He'd fly straight out of that door and I'd never see him
again."

Aggie admitted that Zoie was no doubt speaking the truth.

"Jimmy has awakened Alfred's paternal instinct for twins," declared
Zoie, with another emphatic nod of her head, "and now Jimmy must take
the consequences."

Jimmy tried to frame a few faint objections, but Zoie waved him aside,
with a positive air. "It's no use arguing. If it were only ONE, it
wouldn't be so bad, but to tell Alfred that he's lost twins, he couldn't
live through it."

"But Zoie," argued Aggie, "we can't have that mother hanging around down
stairs until that baby is an old man. She'll have us arrested, the next
thing."

"Why arrest US?" asked Zoie, with wide baby eyes. "WE didn't take it.
Old slow-poke took it." And she nodded toward the now utterly vanquished
Jimmy.

"That's right," murmured Jimmy, with a weak attempt at sarcasm, "don't
leave me out of anything good."

"It doesn't matter WHICH one she arrests," decided the practical Aggie.

"Well, it matters to me," objected Zoie.

"And to me too, if it's all the same to you," protested Jimmy.

"Whoever it is," continued Aggie, "the truth is bound to come out.
Alfred will have to know sooner or later, so we might as well make a
clean breast of it, first as last."

"That's the first sensible thing you've said in three months," declared
Jimmy with reviving hope.

"Oh, is that so?" sneered Zoie, and she levelled her most malicious look
at Jimmy. "What do you think Alfred would do to YOU, Mr. Jimmy, if he
knew the truth? YOU'RE the one who sent him the telegram; you are the
one who told him that he was a FATHER."

"That's true," admitted Aggie, with a wrinkled forehead.

Zoie was quick to see her advantage. She followed it up. "And Alfred
hasn't any sense of humour, you know."

"How could he have?" groaned Jimmy; "he's married." And with that he
sank into his habitual state of dumps.

"Your sarcasm will do a great deal of good," flashed Zoie. Then she
dismissed him with a nod, and crossed to her dressing table.

"But Zoie," persisted Aggie, as she followed her young friend in
trepidation, "don't you realise that if you persist in keeping this
baby, that mother will dog Jimmy's footsteps for the rest of his life?"

"That will be nice," murmured Jimmy.

Zoie busied herself with her toilet, and turned a deaf ear to Aggie.
There was a touch of genuine emotion in Aggie's voice when she
continued.

"Just think of it, Zoie, Jimmy will never be able to come and go like a
free man again."

"What do I care how he comes and goes?" exclaimed Zoie impatiently. "If
Jimmy had gone when we told him to go, that woman would have had her old
baby by now; but he didn't, oh no! All he ever does is to sit around and
talk about his dinner."

"Yes," cried Jimmy hotly, "and that's about as far as I ever GET with
it."

"You'll never get anywhere with anything," was Zoie's exasperating
answer. "You're too slow."

"Well, there's nothing slow about you," retorted Jimmy, stung to a
frenzy by her insolence.

"Oh please, please," interposed Aggie, desperately determined to keep
these two irascible persons to the main issue. "What are we going to
tell that mother?"

"You can tell her whatever you like," answered Zoie, with an impudent
toss of her head, "but I'll NOT give up that baby until I get ANOTHER
one.'

"Another?" almost shrieked Jimmy. It was apparent that he must needs
increase the number of his brain cells if he were to follow this
extraordinary young woman's line of thought much further. "You don't
expect to go on multiplying them forever, do you?" he asked.

"YOU are the one who has been multiplying them," was Zoie's
disconcerting reply.

It was evident to Jimmy that he could not think fast enough nor clearly
enough to save himself from a mental disaster if he continued to argue
with the shameless young woman, so he contented himself by rocking to
and fro and murmuring dismally that he had "known from the first that it
was to be an endless chain."

While Zoie and Jimmy had been wrangling, Aggie had been weighing the
pros and cons of the case. She now turned to Jimmy with a tone of firm
but motherly decision. "Zoie is quite right," she said.

Jimmy rolled his large eyes up at his spouse with a "you too, Brutus,"
expression.

Aggie continued mercilessly, "It's the only way, Jimmy."

No sooner had Aggie arrived at her decision than Zoie upset her
tranquillity by a triumphant expression of "I have it."

Jimmy and Aggie gazed at Zoie's radiant face in consternation. They were
accustomed to see only reproach there. Her sudden enthusiasm increased
Jimmy's uneasiness.

"YOU have it," he grunted without attempting to conceal his disgust.
"SHE'S the one who generally has it." And he nodded toward Aggie.

Inflamed by her young friend's enthusiasm, Aggie rushed to her eagerly.

"What is it, Zoie?" she asked.

"The washerwoman!" exclaimed Zoie, as though the revelation had come
straight from heaven. "SHE HAD TWINS," and with that, two pairs of eyes
turned expectantly toward the only man in the room.

Tracing the pattern of the rug with his toe, Jimmy remained stubbornly
oblivious of their attentions. He rearranged the pillows on the couch,
and finally, for want of a better occupation, he wound his watch. All to
no avail. He could feel Zoie's cat-like gaze upon him.

"Jimmy can get the other one," she said.

"The hell I can," exclaimed Jimmy, starting to his feet and no longer
considering time or place.

The two women gazed at him reproachfully.

"Jimmy!" cried Aggie, in a shocked, hurt voice. "That's the first time
I've ever heard you swear."

"Well, it won't be the LAST time," declared Jimmy hotly, "if THIS keeps
up." His eyes were blazing. He paced to and fro like an infuriated lion.

"Dearest," said Aggie, "you look almost imposing."

"Nonsense," interrupted Zoie, who found Jimmy unusually ridiculous. "If
I'd known that Jimmy was going to put such an idea into Alfred's head,
I'd have got the two in the first place."

"Will she let us HAVE the other?" asked Aggie with some misgiving.

"Of course she will," answered Zoie, leaving Jimmy entirely out of
the conversation. "She's as poor as a church mouse. I'll pay her well.
She'll never miss it. What could she do with one twin, anyway?"

A snort of rage from Jimmy did not disturb Zoie's enthusiasm. She
proceeded to elaborate her plan.

"I'll adopt them," she declared, "I'll leave them all Alfred's money.
Think of Alfred having real live twins for keeps."

"It would be nice, wouldn't it?" commented Jimmy sarcastically.

Zoie turned to Jimmy, as though they were on the best of terms.

"How much money have you?" she asked.

Before Jimmy could declare himself penniless, Aggie answered for him
with the greatest enthusiasm, "He has a whole lot; he drew some today."

"Good!" exclaimed Zoie to the abashed Jimmy, and then she continued in a
matter-of-fact tone, "Now, Jimmy," she said, "you go give the washwoman
what money you have on account, then tell her to come around here in the
morning when Alfred has gone out and I'll settle all the details with
her. Go on now, Jimmy," she continued, "you don't need another letter."

"No," chimed in Aggie sweetly; "you know her now, dear."

"Oh, yes," corroborated Jimmy, with a sarcastic smile and without
budging from the spot on which he stood, "we are great pals now."

"What's the matter?" asked Zoie, astonished that Jimmy was not starting
on his mission with alacrity. "What are you waiting for?"

Jimmy merely continued to smile enigmatically.

"You know what happened the last time you hesitated," warned Aggie.

"I know what happened when I DIDN'T hesitate," ruminated Jimmy, still
holding his ground.

Zoie's eyes were wide with surprise. "You don't mean to say," she
exclaimed incredulously, "that you aren't GOING--after we have thought
all this out just to SAVE you?"

"Say," answered Jimmy, with a confidential air, "do me a favour, will
you? Stop thinking out things to 'save me.'"

"But, Jimmy----" protested both women simultaneously; but before they
could get further Alfred's distressed voice reached them from the next
room.

"Aggie!" he called frantically.



CHAPTER XVIII

What seemed to be a streak of pink through the room was in reality Zoie
bolting for the bed.

While Zoie hastened to snuggle comfortably under the covers, Aggie tried
without avail to get Jimmy started on his errand.

Getting no response from Aggie, Alfred, bearing one infant in his arms,
came in search of her. Apparently he was having difficulty with the
unfastening of baby's collar.

"Aggie," he called sharply, "how on earth do you get this fool pin out?"

"Take him back, Alfred," answered Aggie impatiently; "I'll be there in a
minute."

But Alfred had apparently made up his mind that he was not a success as
a nurse.

"You'd better take him now, Aggie," he decided, as he offered the small
person to the reluctant Aggie. "I'll stay here and talk to Jimmy."

"Oh, but Jimmy was just going out," answered Aggie; then she turned to
her obdurate spouse with mock sweetness, "Weren't you, dear?" she asked.

"Yes," affirmed Zoie, with a threatening glance toward Jimmy. "He was
going, just now."

Still Jimmy remained rooted to the spot.

"Out?" questioned Alfred. "What for?"

"Just for a little air," explained Aggie blandly.

"Yes," growled Jimmy, "another little heir."

"Air?" repeated Alfred in surprise. "He had air a while ago with my
son. He is going to stay here and tell me the news. Sit down, Jimmy,"
he commanded, and to the intense annoyance of Aggie and Zoie, Jimmy sank
resignedly on the couch.

Alfred was about to seat himself beside his friend, when the 'phone rang
violently. Being nearest to the instrument, Alfred reached it first and
Zoie and Aggie awaited the consequences in dread. What they heard did
not reassure them nor Jimmy.

"Still down there?" exclaimed Alfred into the 'phone.

Jimmy began to wriggle with a vague uneasiness.

"Well," continued Alfred at the 'phone, "that woman has the wrong
number." Then with a peremptory "Wait a minute," he turned to Zoie, "The
hall boy says that woman who called a while ago is still down stairs and
she won't go away until she has seen you, Zoie. She has some kind of an
idiotic idea that you know where her baby is."

"How absurd," sneered Zoie.

"How silly," added Aggie.

"How foolish," grunted Jimmy.

"Well," decided Alfred, "I'd better go down stairs and see what's
the matter with her," and he turned toward the door to carry out his
intention.

"Alfred!" called Zoie sharply. She was half out of bed in her anxiety.
"You'll do no such thing. 'Phone down to the boy to send her away. She's
crazy."

"Oh," said Alfred, "then she's been here before? Who is she?"

"Who is she?" answered Zoie, trying to gain time for a new inspiration.
"Why, she's--she's----" her face lit up with satisfaction--the idea had
arrived. "She's the nurse," she concluded emphatically.

"The nurse?" repeated Alfred, a bit confused.

"Yes," answered Zoie, pretending to be annoyed with his dull memory.
"She's the one I told you about, the one I had to discharge."

"Oh," said Alfred, with the relief of sudden comprehension; "the crazy
one?"

Aggie and Zoie nodded their heads and smiled at him tolerantly, then
Zoie continued to elaborate. "You see," she said, "the poor creature was
so insane about little Jimmy that I couldn't go near the child."

"What!" exclaimed Alfred in a mighty rage. "I'll soon tell the boy what
to do with her," he declared, and he rushed to the 'phone. Barely had
Alfred taken the receiver from the hook when the outer door was heard
to bang. Before he could speak a distracted young woman, whose excitable
manner bespoke her foreign origin, swept through the door without seeing
him and hurled herself at the unsuspecting Zoie. The woman's black hair
was dishevelled, and her large shawl had fallen from her shoulders. To
Jimmy, who was crouching behind an armchair, she seemed a giantess.

"My baby!" cried the frenzied mother, with what was unmistakably an
Italian accent. "Where is he?" There was no answer; her eyes sought
the cradle. "Ah!" she shrieked, then upon finding the cradle empty, she
redoubled her lamentations and again she bore down upon the terrified
Zoie.

"You," she cried, "you know where my baby is!"

For answer, Zoie sank back amongst her pillows and drew the bed covers
completely over her head. Alfred approached the bed to protect his young
wife; the Italian woman wheeled about and perceived a small child in his
arms. She threw herself upon him.

"I knew it," she cried; "I knew it!"

Managing to disengage himself from what he considered a mad woman, and
elevating one elbow between her and the child, Alfred prevented the
mother from snatching the small creature from his arms.

"Calm yourself, madam," he commanded with a superior air. "We are very
sorry for you, of course, but we can't have you coming here and going on
like this. He's OUR baby and----"

"He's NOT your baby!" cried the infuriated mother; "he's MY baby.
Give him to me. Give him to me," and with that she sprang upon the
uncomfortable Alfred like a tigress. Throwing her whole weight on his
uplifted elbow, she managed to pull down his arm until she could look
into the face of the washerwoman's promising young offspring. The air
was rent by a scream that made each individual hair of Jimmy's head
stand up in its own defence. He could feel a sickly sensation at the top
of his short thick neck.

"He's NOT my baby," wailed the now demented mother, little dreaming that
the infant for which she was searching was now reposing comfortably on a
soft pillow in the adjoining room.

As for Alfred, all of this was merely confirmation of Zoie's statement
that this poor soul was crazy, and he was tempted to dismiss her with
worthy forbearance.

"I am glad, madam," he said, "that you are coming to your senses."

Now, all would have gone well and the bewildered mother would no doubt
have left the room convinced of her mistake, had not Jimmy's nerves got
the better of his judgment. Having slipped cautiously from his position
behind the armchair he was tiptoeing toward the door, and was flattering
himself on his escape, when suddenly, as his forward foot cautiously
touched the threshold, he heard the cry of the captor in his wake, and
before he could possibly command the action of his other foot, he felt
himself being forcibly drawn backward by what appeared to be his too
tenacious coat-tails.

"If only they would tear," thought Jimmy, but thanks to the excellence
of the tailor that Aggie had selected for him, they did NOT "tear."

Not until she had anchored Jimmy safely to the centre of the rug did the
irate mother pour out the full venom of her resentment toward him. From
the mixture of English and Italian that followed, it was apparent that
she was accusing Jimmy of having stolen her baby.

"Take me to him," she demanded tragically; "my baby--take me to him!"

Jimmy appealed to Aggie and Zoie. Their faces were as blank as his own.
He glanced at Alfred.

"Humour her," whispered Alfred, much elated by the evidence of his
own self-control as compared to Jimmy's utter demoralisation under the
apparently same circumstances.

Still Jimmy did not budge.

Alfred was becoming vexed; he pointed first to his own forehead, then
to that of Jimmy's hysterical captor. He even illustrated his meaning
by making a rotary motion with his forefinger, intended to remind Jimmy
that the woman was a lunatic.

Still Jimmy only stared at him and all the while the woman was becoming
more and more emphatic in her declaration that Jimmy knew where her baby
was.

"Sure, Jimmy," said Alfred, out of all patience with Jimmy's stupidity
and tiring of the strain of the woman's presence. "You know where her
baby is."

"Ah!" cried the mother, and she towered over Jimmy with a wild light in
her eyes. "Take me to him," she demanded; "take me to him."

Jimmy rolled his large eyes first toward Aggie, then toward Zoie and at
last toward Alfred. There was no mercy to be found anywhere.

"Take her to him, Jimmy," commanded a concert of voices; and pursued by
a bundle of waving colours and a medley of discordant sounds, Jimmy shot
from the room.



CHAPTER XXIV

The departure of Jimmy and the crazed mother was the occasion for a
general relaxing among the remaining occupants of the room. Exhausted
by what had passed Zoie had ceased to interest herself in the future. It
was enough for the present that she could sink back upon her pillows and
draw a long breath without an evil face bending over her, and without
the air being rent by screams.

As for Aggie, she fell back upon the window seat and closed her eyes.
The horrors into which Jimmy might be rushing had not yet presented
themselves to her imagination.

Of the three, Alfred was the only one who had apparently received
exhilaration from the encounter. He was strutting about the room with
the babe in his arms, undoubtedly enjoying the sensations of a hero.
When he could sufficiently control his feeling of elation, he looked
down at the small person with an air of condescension and again lent
himself to the garbled sort of language with which defenceless infants
are inevitably persecuted.

"Tink of dat horrid old woman wanting to steal our own little oppsie,
woppsie, toppsie babykins," he said. Then he turned to Zoie with an
air of great decision. "That woman ought to be locked up," he declared,
"she's dangerous," and with that he crossed to Aggie and hurriedly
placed the infant in her unsuspecting arms. "Here, Aggie," he said, "you
take Alfred and get him into bed."

Glad of an excuse to escape to the next room and recover her self
control, Aggie quickly disappeared with the child.

For some moments Alfred continued to pace up and down the room; then he
came to a full stop before Zoie.

"I'll have to have something done to that woman," he declared
emphatically.

"Jimmy will do enough to her," sighed Zoie, weakly.

"She's no business to be at large," continued Alfred; then, with a
business-like air, he started toward the telephone.

"Where are you going?" asked Zoie.

Alfred did not answer. He was now calling into the 'phone, "Give me
information."

"What on earth are you doing?" demanded Zoie, more and more disturbed by
his mysterious manner.

"One can't be too careful," retorted Alfred in his most paternal
fashion; "there's an awful lot of kidnapping going on these days."

"Well, you don't suspect information, do you?" asked Zoie.

Again Alfred ignored her; he was intent upon things of more importance.

"Hello," he called into the 'phone, "is this information?" Apparently it
was for he continued, with a satisfied air, "Well, give me the Fullerton
Street Police Station."

"The Police?" cried Zoie, sitting up in bed and looking about the room
with a new sense of alarm.

Alfred did not answer.

"Aggie!" shrieked the over-wrought young wife.

Alfred attempted to reassure her. "Now, now, dear, don't get nervous,"
he said, "I am only taking the necessary precautions." And again he
turned to the 'phone.

Alarmed by Zoie's summons, Aggie entered the room hastily. She was not
reassured upon hearing Alfred's further conversation at the 'phone.

"Is this the Fullerton Street Police Station?" asked Alfred.

"The Police!" echoed Aggie, and her eyes sought Zoie's inquiringly.

"Sh! Sh!" called Alfred over his shoulder to the excited Aggie, then
he continued into the 'phone. "Is Donneghey there?" There was a pause.
Alfred laughed jovially. "It is? Well, hello, Donneghey, this is your
old friend Hardy, Alfred Hardy at the Sherwood. I've just got back,"
then he broke the happy news to the no doubt appreciative Donneghey.
"What do you think?" he said, "I'm a happy father."

Zoie puckered her small face in disgust.

Alfred continued to elucidate joyfully at the 'phone.

"Doubles," he said, "yes--sure--on the level."

"I don't know why you have to tell the whole neighbourhood," snapped
Zoie. Her colour was visibly rising.

But Alfred was now in the full glow of his genial account to his friend.
"Set 'em up?" he repeated in answer to an evident suggestion from the
other end of the line, "I should say I would. The drinks are on me. Tell
the boys I'll be right over. And say, Donneghey," he added, in a more
confidential tone, "I want to bring one of the men home with me. I
want him to keep an eye on the house to-night"; then after a pause, he
concluded confidentially, "I'll tell you all about it when I get there.
It looks like a kidnapping scheme to me," and with that he hung up the
receiver, unmistakably pleased with himself, and turned his beaming face
toward Zoie.

"It's all right, dear," he said, rubbing his hands together with evident
satisfaction, "Donneghey is going to let us have a Special Officer to
watch the house to-night."

"I won't HAVE a special officer," declared Zoie vehemently; then
becoming aware of Alfred's great surprise, she explained half-tearfully,
"I'm not going to have the police hanging around our very door. I would
feel as though I were in prison."

"You ARE in prison, my dear," returned the now irrepressible Alfred. "A
prison of love--you and our precious boys." He stooped and implanted a
gracious kiss on her forehead, then turned toward the table for his hat.
"Now," he said, "I'll just run around the corner, set up the drinks for
the boys, and bring the officer home with me," and drawing himself up
proudly, he cried gaily in parting, "I'll bet there's not another man in
Chicago who has what I have to-night."

"I hope not," groaned Zoie. as the door closed behind him. Then,
thrusting her two small feet from beneath the coverlet and perching on
the side of the bed, she declared to Aggie that "Alfred was getting more
idiotic every minute."

"He's worse than idiotic," corrected Aggie. "He's getting dangerous. If
he gets the police around here before we give that baby back, they'll
get the mother. She'll tell all she knows and that will be the end of
Jimmy!"

"End of Jimmy?" exclaimed Zoie, "it'll be the end of ALL of us."

"I can see our pictures in the papers, right now," groaned Aggie. "Jimmy
will be the villain."

"Jimmy IS a villain," declared Zoie. "Where is he? Why doesn't he come
back? How am I ever going to get that other twin?"

"There is only one thing to do," decided Aggie, "I must go for it
myself." And she snatched up her cape from the couch and started toward
the door.

"You?" cried Zoie, in alarm, "and leave me alone?"

"It's our only chance," argued Aggie. "I'll have to do it now, before
Alfred gets back."

"But Aggie," protested Zoie, clinging to her departing friend, "suppose
that crazy mother should come back?"

"Nonsense," replied Aggie, and before Zoie could actually realise what
was happening the bang of the outside door told her that she was alone.



CHAPTER XXV

Wondering what new terrors awaited her, Zoie glanced uncertainly from
door to door. So strong had become her habit of taking refuge in the
bed, that unconsciously she backed toward it now. Barely had she reached
the centre of the room when a terrific crash of breaking glass from the
adjoining room sent her shrieking in terror over the footboard, and head
first under the covers. Here she would doubtless have remained until
suffocated, had not Jimmy in his backward flight from one of the
inner rooms overturned a large rocker. This additional shock to Zoie's
overstrung nerves forced a wild scream from her lips, and an answering
exclamation from the nerve-racked Jimmy made her sit bolt upright. She
gazed at him in astonishment. His tie was awry, one end of his collar
had taken leave of its anchorage beneath his stout chin, and was now
just tickling the edge of his red, perspiring brow. His hair was on end
and his feelings were undeniably ruffled. As usual Zoie's greeting did
not tend to conciliate him.

"How did YOU get here?" she asked with an air of reproach.

"The fire-escape," panted Jimmy and he nodded mysteriously toward the
inner rooms of the apartment.

"Fire-escape?" echoed Zoie. There was only one and that led through the
bathroom window.

Jimmy explained no further. He was now peeping cautiously out of the
window toward the pavement below.

"Where's the mother?" demanded Zoie.

Jimmy jerked his thumb in the direction of the street. Zoie gazed at him
with grave apprehension.

"Jimmy!" she exclaimed. "You haven't killed her?"

Jimmy shook his head and continued to peer cautiously out of the window.

"What did you do with her?" called the now exasperated Zoie.

"What did _I_ do with her?" repeated Jimmy, a flash of his old
resentment returning. "What did SHE do with ME?"

For the first time, Zoie became fully conscious of Jimmy's ludicrous
appearance. Her overstrained nerves gave way and she began to laugh
hysterically.

"Say," shouted Jimmy, towering over the bed and devoutly wishing that
she were his wife so that he might strike her with impunity. "Don't you
sic any more lunatics onto me."

It is doubtful whether Zoie's continued laughter might not have provoked
Jimmy to desperate measures, had not the 'phone at that moment directed
their thoughts toward worse possibilities. After the instrument had
continued to ring persistently for what seemed to Zoie an age, she
motioned to Jimmy to answer it. He responded by retreating to the other
side of the room.

"It may be Aggie," suggested Zoie.

For the first time, Jimmy became aware that Aggie was nowhere in the
apartment.

"Good Lord!" he exclaimed, as he realised that he was again tete-a-tete
with the terror of his dreams. "Where IS Aggie?"

"Gone to do what YOU should have done," was Zoie's characteristic
answer.

"Well," answered Jimmy hotly, "it's about time that somebody besides me
did something around this place."

"YOU," mocked Zoie, "all YOU'VE ever done was to hoodoo me from the very
beginning."

"If you'd taken my advice," answered Jimmy, "and told your husband the
truth about the luncheon, there'd never have been any 'beginning.'"

"If, if, if," cried Zoie, in an agony of impatience, "if you'd tipped
that horrid old waiter enough, he'd never have told anyway."

"I'm not buying waiters to cover up your crimes," announced Jimmy with
his most self-righteous air.

"You'll be buying more than that to cover up your OWN crimes before
you've finished," retorted Zoie.

"Before I've finished with YOU, yes," agreed Jimmy. He wheeled upon her
with increasing resentment. "Do you know where I expect to end up?" he
asked.

"I know where you OUGHT to end up," snapped Zoie.

"I'll finish in the electric chair," said Jimmy. "I can feel blue
lightning chasing up and down my spine right now."

"Well, I wish you HAD finished in the electric chair," declared Zoie,
"before you ever dragged me into that awful old restaurant."

"Oh, you do, do you?" answered Jimmy shaking his fist at her across the
foot of the bed. For the want of adequate words to express his further
feelings, Jimmy was beginning to jibber, when the outer door was
heard to close, and he turned to behold Aggie entering hurriedly with
something partly concealed by her long cape.

"It's all right," explained Aggie triumphantly to Zoie. "I've got it."
She threw her cape aside and disclosed the fruits of her conquest.

"So," snorted Jimmy in disgust, slightly miffed by the apparent ease
with which Aggie had accomplished a task about which he had made so much
ado, "you've gone into the business too, have you?"

Aggie deigned no reply to him. She continued in a businesslike tone to
Zoie.

"Where's Alfred?" she asked.

"Still out," answered Zoie.

"Thank Heaven," sighed Aggie, then she turned to Jimmy and addressed him
in rapid, decided tones. "Now, dear," she said, "I'll just put the new
baby to bed, then I'll give you the other one and you can take it right
down to the mother."

Jimmy made a vain start in the direction of the fire-escape. Four
detaining hands were laid upon him.

"Don't try anything like that," warned Aggie; "you can't get out of this
house without that baby. The mother is down stairs now. She's guarding
the door. I saw her." And Aggie sailed triumphantly out of the room to
make the proposed exchange of babies.

Before Jimmy was able to suggest to himself an escape from Aggie's last
plan of action, the telephone again began to cry for attention.

Neither Jimmy nor Zoie could summon courage to approach the impatient
instrument, and as usual Zoie cried frantically for Aggie.

Aggie was not long in returning to the room and this time she bore in
her arms the infant so strenuously demanded by its mad mother.

"Here you are, Jimmy," she said; "here's the other one. Now take him
down stairs quickly before Alfred gets back." She attempted to place the
unresisting babe in Jimmy's chubby arms, but Jimmy's freedom was not to
be so easily disposed of.

"What!" he exclaimed, backing away from the small creature in fear and
abhorrence, "take that bundle of rags down to the hotel office and have
that woman hystericing all over me. No, thanks."

"Oh well," answered Aggie, distracted by the persistent ringing of the
'phone, "then hold him a minute until I answer the 'phone."

This at least was a compromise, and reluctantly Jimmy allowed the now
wailing infant to be placed in his arms.

"Jig it, Jimmy, jig it," cried Zoie. Jimmy looked down helplessly at
the baby's angry red face, but before he had made much headway with the
"jigging," Aggie returned to them, much excited by the message which she
had just received over the telephone.

"That mother is making a scene down stairs in the office," she said.

"You hear," chided Zoie, in a fury at Jimmy, "what did Aggie tell you?"

"If she wants this thing," maintained Jimmy, looking down at the bundle
in his arms, "she can come after it."

"We can't have her up here," objected Aggie.

"Alfred may be back at any minute. He'd catch her. You know what
happened the last time we tried to change them."

"You can send it down the chimney, for all I care," concluded Jimmy.

"I have it!" exclaimed Aggie, her face suddenly illumined.

"Oh Lord," groaned Jimmy, who had come to regard any elation on Zoie's
or Aggie's part as a sure forewarner of ultimate discomfort for him.

Again Aggie had recourse to the 'phone.

"Hello," she called to the office boy, "tell that woman to go around to
the back door, and we'll send something down to her." There was a slight
pause, then Aggie added sweetly, "Yes, tell her to wait at the foot of
the fire-escape."

Zoie had already caught the drift of Aggie's intention and she now fixed
her glittering eyes upon Jimmy, who was already shifting about uneasily
and glancing at Aggie, who approached him with a business-like air.

"Now, dear," said Aggie, "come with me. I'll hand Baby out through the
bathroom window and you can run right down the fire-escape with him."

"If I do run down the fire-escape," exclaimed Jimmy, wagging his large
head from side to side, "I'll keep right on RUNNING. That's the last
you'll ever see of me."

"But, Jimmy," protested Aggie, slightly hurt by his threat, "once that
woman gets her baby you'll have no more trouble."

"With you two still alive?" asked Jimmy, looking from one to the other.

"She'll be up here if you don't hurry," urged Aggie impatiently, and
with that she pulled Jimmy toward the bedroom door.

"Let her come," said Jimmy, planting his feet so as to resist Aggie's
repeated tugs, "I'm going to South America."

"Why will you act like this," cried Aggie, in utter desperation, "when
we have so little time?"

"Say," said Jimmy irrelevantly, "do you know that I haven't had any----"

"Yes," interrupted Aggie and Zoie in chorus, "we know."

"How long," continued Zoie impatiently, "is it going to take you to slip
down that fire-escape?"

"That depends on how fast I 'slip,'" answered Jimmy doggedly.

"You'll 'slip' all right," sneered Zoie.

Further exchange of pleasantries between these two antagonists was cut
short by the banging of the outside door.

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed Aggie, glancing nervously over her shoulder,
"there's Alfred now. Hurry, Jimmy, hurry," she cried, and with that she
fairly forced Jimmy out through the bedroom door, and followed in his
wake to see him safely down the fire-escape.



CHAPTER XXVI

Zoie had barely time to arrange herself after the manner of an
interesting invalid, when Alfred entered the room in the gayest of
spirits.

"Hello, dearie," he cried as he crossed quickly to her side.

"Already?" asked Zoie faintly and she glanced uneasily toward the door,
through which Jimmy and Aggie had just disappeared.

"I told you I shouldn't be long," said Alfred jovially, and he implanted
a condescending kiss on her forehead. "How is the little mother, eh?" he
asked, rubbing his hands together in satisfaction.

"You're all cold," pouted Zoie, edging away, "and you've been drinking."

"I had to have one or two with the boys," said Alfred, throwing out his
chest and strutting about the room, "but never again. From now on I cut
out all drinks and cigars. This is where I begin to live my life for our
sons."

"How about your life for me?" asked Zoie, as she began to see long years
of boredom stretching before her.

"You and our boys are one and the same, dear," answered Alfred, coming
back to her side.

"You mean you couldn't go on loving ME if it weren't for the BOYS?"
asked Zoie, with anxiety. She was beginning to realise how completely
her hold upon him depended upon her hideous deception.

"Of course I could, Zoie," answered Alfred, flattered by what he
considered her desire for his complete devotion, "but----"

"But not so MUCH," pouted Zoie.

"Well, of course, dear," admitted Alfred evasively, as he sank down upon
the edge of the bed by her side--

"You needn't say another word," interrupted Zoie, and then with a shade
of genuine repentance, she declared shame-facedly that she hadn't been
"much of a wife" to Alfred.

"Nonsense!" contradicted the proud young father, "you've given me the
ONE thing that I wanted most in the world."

"But you see, dear," said Zoie, as she wound her little white arms about
his neck, and looked up into his face adoringly, "YOU'VE been the 'ONE'
thing that I wanted 'MOST' and I never realised until to-night how--how
crazy you are about things."

"What things?" asked Alfred, a bit puzzled.

"Well," said Zoie, letting her eyes fall before his and picking at a bit
of imaginary lint on the coverlet, "babies and things."

"Oh," said Alfred, and he was about to proceed when she again
interrupted him.

"But now that I DO realise it," continued Zoie, earnestly, her fingers
on his lips, lest he again interrupt, "if you'll only have a little
patience with me, I'll--I'll----" again her eyes fell bashfully to the
coverlet, as she considered the possibility of being ultimately obliged
to replace the bogus twins with real ones.

"All the patience in the world," answered Alfred, little dreaming of the
problem that confronted the contrite Zoie.

"That's all I ask," declared Zoie, her assurance completely restored,
"and in case anything SHOULD happen to THESE----" she glanced anxiously
toward the door through which Aggie had borne the twins.

"But nothing is going to happen to these, dear," interrupted Alfred,
rising and again assuming an air of fatherly protection. "I'll attend
to that. There, there," he added, patting her small shoulder and nodding
his head wisely. "That crazy woman has got on your nerves, but you
needn't worry, I've got everything fixed. Donneghey sent a special
officer over with me. He's outside watching the house, now."

"Now!" shrieked Zoie, fixing her eyes on the bedroom door, through which
Jimmy had lately disappeared and wondering whether he had yet "slipped"
down the fire-escape.

"Yes," continued Alfred, walking up and down the floor with a masterly
stride. "If that woman is caught hanging around here again, she'll get a
little surprise. My boys are safe now, God bless them!" Then reminded of
the fact that he had not seen them since his return, he started quickly
toward the bedroom door. "I'll just have a look at the little rascals,"
he decided.

"No, dear," cried Zoie. She caught Alfred's arm as he passed the side of
her bed, and clung to him in desperation. "Wait a minute."

Alfred looked down at her in surprise.

She turned her face toward the door, and called lustily, "Aggie! Aggie!"

"What is it, dear?" questioned Alfred, thinking Zoie suddenly ill, "can
I get you something?"

Before Zoie was obliged to reply, Aggie answered her summons.

"Did you call?" she asked, glancing inquiringly into Zoie's distressed
face.

"Alfred's here," said Zoie, with a sickly smile as she stroked his hand
and glanced meaningly at Aggie. "He's GOT the OFFICER!"

"The OFFICER?" cried Aggie, and involuntarily she took a step backward,
as though to guard the bedroom door.

"Yes," said Alfred, mistaking Aggie's surprise for a compliment to his
resource; "and now, Aggie, if you'll just stay with Zoie for a minute
I'll have a look at my boys."

"No, no!" exclaimed Aggie, nervously, and she placed herself again in
front of the bedroom door.

Alfred was plainly annoyed by her proprietory air.

"They're asleep," explained Aggie.

"I'll not WAKE them," persisted Alfred, "I just wish to have a LOOK at
them," and with that he again made a move toward the door.

"But Alfred," protested Zoie, still clinging to his hand, "you're not
going to leave me again--so soon."

Alfred was becoming more and more restive under the seeming absurdity of
their persistent opposition, but before he could think of a polite way
of over-ruling them, Aggie continued persuasively.

"You stay with Zoie," she said. "I'll bring the boys in here and you can
both have a look at them."

"But Aggie," argued Alfred, puzzled by her illogical behaviour, "would
it be wise to wake them?"

"Just this once," said Aggie. "Now you stay here and I'll get them."
Before Alfred could protest further she was out of the room and the door
had closed behind her, so he resigned himself to her decision, banished
his temporary annoyance at her obstinacy, and glanced about the room
with a new air of proprietorship.

"This is certainly a great night, Zoie," he said.

"It certainly is," acquiesced Zoie, with an over emphasis that made
Alfred turn to her with new concern.

"I'm afraid that mad woman made you very nervous, dear," he said.

"She certainly did," said Zoie.

Zoie's nerves were destined to bear still further strain, for at that
moment, there came a sharp ring at the door.

Beside herself with anxiety Zoie threw her arms about Alfred, who had
advanced to soothe her, drew him down by her side and buried her head on
his breast.

"You ARE jumpy," said Alfred, and at that instant a wrangle of loud
voices, and a general commotion was heard in the outer hall. "What's
that?" asked Alfred, endeavouring to disentangle himself from Zoie's
frantic embrace.

Zoie clung to him so tightly that he was unable to rise, but his alert
ear caught the sound of a familiar voice rising above the din of dispute
in the hallway.

"That sounds like the officer," he exclaimed.

"The officer?" cried Zoie, and she wound her arms more tightly about
him.



CHAPTER XXVII

Propelled by a large red fist, attached to the back of his badly wilted
collar, the writhing form of Jimmy was now thrust through the outer
door.

"Let go of me," shouted the hapless Jimmy.

The answer was a spasmodic shaking administered by the fist; then a
large burly officer, carrying a small babe in his arms, shoved the
reluctant Jimmy into the centre of the room and stood guard over him.

"I got him for you, sir," announced the officer proudly, to the
astonished Alfred, who had just managed to untwine Zoie's arms and to
struggle to his feet.

Alfred's eyes fell first upon the dejected Jimmy, then they travelled to
the bundle of long clothes in the officer's arms.

"My boy!" he cried. "My boy!" He snatched the infant from the officer
and pressed him jealously to his breast. "I don't understand," he said,
gazing at the officer in stupefaction. "Where was he?"

"You mean this one?" asked the officer, nodding toward the unfortunate
Jimmy. "I caught him slipping down your fire-escape."

"I KNEW it," exclaimed Zoie in a rage, and she cast a vindictive look at
Jimmy for his awkwardness.

"Knew WHAT, dear?" asked Alfred, now thoroughly puzzled.

Zoie did not answer. Her powers of resource were fast waning. Alfred
turned again to the officer, then to Jimmy, who was still flashing
defiance into the officer's threatening eyes.

"My God!" he exclaimed, "this is awful. What's the matter with you,
Jimmy? This is the third time that you have tried to take my baby out
into the night."

"Then you've had trouble with him before?" remarked the officer. He
studied Jimmy with new interest, proud in the belief that he had brought
a confirmed "baby-snatcher" to justice.

"I've had a little trouble myself," declared Jimmy hotly, now resolved
to make a clean breast of it.

"I'm not asking about your troubles," interrupted the officer savagely,
and Jimmy felt the huge creature's obnoxious fingers tightening again on
his collar. "Go ahead, sir," said the officer to Alfred.

"Well," began Alfred, nodding toward the now livid Jimmy, "he was out
with my boy when I arrived. I stopped him from going out with him
a second time, and now you, officer, catch him slipping down the
fire-escape. I don't know what to say," he finished weakly.

"_I_ do," exclaimed Jimmy, feeling more and more like a high explosive,
"and I'll say it."

"Cut it," shouted the officer. And before Jimmy could get further,
Alfred resumed with fresh vehemence.

"He's supposed to be a friend of mine," he explained to the officer, as
he nodded toward the wriggling Jimmy. "He was all right when I left him
a few months ago."

"You'll think I'm all right again," shouted Jimmy, trying to get free
from the officer, "before I've finished telling all I----"

"That won't help any," interrupted the officer firmly, and with another
twist of Jimmy's badly wilted collar he turned to Alfred with his most
civil manner, "What shall I do with him, sir?"

"I don't know," said Alfred, convinced that his friend was a fit subject
for a straight jacket. "This is horrible."

"It's absurd," cried Zoie, on the verge of hysterics, and in utter
despair of ever disentangling the present complication without
ultimately losing Alfred, "you're all absurd," she cried wildly.

"Absurd?" exclaimed Alfred, turning upon her in amazement, "what do you
mean?"

"It's a joke," said Zoie, without the slightest idea of where the joke
lay. "If you had any sense you could see it."

"I DON'T see it," said Alfred, with hurt dignity.

"Neither do I," said Jimmy, with boiling resentment.

"Can you call it a joke," asked Alfred, incredulously, "to have our
boy----" He stopped suddenly, remembering that there was a companion
piece to this youngster. "The other one!" he exclaimed, "our other
boy----" He rushed to the crib, found it empty, and turned a terrified
face to Zoie. "Where is he?" he demanded.

"Now, Alfred," pleaded Zoie, "don't get excited; he's all right."

"How do you know?" asked the distracted father.

Zoie did not know, but at that moment her eyes fell upon Jimmy, and as
usual he was the source of an inspiration for her.

"Jimmy never cared for the other one," she said, "did you, Jimmy?"

Alfred turned to the officer, with a tone of command. "Wait," he said,
then he started toward the bedroom door to make sure that his other
boy was quite safe. The picture that confronted him brought the hair
straight up on his head. True to her promise, and ignorant of Jimmy's
return with the first baby, Aggie had chosen this ill-fated moment to
appear on the threshold with one babe on each arm.

"Here they are," she said graciously, then stopped in amazement at sight
of the horrified Alfred, clasping a third infant to his breast.

"Good God!" exclaimed Alfred, stroking his forehead with his unoccupied
hand, and gazing at what he firmly believed must be an apparition,
"THOSE aren't MINE," he pointed to the two red mites in Aggie's arms.

"Wh--why not, Alfred?" stammered Aggie for the want of something better
to say.

"What?" shrieked Alfred. Then he turned in appeal to his young wife,
whose face had now become utterly expressionless. "Zoie?" he entreated.

There was an instant's pause, then the blood returned to Zoie's face and
she proved herself the artist that Alfred had once declared her.

"OURS, dear," she murmured softly, with a bashful droop of her lids.

"But THIS one?" persisted Alfred, pointing to the baby in his arms, and
feeling sure that his mind was about to give way.

"Why--why--why," stuttered Zoie, "THAT'S the JOKE."

"The joke?" echoed Alfred, looking as though he found it anything but
such.

"Yes," added Aggie, sharing Zoie's desperation to get out of their
temporary difficulty, no matter at what cost in the future. "Didn't
Jimmy tell you?"

"Tell me WHAT?" stammered Alfred, "what IS there to tell?"

"Why, you see," said Aggie, growing more enthusiastic with each
elaboration of Zoie's lie, "we didn't dare to break it to you too
suddenly."

"Break it to me?" gasped Alfred; a new light was beginning to dawn on
his face.

"So," concluded Zoie, now thoroughly at home in the new situation, "we
asked Jimmy to take THAT one OUT."

Jimmy cast an inscrutable glance in Zoie's direction. Was it possible
that she was at last assisting him out of a difficulty?

"You 'ASKED Jimmy'?" repeated Alfred.

"Yes," confirmed Aggie, with easy confidence, "we wanted you to get used
to the idea gradually."

"The idea," echoed Alfred. He was afraid to allow his mind to accept
too suddenly the whole significance of their disclosure, lest his joy
over-power him. "You--you--do--don't mean----" he stuttered.

"Yes, dear," sighed Zoie, with the face of an angel, and then with a
languid sigh, she sank back contentedly on her pillows.

"My boys! My boys!" cried Alfred, now delirious with delight. "Give
them to me," he called to Aggie, and he snatched the surprised infants
savagely from her arms. "Give me ALL of them, ALL of them." He clasped
the three babes to his breast, then dashed to the bedside of the
unsuspecting Zoie and covered her small face with rapturous kisses.

Feeling the red faces of the little strangers in such close proximity to
hers, Zoie drew away from them with abhorrence, but unconscious of her
unmotherly action, Alfred continued his mad career about the room, his
heart overflowing with gratitude toward Zoie in particular and mankind
in general. Finding Aggie in the path of his wild jubilee, he treated
that bewildered young matron to an unwelcome kiss. A proceeding which
Jimmy did not at all approve.

Hardly had Aggie recovered from her surprise when the disgruntled
Jimmy was startled out of his dark mood by the supreme insult of a
loud resounding kiss implanted on his own cheek by his excitable young
friend. Jimmy raised his arm to resist a second assault, and Alfred
veered off in the direction of the officer, who stepped aside just in
time to avoid similar demonstration from the indiscriminating young
father.

Finding a wide circle prescribed about himself and the babies, Alfred
suddenly stopped and gazed about from one astonished face to the other.

"Well," said the officer, regarding Alfred with an injured air,
and feeling much downcast at being so ignominiously deprived of his
short-lived heroism in capturing a supposed criminal, "if this is all a
joke, I'll let the woman go."

"The woman," repeated Alfred; "what woman?"

"I nabbed a woman at the foot of the fire-escape," explained the
officer. Zoie and Aggie glanced at each other inquiringly. "I thought
she might be an accomplice."

"What does she look like, officer?" asked Alfred. His manner was
becoming more paternal, not to say condescending, with the arrival of
each new infant.

"Don't be silly, Alfred," snapped Zoie, really ashamed that Alfred was
making such an idiot of himself. "It's only the nurse."

"Oh, that's it," said Alfred, with a wise nod of comprehension; "the
nurse, then she's in the joke too?" He glanced from one to the other.
They all nodded. "You're all in it," he exclaimed, flattered to think
that they had considered it necessary to combine the efforts of so many
of them to deceive him.

"Yes," assented Jimmy sadly, "we are all 'in it.'"

"Well, she's a great actress," decided Alfred, with the air of a
connoisseur.

"She sure is," admitted Donneghey, more and more disgruntled as he felt
his reputation for detecting fraud slipping from him. "She put up a
phoney story about the kid being hers," he added. "But I could tell she
wasn't on the level. Good-night, sir," he called to Alfred, and ignoring
Jimmy, he passed quickly from the room.

"Oh, officer," Alfred called after him. "Hang around downstairs. I'll
be down later and fix things up with you." Again Alfred gave his whole
attention to his new-found family. He leaned over the cradle and gazed
ecstatically into the three small faces below his. "This is too much,"
he murmured.

"Much too much," agreed Jimmy, who was now sitting hunched up on the
couch in his customary attitude of gloom.

"You were right not to break it to me too suddenly," said Alfred, and
with his arms encircling three infants he settled himself on the couch
by Jimmy's side. "You're a cute one," he continued to Jimmy, who was
edging away from the three mites with aversion. In the absence of any
answer from Jimmy, Alfred appealed to Zoie, "Isn't he a cute one, dear?"
he asked.

"Oh, yes, VERY," answered Zoie, sarcastically.

Shutting his lips tight and glancing at Zoie with a determined effort at
self restraint, Jimmy rose from the couch and started toward the door.

"If you women are done with me," he said, "I'll clear out."

"Clear out?" exclaimed Alfred, rising quickly and placing himself
between his old friend and the door. "What a chance," and he laughed
boisterously. "You're not going to get out of my sight this night," he
declared. "I'm just beginning to appreciate all you've done for me."

"So am I," assented Jimmy, and unconsciously his hand sought the spot
where his dinner should have been, but Alfred was not to be resisted.

"A man needs someone around," he declared, "when he's going through a
thing like this. I need all of you, all of you," and with his eyes he
embraced the weary circle of faces about him. "I feel as though I could
go out of my head," he explained and with that he began tucking the
three small mites in the pink and white crib designed for but one.

Zoie regarded him with a bored expression'

"You act as though you WERE out of your head," she commented, but Alfred
did not heed her. He was now engaged in the unhoped for bliss of singing
three babies to sleep with one lullaby.

The other occupants of the room were just beginning to relax and to show
some resemblance to their natural selves, when their features were again
simultaneously frozen by a ring at the outside door.



CHAPTER XXVIII

Annoyed at being interrupted in the midst of his lullaby, to three,
Alfred looked up to see Maggie, hatless and out of breath, bursting into
the room, and destroying what was to him an ideally tranquil home scene.
But Maggie paid no heed to Alfred's look of inquiry. She made directly
for the side of Zoie's bed.

"If you plaze, mum," she panted, looking down at Zoie, and wringing her
hands.

"What is it?" asked Aggie, who had now reached the side of the bed.

"'Scuse me for comin' right in"--Maggie was breathing hard--"but me
mother sint me to tell you that me father is jus afther comin' home from
work, and he's fightin' mad about the babies, mum."

"Sh! Sh!" cautioned Aggie and Zoie, as they glanced nervously toward
Alfred who was rising from his place beside the cradle with increasing
interest in Maggie's conversation.

"Babies?" he repeated, "your father is mad about babies?"

"It's all right, dear," interrupted Zoie nervously; "you see," she
went on to explain, pointing toward the trembling Maggie, "this is our
washerwoman's little girl. Our washerwoman has had twins, too, and it
made the wash late, and her husband is angry about it."

"Oh," said Alfred, with a comprehensive nod, but Maggie was not to be so
easily disposed of.

"If you please, mum," she objected, "it ain't about the wash. It's about
our baby girls."

"Girls?" exclaimed Zoie involuntarily.

"Girls?" repeated Alfred, drawing himself up in the fond conviction that
all his heirs were boys, "No wonder your pa's angry. I'd be angry too.
Come now," he said to Maggie, patting the child on the shoulder and
regarding her indulgently, "you go straight home and tell your father
that what HE needs is BOYS."

"Well, of course, sir," answered the bewildered Maggie, thinking that
Alfred meant to reflect upon the gender of the offspring donated by her
parents, "if you ain't afther likin' girls, me mother sint the money
back," and with that she began to feel for the pocket in her red flannel
petticoat.

"The money?" repeated Alfred, in a puzzled way, "what money?"

It was again Zoie's time to think quickly.

"The money for the wash, dear," she explained.

"Nonsense!" retorted Alfred, positively beaming generosity, "who talks
of money at such a time as this?" And taking a ten dollar bill from his
pocket, he thrust it in Maggie's outstretched hand, while she was trying
to return to him the original purchase money. "Here," he said to the
astonished girl, "you take this to your father. Tell him I sent it to
him for his babies. Tell him to start a bank account with it."

This was clearly not a case with which one small addled mind could deal,
or at least, so Maggie decided. She had a hazy idea that Alfred was
adding something to the original purchase price of her young sisters,
but she was quite at a loss to know how to refuse the offer of such
a "grand 'hoigh" gentleman, even though her failure to do so would no
doubt result in a beating when she reached home. She stared at Alfred
undecided what to do, the money still lay in her outstretched hand.

"I'm afraid Pa'll niver loike it, sir," she said.

"Like it?" exclaimed Alfred in high feather, and he himself closed her
red little fingers over the bill, "he's GOT to like it. He'll GROW to
like it. Now you run along," he concluded to Maggie, as he urged her
toward the door, "and tell him what I say."

"Yes, sir," murmured Maggie, far from sharing Alfred's enthusiasm.

Feeling no desire to renew his acquaintance with Maggie, particularly
under Alfred's watchful eye, Jimmy had sought his old refuge, the high
backed chair. As affairs progressed and there seemed no doubt of Zoie's
being able to handle the situation to the satisfaction of all concerned,
Jimmy allowed exhaustion and the warmth of the firelight to have their
way with him. His mind wandered toward other things and finally into
space. His head dropped lower and lower on his chest; his breathing
became laboured--so laboured in fact that it attracted the attention of
Maggie, who was about to pass him on her way to the door.

"Sure an it's Mr. Jinks!" exclaimed Maggie. Then coming close to the
side of the unsuspecting sleeper, she hissed a startling message in his
ear. "Me mother said to tell you that me fadder's hoppin' mad at you,
sir."

Jimmy sat up and rubbed his eyes. He studied the young person at his
elbow, then he glanced at Alfred, utterly befuddled as to what had
happened while he had been on a journey to happier scenes. Apparently
Maggie was waiting for an answer to something, but to what? Jimmy
thought he detected an ominous look in Alfred's eyes. Letting his hand
fall over the arm of the chair so that Alfred could not see it, Jimmy
began to make frantic signals to Maggie to depart; she stared at him the
harder.

"Go away," whispered Jimmy, but Maggie did not move. "Shoo, shoo!" he
said, and waved her off with his hand.

Puzzled by Jimmy's sudden aversion to this apparently harmless child,
Alfred turned to Maggie with a puckered brow.

"Your father's mad at Jimmy?" he repeated. "What about?"

For once Jimmy found it in his heart to be grateful to Zoie for the
prompt answer that came from her direction.

"The wash, dear," said Zoie to Alfred; "Jimmy had to go after the wash,"
and then with a look which Maggie could not mistake for an invitation to
stop longer, Zoie called to her haughtily, "You needn't wait, Maggie; we
understand."

"Sure, an' it's more 'an I do," answered Maggie, and shaking her head
sadly, she slipped from the room.

But Alfred could not immediately dismiss from his mind the picture of
Maggie's inhuman parent.

"Just fancy," he said, turning his head to one side meditatively, "fancy
any man not liking to be the father of twins," and with that he again
bent over the cradle and surveyed its contents. "Think, Jimmy," he said,
when he had managed to get the three youngsters in his arms, "just think
of the way THAT father feels, and then think of the way _I_ feel."

"And then think of the way _I_ feel," grumbled Jimmy.

"You!" exclaimed Alfred; "what have you to feel about?"

Before Jimmy could answer, the air was rent by a piercing scream and a
crash of glass from the direction of the inner rooms.

"What's that?" whispered Aggie, with an anxious glance toward Zoie.

"Sounded like breaking glass," said Alfred.

"Burglars!" exclaimed Zoie, for want of anything better to suggest.

"Burglars?" repeated Alfred with a superior air; "nonsense! Nonsense!
Here," he said, turning to Jimmy, "you hold the boys and I'll go
see----" and before Jimmy was aware of the honour about to be thrust
upon him, he felt three red, spineless morsels, wriggling about in his
arms. He made what lap he could for the armful, and sat up in a stiff,
strained attitude on the edge of the couch. In the meantime, Alfred had
strode into the adjoining room with the air of a conqueror. Aggie looked
at Zoie, with dreadful foreboding.

"You don't suppose it could be?" she paused.

"My baby!" shrieked the voice of the Italian mother from the adjoining
room. "Where IS he?"

Regardless of the discomfort of his three disgruntled charges, Jimmy
began to circle the room. So agitated was his mind that he could
scarcely hear Aggie, who was reporting proceedings from her place at the
bedroom door.

"She's come up the fire-escape," cried Aggie; "she's beating Alfred to
death."

"What?" shrieked Zoie, making a flying leap from her coverlets.

"She's locking him in the bathroom," declared Aggie, and with that she
disappeared from the room, bent on rescue.

"My Alfred!" cried Zoie, tragically, and she started in pursuit of
Aggie.

"Wait a minute," called Jimmy, who had not yet been able to find
a satisfactory place in which to deposit his armful of clothes and
humanity. "What shall I do with these things?"

"Eat 'em," was Zoie's helpful retort, as the trailing end of her
negligee disappeared from the room.



CHAPTER XXIX

Now, had Jimmy been less perturbed during the latter part of this
commotion, he might have heard the bell of the outside door, which
had been ringing violently for some minutes. As it was, he was wholly
unprepared for the flying advent of Maggie.

"Oh, plaze, sir," she cried, pointing with trembling fingers toward
the babes in Jimmy's arms, "me fadder's coming right behind me. He's
a-lookin' for you sir."

"For me," murmured Jimmy, wondering vaguely why everybody on earth
seemed to be looking for HIM.

"Put 'em down, sir," cried Maggie, still pointing to the three babies,
"put 'em down. He's liable to wallop you."

"Put 'em where?" asked Jimmy, now utterly confused as to which way to
turn.

"There," said Maggie, and she pointed to the cradle beneath his very
eyes.

"Of course," said Jimmy vapidly, and he sank on his knees and strove to
let the wobbly creatures down easily.

Bang went the outside door.

"That's Pa now," cried Maggie. "Oh hide, sir, hide." And with that
disconcerting warning, she too deserted him.

"Hide where?" gasped Jimmy.

There was a moment's awful silence. Jimmy rose very cautiously from the
cradle, his eyes sought the armchair. It had always betrayed him. He
glanced toward the window. It was twelve stories to the pavement. He
looked towards the opposite door; beyond that was the mad Italian woman.
His one chance lay in slipping unnoticed through the hallway; he made
a determined dash in that direction, but no sooner had he put his head
through the door, than he drew it back quickly. The conversation between
O'Flarety and the maid in the hallway was not reassuring. Jimmy decided
to take a chance with the Italian mother, and as fast as he could, he
streaked it toward the opposite door. The shrieks and denunciations that
he met from this direction were more disconcerting than those of
the Irish father. For an instant he stood in the centre of the room,
wavering as to which side to surrender himself.

The thunderous tones of the enraged father drew nearer; he threw himself
on the floor and attempted to roll under the bed; the space between the
railing and the floor was far too narrow. Why had he disregarded Aggie's
advice as to diet? The knob of the door handle was turning--he vaulted
into the bed and drew the covers over his head just as O'Flarety,
trembling with excitement, and pursued by Maggie, burst into the room.

"Lave go of me," cried O'Flarety to Maggie, who clung to his arm in a
vain effort to soothe him, and flinging her off, he made straight for
the bed.

"Ah," he cried, gazing with dilated nostrils at the trembling object
beneath the covers, "there you are, mum," and he shook his fist above
what he believed to be the cowardly Mrs. Hardy. "'Tis well ye may cover
up your head," said he, "for shame on yez! Me wife may take in washing,
but when I comes home at night I wants me kids, and I'll be after havin'
'em too. Where ar' they?" he demanded. Then getting no response from the
agitated covers, he glanced wildly about the room. "Glory be to God!"
he exclaimed as his eyes fell on the crib; but he stopped short in
astonishment, when upon peering into it, he found not one, or two, but
three "barren."

"They're child stalers, that's what they are," he declared to Maggie,
as he snatched Bridget and Norah to his no doubt comforting breast. "Me
little Biddy," he crooned over his much coveted possession. "Me little
Norah," he added fondly, looking down at his second. The thought of his
narrow escape from losing these irreplaceable treasures rekindled
his wrath. Again he strode toward the bed and looked down at the now
semi-quiet comforter.

"The black heart of ye, mum," he roared, then ordering Maggie to give
back "every penny of that shameless creetur's money" he turned toward
the door.

So intense had been O'Flarety's excitement and so engrossed was he in
his denunciation that he had failed to see the wild-eyed Italian woman
rushing toward him from the opposite door.

"You, you!" cried the frenzied woman and, to O'Flarety's astonishment,
she laid two strong hands upon his arm and drew him round until he faced
her. "Where are you going with my baby?" she asked, then peering into
the face of the infant nearest to her, she uttered a disappointed
moan. "'Tis not my baby!" she cried. She scanned the face of the second
infant--again she moaned.

Having begun to identify this hysterical creature as the possible mother
of the third infant, O'Flarety jerked his head in the direction of the
cradle.

"I guess you'll find what you're lookin' for in there," he said. Then
bidding Maggie to "git along out o' this" and shrugging his shoulders
to convey his contempt for the fugitive beneath the coverlet, he swept
quickly from the room.

Clasping her long-sought darling to her heart and weeping with delight,
the Italian mother was about to follow O'Flarety through the door when
Zoie staggered into the room, weak and exhausted.

"You, you!" called the indignant Zoie to the departing mother. "How dare
you lock my husband in the bathroom?" She pointed to the key, which the
woman still unconsciously clasped in her hand. "Give me that key," she
demanded, "give it to me this instant."

"Take your horrid old key," said the mother, and she threw it on the
floor. "If you ever try to get my baby again, I'll lock your husband in
JAIL," and murmuring excited maledictions in her native tongue, she took
her welcome departure.

Zoie stooped for the key, one hand to her giddy head, but Aggie, who had
just returned to the room, reached the key first and volunteered to go
to the aid of the captive Alfred, who was pounding desperately on the
bathroom door and demanding his instant release.

"I'll let him out," said Aggie. "You get into bed," and she slipped
quickly from the room.

Utterly exhausted and half blind with fatigue Zoie lifted the coverlet
and slipped beneath it. Her first sensation was of touching something
rough and scratchy, then came the awful conviction that the thing
against which she lay was alive.

Without stopping to investigate the identity of her uninvited
bed-fellow, or even daring to look behind her, Zoie fled from the room
emitting a series of screams that made all her previous efforts in that
direction seem mere baby cries. So completely had Jimmy been enveloped
in the coverlets and for so long a time that he had acquired a vague
feeling of aloftness toward the rest of his fellows, and had lost all
knowledge of their goings and comings. But when his unexpected companion
was thrust upon him he was galvanised into sudden action by her scream,
and swathed in a large pink comforter, he rolled ignominiously from the
upper side of the bed, where he lay on the floor panting and enmeshed,
awaiting further developments. Of one thing he was certain, a great deal
had transpired since he had sought the friendly solace of the covers and
he had no mind to lose so good a friend as the pink comforter. By the
time he had summoned sufficient courage to peep from under its edge, a
babel of voices was again drawing near, and he hastily drew back in his
shell and waited.

Not daring to glance at the scene of her fright, Zoie pushed Aggie
before her into the room and demanded that she look in the bed.

Seeing the bed quite empty and noticing nothing unusual in the fact that
the pink comforter, along with other covers, had slipped down behind it,
Aggie hastened to reassure her terrified friend.

"You imagined it, Zoie," she declared, "look for yourself."

Zoie's small face peeped cautiously around the edge of the doorway.

"Well, perhaps I did," she admitted; then she slipped gingerly into the
room, "my nerves are jumping like fizzy water."

They were soon to "jump" more, for at this instant, Alfred, burning with
anger at the indignity of having been locked in the bathroom, entered
the room, demanding to know the whereabouts of the lunatic mother, who
had dared to make him a captive in his own house.

"Where is she?" he called to Zoie and Aggie, and his eye roved wildly
about the room. Then his mind reverted with anxiety to his newly
acquired offspring. "My boys!" he cried, and he rushed toward the crib.
"They're gone!" he declared tragically.

"Gone?" echoed Aggie.

"Not ALL of them," said Zoie.

"All," insisted Alfred, and his hands went distractedly toward his head.
"She's taken them all."

Zoie and Aggie looked at each other in a dazed way. They had a hazy
recollection of having seen one babe disappear with the Italian woman,
but what had become of the other two?

"Where did they go?" asked Aggie.

"I don't know," said Zoie, with the first truth she had spoken that
night, "I left them with Jimmy."

"Jimmy!" shrieked Alfred, and a diabolical light lit his features.
"Jimmy!" he snorted, with sudden comprehension, "then he's at it again.
He's crazy as she is. This is inhuman. This joke has got to stop!" And
with that decision he started toward the outer door.

"But Allie!" protested Zoie, really alarmed by the look that she saw on
his face.

Alfred turned to his trembling wife with suppressed excitement, and
patted her shoulder condescendingly.

"Control yourself, my dear," he said. "Control yourself; I'll get
your babies for you--trust me, I'll get them. And then," he added with
parting emphasis from the doorway, "I'll SETTLE WITH JIMMY!"

By uncovering one eye, Jimmy could now perceive that Zoie and Aggie
were engaged in a heated argument at the opposite side of the room. By
uncovering one ear he learned that they were arranging a line of action
for him immediately upon his reappearance. He determined not to wait for
the details.

Fixing himself cautiously on all fours, and making sure that he was
well covered by the pink comforter, he began to crawl slowly toward the
bedroom door.

Turning away from Aggie with an impatient exclamation, Zoie suddenly
beheld what seemed to her a large pink monster with protruding claws
wriggling its way hurriedly toward the inner room.

"Look!" she screamed, and pointing in horror toward the dreadful
creature now dragging itself across the threshold, she sank fainting
into Aggie's outstretched arms.



CHAPTER XXX

Having dragged the limp form of her friend to the near-by couch, Aggie
was bending over her to apply the necessary restoratives, when Alfred
returned in triumph. He was followed by the officer in whose arms were
three infants, and behind whom was the irate O'Flarety, the hysterical
Italian woman, and last of all, Maggie.

"Bring them all in here, officer," called Alfred over his shoulder.
"I'll soon prove to you whose babies those are." Then turning to Aggie,
who stood between him and the fainting Zoie he cried triumphantly,
"I've got them Aggie, I've got them." He glanced toward the empty bed.
"Where's Zoie?" he asked.

"She's fainted," said Aggie, and stepping from in front of the young
wife, she pointed toward the couch.

"Oh, my darling!" cried Alfred, with deep concern as he rushed to Zoie
and began frantically patting her hands. "My poor frightened darling!"
Then he turned to the officer, his sense of injury welling high within
him, "You see what these people have done to my wife? She's fainted."
Ignoring the uncomplimentary remarks of O'Flarety, he again bent over
Zoie.

"Rouse yourself, my dear," he begged of her. "Look at me," he pleaded.
"Your babies are safe."

"HER babies!" snorted O'Flarety, unable longer to control his pent up
indignation.

"I'll let you know when I want to hear from you," snarled the officer to
O'Flarety.

"But they're NOT her babies," protested the Italian woman desperately.

"Cut it," shouted the officer, and with low mutterings, the outraged
parents were obliged to bide their time.

Lifting Zoie to a sitting posture Alfred fanned her gently until she
regained her senses. "Your babies are all right," he assured her. "I've
brought them all back to you."

"All?" gasped Zoie weakly, and she wondered what curious fate had been
intervening to assist Alfred in such a prodigious undertaking.

"Yes, dear," said Alfred, "every one," and he pointed toward the three
infants in the officer's arms. "See, dear, see."

Zoie turned her eyes upon what SEEMED to her numberless red faces. "Oh!"
she moaned and again she swooned.

"I told you she'd be afraid to face us," shouted the now triumphant
O'Flarety.

"You brute!" retorted the still credulous Alfred, "how dare you
persecute this poor demented mother?"

Alfred's persistent solicitude for Zoie was too much for the resentful
Italian woman.

"She didn't persecute me, oh no!" she exclaimed sarcastically.

"Keep still, you!" commanded the officer.

Again Zoie was reviving and again Alfred lifted her in his arms and
begged her to assure the officer that the babies in question were hers.

"Let's hear her SAY it," demanded O'Flarety.

"You SHALL hear her," answered Alfred, with confidence. Then he beckoned
to the officer to approach, explaining that Zoie was very weak.

"Sure," said the officer; then planting himself directly in front of
Zoie's half closed eyes, he thrust the babies upon her attention.

"Look, Zoie!" pleaded Alfred. "Look!"

Zoie opened her eyes to see three small red faces immediately opposite
her own.

"Take them away!" she cried, with a frantic wave of her arm, "take them
away!"

"What?" exclaimed Alfred in astonishment.

"What did I tell you?" shouted O'Flarety. This hateful reminder brought
Alfred again to the protection of his young and defenceless wife.

"The excitement has unnerved her," he said to the officer.

"Ain't you about done with my kids?" asked O'Flarety, marvelling how any
man with so little penetration as the officer, managed to hold down a
"good payin' job."

"What do you want for your proof anyway?" asked the mother. But Alfred's
faith in the validity of his new parenthood was not to be so easily
shaken.

"My wife is in no condition to be questioned," he declared. "She's out
of her head, and if you don't----"

He stepped suddenly, for without warning, the door was thrown open and a
second officer strode into their midst dragging by the arm the reluctant
Jimmy.

"I guess I've got somethin' here that you folks need in your business,"
he called, nodding toward the now utterly demoralised Jimmy.

"Jimmy!" exclaimed Aggie, having at last got her breath.

"The Joker!" cried Alfred, bearing down upon the panting Jimmy with a
ferocious expression.

"I caught him slipping down the fire-escape," explained the officer.

"Again?" exclaimed Aggie and Alfred in tones of deep reproach.

"Jimmy," said Alfred, coming close to his friend, and fixing his eyes
upon him in a determined effort to control the poor creature's fast
failing faculties, "you know the truth of this thing. You are the one
who sent me that telegram, you are the one who told me that I was a
father."

"Well, aren't you a father?" asked Aggie, trying to protect her dejected
spouse.

"Of course I am," replied Alfred, with every confidence, "but I have to
prove it to the officer. Jimmy knows," he concluded. Then turning to
the uncomfortable man at his side, he demanded imperatively, "Tell the
officer the truth, you idiot. No more of your jokes. Am I a father or am
I not?"

"If you're depending on ME for your future offspring," answered Jimmy,
wagging his head with the air of a man reckless of consequences, "you
are NOT a father."

"Depending on YOU?" gasped Alfred, and he stared at his friend in
bewilderment. "What do you mean by that?"

"Ask them," answered Jimmy, and he nodded toward Zoie and Aggie.

Alfred appealed to Aggie.

"Ask Zoie," said Aggie.

Alfred bent over the form of the again prostrate Zoie. "My darling,"
he entreated, "rouse yourself." Slowly she opened her eyes. "Now," said
Alfred, with enforced self-control, "you must look the officer squarely
in the eye and tell him whose babies those are," and he nodded toward
the officer, who was now beginning to entertain grave doubts on the
subject.

"How should _I_ know?" cried Zoie, too exhausted for further lying.

"What!" exclaimed Alfred, his hand on his forehead.

"I only borrowed them," said Zoie, "to get you home," and with that she
sank back on the couch and closed her eyes.

"What did I tell you?" cried the triumphant O'Flarety.

"I guess they're your'n all right," admitted the officer doggedly, and
he grudgingly released the three infants to their rightful parents.

"I guess they'd better be," shouted O'Flarety; then he and the Italian
woman made for the door with their babes pressed close to their hearts.

"Wait a minute," cried Alfred. "I want an understanding."

O'Flarety turned in the doorway and raised a warning fist.

"If you don't leave my kids alone, you'll GIT 'an understanding.'"

"Me too," added the mother.

"On your way," commanded the officer to the pair of them, and together
with Maggie and the officer, they disappeared forever from the Hardy
household.

Alfred gazed about the room. "My God!" he exclaimed; then he turned to
Jimmy who was still in the custody of the second officer: "If I'm not a
father, what am I?"

"I'd hate to tell you," was Jimmy's unsympathetic reply, and in utter
dejection Alfred sank on the foot of the bed and buried his head in his
hands.

"What shall I do with this one, sir?" asked the officer, undecided as to
Jimmy's exact standing in the household.

"Shoot him, for all I care," groaned Alfred, and he rocked to and fro.

"How ungrateful!" exclaimed Aggie, then she signalled to the officer to
go.

"No more of your funny business," said the officer with a parting nod at
Jimmy and a vindictive light in his eyes when he remembered the bruises
that Jimmy had left on his shins.

"Oh, Jimmy!" said Aggie sympathetically, and she pressed her hot face
against his round apoplectic cheek. "You poor dear! And after all you
have done for us!"

"Yes," sneered Zoie, having regained sufficient strength to stagger to
her feet, "he's done a lot, hasn't he?" And then forgetting that her
original adventure with Jimmy which had brought about such disastrous
results was still unknown to Aggie and Alfred, she concluded bitterly,
"All this would never have happened, if it hadn't been for Jimmy and his
horrid old luncheon."

Jimmy was startled. This was too much, and just as he had seemed to be
well out of complications for the remainder of his no doubt short life.
He turned to bolt for the door but Aggie's eyes were upon him.

"Luncheon?" exclaimed Aggie and she regarded him with a puzzled frown.

Zoie's hand was already over her lips, but too late.

Recovering from his somewhat bewildering sense of loss, Alfred, too, was
now beginning to sit up and take notice.

"What luncheon?" he demanded.

Zoie gazed from Alfred to Aggie, then at Jimmy, then resolving to make
a clean breast of the matter, she sidled toward Alfred with her most
ingratiating manner.

"Now, Alfred," she purred, as she endeavoured to act one arm about
his unsuspecting neck, "if you'll only listen, I'll tell you the REAL
TRUTH."

A wild despairing cry from Alfred, a dash toward the door by Jimmy, and
a determined effort on Aggie's part to detain her spouse, temporarily
interrupted Zoie's narrative.

But in spite of these discouragements, Zoie did eventually tell Alfred
the real truth, and before the sun had risen on the beginning of another
day, she had added to her confession, promises whose happy fulfillment
was evidenced for many years after by the chatter of glad young voices,
up and down the stairway of Alfred's new suburban home, and the flutter
of golden curls in and out amongst the sunlight and shadows of his
ample, well kept grounds.

========================================
========================================

POLLY OF THE CIRCUS

By Margaret Mayo


To My "_KLEINE MUTTER_"




Chapter I

The band of the "Great American Circus" was playing noisily. The
performance was in full swing.

Beside a shabby trunk in the women's dressing tent sat a young,
wistful-faced girl, chin in hand, unheeding the chatter of the women
about her or the picturesque disarray of the surrounding objects. Her
eyes had been so long accustomed to the glitter and tinsel of circus
fineries that she saw nothing unusual in a picture that might have held
a painter spellbound.

Circling the inside of the tent and forming a double line down the
centre were partially unpacked trunks belching forth impudent masses
of satins, laces, artificial hair, paper flowers, and paste jewels.
The scent of moist earth mingled oddly with the perfumed odours of the
garments heaped on the grass. Here and there high circles of lights
threw a strong, steady glare upon the half-clad figure of a robust
acrobat, or the thin, drooping shoulders of a less stalwart sister.
Temporary ropes stretched from one pole to another, were laden with
bright-coloured stockings, gaudy, spangled gowns, or dusty street
clothes, discarded by the performers before slipping into their circus
attire. There were no nails or hooks, so hats and veils were pinned to
the canvas walls.

The furniture was limited to one camp chair in front of each trunk,
the till of which served as a tray for the paints, powders and other
essentials of "make-up."

A pail of water stood by the side of each chair, so that the performers
might wash the delicately shaded tights, handkerchiefs and other small
articles not to be entrusted to the slow, careless process of the
village laundry. Some of these had been washed to-night and hung to dry
on the lines between the dusty street garments.

Women whose "turns" came late sat about half-clothed reading, crocheting
or sewing, while others added pencilled eyebrows, powder or rouge to
their already exaggerated "make-ups." Here and there a child was putting
her sawdust baby to sleep in the till of her trunk, before beginning
her part in the evening's entertainment. Young and old went about their
duties with a systematic, business-like air, and even the little knot
of excited women near Polly--it seemed that one of the men had upset a
circus tradition--kept a sharp lookout for their "turns."

"What do you think about it, Polly?" asked a handsome brunette, as she
surveyed herself in the costume of a Roman charioteer.

"About what?" asked Polly vacantly.

"Leave Poll alone; she's in one of her trances!" called a motherly,
good-natured woman whose trunk stood next to Polly's, and whose business
was to support a son and three daughters upon stalwart shoulders, both
figuratively and literally.

"Well, _I_ ain't in any trance," answered the dark girl, "and _I_ think
it's pretty tough for him to take up with a rank outsider, and expect
us to warm up to her as though he'd married one of our own folks." She
tossed her head, the pride of class distinction welling high in her
ample bosom.

"He ain't asking us to warm up to her," contradicted Mademoiselle
Eloise, a pale, light-haired sprite, who had arrived late and was making
undignified efforts to get out of her clothes by way of her head. She
was Polly's understudy and next in line for the star place in the bill.

"Well, Barker has put her into the 'Leap of Death' stunt, ain't he?"
continued the brunette. "'Course that ain't a regular circus act,"
she added, somewhat mollified, "and so far she's had to dress with
the 'freaks,' but the next thing we know, he'll be ringin' her in on a
regular stunt and be puttin' her in to dress with US."

"No danger of that," sneered the blonde; "Barker is too old a stager to
mix up his sheep and his goats."

Polly had again lost the thread of the conversation. Her mind had
gone roving to the night when the frightened girl about whom they
were talking had made her first appearance in the circus lot, clinging
timidly to the hand of the man who had just made her his wife. Her eyes
had met Polly's, with a look of appeal that had gone straight to the
child's simple heart.

A few nights later the newcomer had allowed herself to be strapped into
the cumbersome "Leap of Death" machine which hurled itself through space
at each performance, and flung itself down with force enough to break
the neck of any unskilled rider. Courage and steady nerve were the
requisites for the job, so the manager had said; but any physician would
have told him that only a trained acrobat could long endure the nervous
strain, the muscular tension, and the physical rack of such an ordeal.

What matter? The few dollars earned in this way would mean a great deal
to the mother, whom the girl's marriage had left desolate.

Polly had looked on hungrily the night that the mother had taken the
daughter in her arms to say farewell in the little country town where
the circus had played before her marriage. She could remember no woman's
arms about HER, for it was fourteen years since tender hands had carried
her mother from the performers' tent into the moonlit lot to die. The
baby was so used to seeing "Mumsie" throw herself wearily on the ground
after coming out of the "big top" exhausted, that she crept to the
woman's side as usual that night, and gazed laughingly into the
sightless eyes, gurgling and prattling and stroking the unresponsive
face. There were tears from those who watched, but no word was spoken.

Clown Toby and the big "boss canvas-man" Jim had always taken turns
amusing and guarding little Polly, while her mother rode in the ring. So
Toby now carried the babe to another side of the lot, and Jim bore the
lifeless body of the mother to the distant ticket-wagon, now closed for
the night, and laid it upon the seller's cot.

"It's allus like this in the end," he murmured, as he drew a piece of
canvas over the white face and turned away to give orders to the men who
were beginning to load the "props" used earlier in the performance.

When the show moved on that night it was Jim's strong arms that lifted
the mite of a Polly close to his stalwart heart, and climbed with her to
the high seat on the head wagon. Uncle Toby was entrusted with the brown
satchel in which the mother had always carried Polly's scanty wardrobe.
It seemed to these two men that the eyes of the woman were fixed
steadily upon them.

Barker, the manager, a large, noisy, good-natured fellow, at first
mumbled something about the kid being "excess baggage," but his
objections were only half-hearted, for like the others, he was already
under the hypnotic spell of the baby's round, confiding eyes, and he
eventually contented himself with an occasional reprimand to Toby, who
was now sometimes late on his cues. Polly wondered, at these times,
why the old man's stories were so suddenly cut short just as she was so
"comfy" in the soft grass at his feet. The boys who used to "look sharp"
because of their boss at loading time, now learned that they might
loiter so long as "Muvver Jim" was "hikin' it round for the kid." It was
Polly who had dubbed big Jim "Muvver," and the sobriquet had stuck to
him in spite of his six feet two, and shoulders that an athlete might
have envied. Little by little, Toby grew more stooped and small lines
of anxiety crept into the brownish circles beneath Jim's eyes, the lips
that had once shut so firmly became tender and tremulous, but neither of
the men would willingly have gone back to the old emptiness.

It was a red letter day in the circus, when Polly first managed to climb
up on the pole of an unhitched wagon and from there to the back of
a friendly, Shetland pony. Jim and Toby had been "neglectin' her
eddication" they declared, and from that time on, the blood of Polly's
ancestors was given full encouragement.

Barker was quick to grasp the advantage of adding the kid to the daily
parade. She made her first appearance in the streets upon something very
like a Newfoundland dog, guarded from the rear by Jim, and from the fore
by a white-faced clown who was thought to be all the funnier because he
twisted his neck so much.

From the street parade to Polly's first appearance in the "big top,"
had seemed a short while to Jim and Toby. They were proud to see her
circling the ring in bright colours and to hear the cheers of the
people, but a sense of loss was upon them.

"I always said she'd do it," cried Barker, who now took upon himself the
credit of Polly's triumph.

And what a triumph it was!

Polly danced as serenely on Bingo's back as she might have done on the
"concert boards." She swayed gracefully with the music. Her tiny sandals
twinkled as she stood first upon one foot and then upon the other.

Uncle Toby forgot to use many of his tricks that night; and Jim left the
loading of the wagons to take care of itself, while he hovered near the
entrance, anxious and breathless. The performers crowded around the girl
with outstretched hands and congratulations, as she came out of the ring
to cheers and applause.

But Big Jim stood apart. He was thinking of the buttons that his clumsy
fingers used to force into the stiff, starchy holes too small for them
and of the pigtails so stubborn at the ends; and Toby was remembering
the little shoes that had once needed to be laced in the cold, dark
mornings, and the strings that were always snapping.

Something had gone.

They were not philosophers to reason like Emerson, that for everything
we lose we gain something; they were simple souls, these two, they could
only feel.



Chapter II

WHILE Polly sat in the dressing tent, listening indifferently to the
chatter about the "Leap of Death" girl, Jim waited in the lot outside,
opening and shutting a small, leather bag which he had bought for her
that day. He was as blind to the picturesque outdoor life as she to her
indoor surroundings, for he, too, had been with the circus since his
earliest recollection.

The grass enclosure, where he waited, was shut in by a circle of tents
and wagons. The great, red property vans were waiting to be loaded with
the costumes and tackle which were constantly being brought from the
"big top," where the evening performance was now going on. The gay
striped curtains at the rear of the tent were looped back to give air
to the panting musicians, who sat just inside. Through the opening,
a glimpse of the audience might be had, tier upon tier, fanning and
shifting uneasily. Near the main tent stood the long, low dressing
"top," with the women performers stowed away in one end, the "ring
horses" in the centre, and the men performers in the other end.

A temporary curtain was hung between the main and the dressing tent,
to shut out the curious mob that tried to peep in at the back lot for a
glimpse of things not to be seen in the ring.

Coloured streamers, fastened to the roofs of the tents, waved and
floated in the night air and beckoned to the towns-people on the other
side to make haste to get their places, forget their cares, and be
children again.

Over the tops of the tents, the lurid light of the distant red fire shot
into the sky, accompanied by the cries of the peanut "butchers," the
popcorn boys, the lemonade venders,{sic} and the exhortations of the
side-show "spieler," whose flying banners bore the painted reproductions
of his "freaks." Here and there stood unhitched chariots, half filled
trunks, trapeze tackle, paper hoops, stake pullers or other "properties"
necessary to the show.

Torches flamed at the tent entrances, while oil lamps and lanterns gave
light for the loading of the wagons.

There was a constant stream of life shooting in and out from the
dressing tent to the "big top," as gaily decked men, women and animals
came or went.

Drowsy dogs were stretched under the wagons, waiting their turn to be
dressed as lions or bears. The wise old goose, with his modest grey
mate, pecked at the green grass or turned his head from side to side,
watching the singing clown, who rolled up the painted carcass and long
neck of the imitation giraffe from which two property men had just
slipped, their legs still encased in stripes.

Ambitious canvas-men and grooms were exercising, feet in air, in the
hope of some day getting into the performers' ring. Property men stole a
minute's sleep in the soft warm grass while they waited for more tackle
to load in the wagons. Children of the performers were swinging on the
tent ropes, chattering monkeys sat astride the Shetland ponies, awaiting
their entrance to the ring. The shrieks of the hyenas in the distant
animal tent, the roaring of the lions and the trumpeting of the
elephants mingled with the incessant clamour of the band. And back of
all this, pointing upward in mute protest, rose a solemn church spire,
white and majestic against a vast panorama of blue, moonlit hills, that
encircled the whole lurid picture. Jim's eyes turned absently toward the
church as he sat fumbling with the lock of the little brown satchel.

He had gone from store to store in the various towns where they had
played looking for something to inspire wonder in the heart of a miss,
newly arrived at her sixteenth year. Only the desperation of a last
moment had forced him to decide upon the imitation alligator bag, which
he now held in his hand.

It looked small and mean to him as the moment of presentation
approached, and he was glad that the saleswoman in the little country
store had suggested the addition of ribbons and laces, which he now drew
from the pocket of his corduroys. He placed his red and blue treasures
very carefully in the bottom of the satchel, and remembered with regret
the strand of coral beads which he had so nearly bought to go with them.

He opened the large property trunk by his side, and took from it
a laundry box, which held a little tan coat, that was to be Toby's
contribution to the birthday surprise. He was big-hearted enough to be
glad that Toby's gift seemed finer and more useful than his.

It was only when the "Leap of Death" act preceding Polly's turn was
announced, that the big fellow gave up feasting his eyes on the satchel
and coat, and hid them away in the big property trunk. She would be out
in a minute, and these wonders were not to be revealed to her until the
close of the night's performance.

Jim put down the lid of the trunk and sat upon it, feeling like a
criminal because he was hiding something from Polly.

His consciousness of guilt was increased as he recalled how often she
had forbidden Toby and himself to rush into reckless extravagances for
her sake, and how she had been more nearly angry than he had ever seen
her, when they had put their month's salaries together to buy her the
spangled dress for her first appearance. It had taken a great many
apologies and promises as to their future behaviour to calm her, and now
they had again disobeyed her. It would be a great relief when to-night's
ordeal was over.

Jim watched Polly uneasily as she came from the dressing tent and
stopped to gaze at the nearby church steeple. The incongruity of the
slang, that soon came from her delicately formed lips, was lost upon him
as she turned her eyes toward him.

"Say, Jim," she said, with a Western drawl, "them's a funny lot of guys
what goes to them church places, ain't they?"

"Most everybody has got some kind of a bug," Jim assented; "I guess they
don't do much harm."

"'Member the time you took me into one of them places to get me out a
the rain, the Sunday our wagon broke down? Well, that bunch WE butted
into wouldn't a give Sell's Brothers no cause for worry with that show
a' theirn, would they, Jim?" She looked at him with withering disgust.
"Say, wasn't that the punkiest stunt that fellow in black was doin' on
the platform? You said Joe was only ten minutes gettin' the tire onto
our wheel, but say, you take it from me, Jim, if I had to wait another
ten minutes as long as that one, I'd be too old to go on a-ridin'."

Jim "'lowed" some church shows might be better than "that un," but Polly
said he could have her end of the bet, and summed up by declaring it no
wonder that the yaps in these towns was daffy about circuses, if they
didn't have nothin' better an' church shows to go to.

One of the grooms was entering the lot with Polly's horse. She stooped
to tighten one of her sandals, and as she rose, Jim saw her sway
slightly and put one hand to her head. He looked at her sharply,
remembering her faintness in the parade that morning.

"You ain't feeling right," he said uneasily.

"You just bet I am," Polly answered with an independent toss of her
head. "This is the night we're goin' to make them rubes in there sit up,
ain't it, Bingo?" she added, placing one arm affectionately about the
neck of the big, white horse that stood waiting near the entrance.

"You bin ridin' too reckless lately," said Jim, sternly, as he followed
her. "I don't like it. There ain't no need of your puttin' in all them
extra stunts. Your act is good enough without 'em. Nobody else ever done
'em, an' nobody'd miss 'em if you left 'em out."

Polly turned with a triumphant ring in her voice. The music was swelling
for her entrance.

"You ain't my MOTHER, Jim, you're my GRANDmother," she taunted; and,
with a crack of her whip she was away on Bingo's back.

"It's the spirit of the dead one that's got into her," Jim mumbled as he
turned away, still seeing the flash in the departing girl's eyes.



Chapter III

Polly and Bingo always made the audience "sit up" when they swept into
the ring. She was so young, so gaily clad, so light and joyous in all
her poses. She seemed scarcely to touch the back of the white horse, as
they dashed round the ring in the glare of the tent lights. The other
performers went through their work mechanically while Polly rode, for
they knew the audience was watching her only.

As for Polly, her work had never lost its first interest. Jim may have
been right when he said that the spirit of the dead mother had got into
her; but it must have been an unsatisfied spirit, unable to fulfil its
ambition in the body that once held it, for it sometimes played strange
pranks with Polly. To-night, her eyes shone and her lips were parted in
anticipation, as she leaped lightly over the many coloured streamers of
the wheel of silken ribbons held by Barker in the centre of the ring,
and by Toby and the "tumblers" on the edge of the bank.

With each change of her act, the audience cheered and frantically
applauded. The band played faster; Bingo's pace increased; the end of
her turn was coming. The "tumblers" arranged themselves around the ring
with paper hoops; Bingo was fairly racing. She went through the first
hoop with a crash of tearing paper and cheers from the audience.

"Heigh, Bingo!" she shouted, as she bent her knees to make ready for the
final leap.

Bingo's neck was stretched. He had never gone so fast before. Barker
looked uneasy. Toby forgot to go on with his accustomed tricks. Jim
watched anxiously from the entrance.

The paper of one hoop was still left unbroken. The attendant turned his
eyes to glance at the oncoming girl; the hoop shifted slightly in his
clumsy hand as Polly leapt straight up from Bingo's back, trusting to
her first calculation. Her forehead struck the edge of the hoop. She
clutched wildly at the air. Bingo galloped on, and she fell to the
ground, striking her head against the iron-bound stake at the edge of
the ring.

Everything stopped. There was a gasp of horror; the musicians dropped
their instruments; Bingo halted and looked back uneasily; she lay
unconscious and seemingly lifeless.

A great cry went up in the tent. Panic-stricken, men, women and children
began to clamber down from their seats, while others nearest the ground
attempted to jump into the ring. Barker, still grasping his long whip,
rushed to the girl's side, and shouted wildly to Toby:

"Say something, you. Get 'em back!"

Old Toby turned his white face to the crowd, his features worked
convulsively, but he could not speak. His grief was so grotesque, that
the few who saw him laughed hysterically. He could not even go to Polly,
his feet seemed pinned to the earth.

Jim rushed into the tent at the first cry of the audience. He lifted the
limp form tenderly, and kneeling in the ring held her bruised head in
his hands.

"Can't you get a doctor!" he shouted desperately to Barker.

"Here's the doctor!" some one called; and a stranger came toward them.
He bent over the seemingly lifeless form, his fingers on the tiny wrist,
his ear to the heart.

"Well, sir?" Jim faltered, for he had caught the puzzled look in the
doctor's eyes as his deft hand pressed the cruelly wounded head.

"I can't tell just yet," said the doctor. "She must be taken away."

"Where can we take her?" asked Jim, a look of terror in his great,
troubled eyes.

"The parsonage is the nearest house," said the doctor. "I am sure the
pastor will be glad to have her there until we can find out how badly
she is hurt."

In an instant Barker was back in the centre of the ring. He announced
that Polly's injuries were slight, called the attention of the audience
to the wonderful concert to take place, and bade them make ready for the
thrilling chariot race which would end the show.

Jim, blind with despair, lifted the light burden and staggered out of
the tent, while the band played furiously and the people fell back
into their seats. The Roman chariots thundered and clattered around the
outside of the ring, the audience cheered the winner of the race, and
for the moment Polly was forgotten.



Chapter IV

THE blare of the circus band had been a sore temptation to Mandy Jones
all afternoon and evening. Again and again it had dragged her from
her work to the study window, from which she could see the wonders so
tantalisingly near. Mandy was housekeeper for the Rev. John Douglas,
but the unwashed supper dishes did not trouble her, as she watched the
lumbering elephants, the restless lions, the long-necked giraffes and
the striped zebras, that came and went in the nearby circus lot. And
yet, in spite of her own curiosity, she could not forgive her vagrant
"worse half," Hasty, who had been lured from duty early in the day. She
had once dubbed him Hasty, in a spirit of derision, and the name had
clung to him. The sarcasm seemed doubly appropriate to-night, for he had
been away since ten that morning, and it was now past nine.

The young pastor for a time had enjoyed Mandy's tirades against her
husband, but when she began calling shrilly out of the window to chance
acquaintances for news of him, he slipped quietly into the next room to
finish to-morrow's sermon. Mandy renewed her operations at the window
with increased vigour when the pastor had gone. She was barely saved
from pitching head foremost into the lot, by the timely arrival of
Deacon Strong's daughter, who managed, with difficulty, to connect the
excited woman's feet with the floor.

"Foh de Lor' sake!" Mandy gasped, as she stood panting for breath and
blinking at the pretty, young, apple-faced Julia; "I was suah most gone
dat time." Then followed another outburst against the delinquent Hasty.

But the deacon's daughter did not hear; her eyes were already wandering
anxiously to the lights and the tinsel of the little world beyond the
window.

This was not the first time to-day that Mandy had found herself talking
to space. There had been a steady stream of callers at the parsonage
since eleven that morning, but she had long ago confided to the pastor
that she suspected their reasons.

"Dey comes in here a-trackin' up my floors," she said, "and a-askin'
why you don' stop de circus from a-showin' nex' to de church and den
a-cranin' afar necks out de winder, till I can't get no housework done."

"That's only human nature," Douglas had answered with a laugh; but
Mandy had declared that she knew another name for it, and had mumbled
something about "hypocritters," as she seized her broom and began to
sweep imaginary tracks from in front of the door.

Many times she had made up her mind to let the next caller know just
what she thought of "hypocritters," but her determination was usually
weakened by her still greater desire to excite increased wonder in the
faces of her visitors.

Divided between these two inclinations, she gazed at Julia now; the
shining eyes of the deacon's daughter conquered, and she launched forth
into an eager description of how she had just seen a "wondeful striped
anamule" with a "pow'ful long neck walk right out of the tent," and how
he had "come apart afore her very eyes," and two men had slipped "right
out a' his insides." Mandy was so carried away by her own eloquence and
so busy showing Julia the sights beyond the window, that she did not
hear Miss Perkins, the thin-lipped spinster, who entered, followed by
the Widow Willoughby dragging her seven-year-old son Willie by the hand.

The women were protesting because their choir practice of "What
Shall the Harvest Be?" had been interrupted by the unrequested
acompaniment{sic} of the "hoochie coochie" from the nearby circus band.

"It's scandalous!" Miss Perkins snapped. "Scandalous! And SOMEBODY ought
to stop it." She glanced about with an unmistakable air of grievance at
the closed doors, feeling that the pastor was undoubtedly behind one of
them, when he ought to be out taking action against the things that her
soul abominated.

"Well, I'm sure I'VE done all that _I_ could," piped the widow, with
a meek, martyred air. She was always martyred. She considered it an
appropriate attitude for a widow. "He can't blame ME if the choir is out
of key to-morrow." "Mercy me!" interrupted the spinster, "if there isn't
Julia Strong a-leaning right out of that window a-looking at the circus,
and her pa a deacon of the church, and this the house of the pastor.
It's shocking! I must go to her."

"Ma, let me see, too," begged Willie, as he tugged at his mother's
skirts.

Mrs. Willoughby hesitated. Miss Perkins was certainly taking a long
while for her argument with Julia. The glow from the red powder outside
the window was positively alarming.

"Dear me!" she said, "I wonder if there can be a fire." And with this
pretext for investigation, she, too, joined the little group at the
window.

A few moments later when Douglas entered for a fresh supply of paper,
the backs of the company were toward him. He crossed to the study table
without disturbing his visitors, and smiled to himself at the eager way
in which they were hanging out of the window.

Douglas was a sturdy young man of eight and twenty, frank and boyish in
manner, confident and light-hearted in spirit. He had seemed too young
to the deacons when he was appointed to their church, and his keen
enjoyment of outdoor games and other healthful sports robbed him of a
certain dignity in their eyes. Some of the women of the congregation had
been inclined to side with the deacons, for it hurt their vanity that
the pastor found so many other interests when he might have been sitting
in dark, stuffy rooms discussing theology with them; but Douglas had
been either unconscious of or indifferent to their resentment, and had
gone on his way with a cheery nod and an unconquerable conviction of
right, that had only left them floundering. He intended to quit the room
now unnoticed, but was unfortunate enough to upset a chair as he turned
from the table. This brought a chorus of exclamations from the women,
who chattering rushed quickly toward him.

"What do you think of my naughty boy, Willie?" simpered the widow. "He
dragged me quite to the window."

Douglas glanced amusedly first at the five-foot-six widow and then at
the helpless, red-haired urchin by her side, but he made no comment
beyond offering a chair to each of the women.

"Our choir practice had to be entirely discontinued," declared Miss
Perkins sourly, as she accepted the proffered chair, adjusted her skirts
for a stay, and glanced defiantly at the parson, who had dutifully
seated himself near the table.

"I am sure _I_ have as true an ear as anybody," whimpered the widow,
with an injured air; "but I defy ANY ONE to lead 'What Shall the
Harvest Be?' to an accompaniment like THAT." She jerked her hand in
the direction of the window. The band was again playing the "hoochie
coochie."

"Never mind about the choir practice," said Douglas, with a smile. "It
is SOUL not SKILL that our congregation needs in its music. As for that
music out there, it is NOT without its compensations. Why, the small
boys would rather hear that band than the finest church organ in the
world."

"And the SMALL BOYS would rather see the circus than to hear you preach,
most likely," snapped Miss Perkins. It was adding insult to injury for
him to try to CONSOLE her.

"Of course they would; and so would some of the grown-ups if they'd only
tell the truth about it," said Douglas, laughing.

"What!" exclaimed Miss Perkins.

"Why not?" asked Douglas. "I am sure I don't know what they do inside
the tents, but the parade looked very promising."

"The PARADE!" the two women echoed in one breath. "Did YOU see the
parade?"

"Yes, indeed," said Douglas, enthusiastically. "But it didn't compare
with the one I saw at the age of eight." He turned his head to one side
and looked into space with a reminiscent smile. The widow's red-haired
boy crept close to him.

"The Shetland ponies seemed as small as mice," he continued, dreamily,
"the elephants huge as mountains, the great calliope wafted my soul to
the very skies, and I followed that parade right into the circus lot."

"Did you seed inside de tent?" Willie asked, eagerly.

"I didn't have enough money for that," Douglas answered, frankly.
He turned to the small boy and pinched his ear. There was sad
disappointment in the youngster's face, but he brightened again, when
the parson confessed that he "peeped."

"A parson peeping!" cried the thin-lipped Miss Perkins.

"I was not a parson then," corrected Douglas, good-naturedly.

"You were GOING to be," persisted the spinster.

"I had to be a boy first, in spite of that fact."

The sudden appearance of Hasty proved a diversion. He was looking very
sheepish.

"Hyar he is, Mars John; look at him!" said Mandy.

"Hasty, where have you been all day?" demanded Douglas, severely.

Hasty fumbled with his hat and sparred for time. "Did yo' say whar's I
been, sah?"

"Dat's what he done ast yo'," Mandy prompted, threateningly.

"I bin 'ceived, Mars John," declared Hasty, solemnly. Mandy snorted
incredulously. Douglas waited.

"A gemmen in de circus done tole me dis mawnin' dat ef I carry water
fo' de el'phants, he'll let me in de circus fo' nuffin', an' I make a
'greement wid him. Mars John, did yo' ebber seed an' el'phant drink?" he
asked, rolling his eyes. John shook his head.

"Well, sah, he jes' put dat trunk a'his'n into de pail, jes' once
an--swish--water gone."

Douglas laughed; and Mandy muttered, sullenly.

"Well, sah," continued Hasty, "I tote water fo' dem el'phants all day
long, an' when I cum roun' to see de circus, de gemmen won't let me in.
An' when I try to crawl under de tent, dey pulls me out by de laigs an'
beats me." He looked from one to the other expecting sympathy.

"Serves you right," was Mandy's unfeeling reply. "If yo's so anxious to
be a-totin' water, jes' yo' come along outside and tote some fo' Mandy."

"I can't do no mo' carryin', Mandy," protested Hasty. "I'se hurted in
mah arm."

"What hurt yo'?"

"Tiger."

"A tiger?" exclaimed the women in unison.

"Done chawed it mos' off," he declared, solemnly. "Deacon Elverson, he
seed it, an' he says I's hurt bad."

"Deacon Elverson?" cried the spinster. "Was Deacon Elverson at the
circus?"

"He was in de lot, a-tryin' to look in, same as me," Hasty answered,
innocently.

"You'd better take Hasty into the kitchen," said Douglas to Mandy, with
a dry smile; "he's talking too much for a wounded man."

Mandy disappeared with the disgraced Hasty, advising him with fine scorn
"to get de tiger to chew off his laigs, so's he wouldn't have to walk no
mo'."

The women gazed at each other with lips closed tightly. Elverson's
behaviour was beyond their power of expression. Miss Perkins turned
to the pastor, as though he were somehow to blame for the deacon's
backsliding, but before she could find words to argue the point, the
timid little deacon appeared in the doorway, utterly unconscious of the
hostile reception that Hasty had prepared for him. He glanced nervously
from one set face to the other, then coughed behind his hat.

"We're all very much interested in the circus," said Douglas. "Can't you
tell us about it?"

"I just went into the lot to look for my son," stammered the deacon. "I
feared Peter had strayed."

"Why, deacon," said Mrs. Willoughby. "I just stopped by your house and
saw Mrs. Elverson putting Peter to bed."

The deacon was saved from further embarrassment by an exclamation from
Julia, who had stayed at the window. "Oh, look; something has happened!"
she cried. "There's a crowd. They are coming this way."

Douglas crossed quickly to Julia's side, and saw an excited mob
collecting before the entrance to the main tent. He had time to discover
no more before Mandy burst in at the door, panting with excitement and
rolling her large, white-rimmed eyeballs.

"Mars John, a little circus girl done fall off her hoss!" she cried.
"Dr. Hartley say can dey bring her in heah?"

"Of course," said Douglas, hurrying outside.

There were horrified exclamations from the women, who were aghast at the
idea of a circus rider in the parsonage. In their helpless indignation,
they turned upon the little deacon, feeling intuitively that he was
enjoying the drama. Elverson was retreating toward the door when he was
suddenly thrust aside by Douglas.

In the young pastor's arms was a white, spangled burden of humanity, her
slender arm hung lifeless over his shoulder. The silk stocking was torn
from one bruised ankle; her hair fell across her face, veiling it from
the unfriendly glances of the women. Douglas passed out of sight up the
stairway without looking to the right or left, followed by the doctor.

Mandy reached the front door in time to push back a crowd of intruders.
She had barely closed the door when it was thrust open by Jim.

"Where is she?" he demanded.

"Go 'way f'um here!" cried Mandy, as her eyes unconsciously sought the
stairs.

Jim followed the direction of her glance, and cleared the steps at a
bound. Mandy pursued him, muttering angrily. Deacon Elverson, too, was
about to follow, when a grim reminder from Miss Perkins brought him
around and he made for the door instead. He started back on opening it,
for standing on the threshold was a clown in his grotesque "make-up";
his white clothes were partially concealed by a large, travelling
ulster, held together by one button. In one hand he carried a small
leather satchel; in the other a girl's sailor hat; a little tan coat was
thrown across his arm. The giggles of the boy hiding behind his mother's
skirt were the only greetings received by the trembling old man in the
doorway.

He glanced uncertainly from one unfriendly face to the other, waiting
for a word of invitation to enter; but none came.

"Excuse me," he said; "I just brought some of her little things. She'd
better put on her coat when she goes out. It's gettin' kinder chilly."

He looked again into the blank faces; still no one spoke. He stepped
forward, trembling with anxiety. A sudden fear clutched at his heart,
the muscles of his face worked pitifully, the red painted lips began to
quiver.

"It ain't--It ain't that, is it?" he faltered, unable to utter the word
that filled him with horror.

Even Miss Perkins was momentarily touched by the anguish in the old
man's voice. "I guess you will find the person you are looking for
upstairs," she answered tartly; and flounced out of the house, calling
to Julia and the others to follow her, and declaring that she would soon
let folks know how the parson had brought a "circus ridin' girl" into
the parsonage.

The painted clown stood alone, looking from one wall to the other, then
he crossed the room and placed the alligator satchel and the little coat
and hat on the study table. He was careful not to wrinkle the coat,
for this was Polly's birthday gift. Jim and he had planned to have
sandwiches and soda pop on the top of the big wagon when they offered
their treasures tonight; but now the wagons would soon be leaving--and
where was Polly? He turned to ask this question as Mandy came down the
stairs.

"Well, if dar ain't anudder one," she cried.

"Never mind, Mandy," said Douglas, who was just behind her, carrying a
small water pitcher, and searching for a bottle of brandy which had been
placed in the medicine chest for emergencies.

"You can take these upstairs," he told her, when he had filled the
pitcher with water and found the liquor. Mandy looked threateningly at
Toby, then reluctantly went on her way.

Douglas turned to the old man pleasantly. His was the first greeting
that Toby had received, and he at last found voice to ask whether Polly
was badly hurt.

"The doctor hasn't told us yet," said Douglas, kindly.

"I'm her Uncle Toby--not her REAL uncle," the old man explained, "but
that's what she calls me. I couldn't come out right away, because I'm on
in the concert. Could I see her now, please?"

"Here's the doctor," said Douglas, as Hartley came down the stairs,
followed by Jim. "Well, doctor, not bad, I hope?"

"Yes, rather bad," said the doctor, adding quickly, as he saw the
suffering in Toby's face, "but don't be alarmed. She's going to get
well."

"How long will it be before we can have her back--before she can ride
again?" asked Jim gruffly, as he stood apart, twisting his brown, worn
hat in his hands.

"Probably several months," said the doctor. "No bones are broken, but
the ligaments of one ankle are torn, and she received a bad blow on the
head. It will be some time before she recovers consciousness." "What are
we goin' to do, Jim?" asked Toby, helplessly.

"You needn't worry, we'll take good care of her here," said Douglas,
seeing desperation written on their faces.

"Here?" They looked at him incredulously.--And this was a parson!

"Where are her parents?" the doctor asked, looking at Jim and Toby.

"She ain't got no parents 'cept Toby an' me," replied Jim. "We've took
care of her ever since she was a baby."

"Oh, I see," said the doctor. "Well, one of you'd better stay here until
she can be moved."

"That's the trouble; we can't," said Toby, hanging his head. "You see,
sir, circus folks is like soldiers. No matter what happens, the show has
to go on, and we got to be in our places."

"Well, well, she'll be safe enough, here," said the doctor. "It is a
fortunate thing that Mr. Douglas can manage this. Our town hospital
burned down a few months ago, and we've been rather puzzled as to what
to do with such cases." He took his leave with a cheery "Good night,"
and a promise to look in upon the little patient later. Jim shuffled
awkwardly toward the pastor.

"It's mighty good of you to do this," he mumbled, "but she ain't goin'
to be no charity patient. Me and Toby is goin' to look after her keep."

"Her wants will be very few," Douglas answered, kindly. "You needn't
trouble much about that."

"I mean it," said Jim, savagely. He met Douglas's glance of surprise
with a determined look, for he feared that his chance of being useful to
Polly might be slipping out of his life.

"You mustn't mind Jim," the clown pleaded at the pastor's elbow. "You
see pain gets some folks different from others; and it always kinder
makes him savage."

"Oh, that's all right," Douglas answered, quickly. His own life had
been so lonely, that he could understand the selfish yearning in the big
man's heart. "You must do what you think best about these things; Mandy
and I will look after the rest."

Jim hung his head, feeling somehow that the pastor had seen straight
into his heart and discovered his petty weakness. He was about to turn
toward the door when it was thrown open by Barker.

"Where is she?" shouted the manager, looking from one to the other.

"She can't come," said Jim in a low, steady voice, for he knew the storm
of opposition with which Barker would meet the announcement.

"Can't come?" shrieked Barker. "Of course she'll come. I can't get along
without her. She's GOT to come." He looked at Jim, who remained silent
and firm. "WHY ain't she comin'?" he asked, feeling himself already
defeated.

"She's hurt bad," was Jim's laconic reply.

"The devil she is!" said Barker, looking at Douglas for confirmation.
"Is that right?"

"She won't be able to travel for some time," said Douglas.

"Mr. Barker is our manager," Toby explained, as he edged his way to the
pastor's side.

"Some time!" Barker looked at Douglas as though he were to blame for
their misfortune. "Well, you just bet she will," he declared menacingly.

"See here, Barker, don't you talk to him like that," said Jim, facing
the manager. "He's darned square even if he is a parson." Barker turned
away. He was not a bad-hearted man, but he was irritated and upset at
losing the star feature of his bill.

"Ain't this my dod-gasted luck?" he muttered to himself, as his eye
again travelled to the boss canvas-man. "You get out a' here, Jim," he
shouted, "an' start them wagons. The show's got to go on, Poll or no
Poll."

He turned with his hand on the door-knob and jerked out a grudging
thanks to the pastor. "It's all fired good of you to take her in," he
said, "but it's tough to lose her. Good night!" He banged the door and
clattered down the steps.

Jim waited. He was trying to find words in which to tell his gratitude.
None came; and he turned to go with a short "good-bye!"

"Good night, Jim," said the pastor. He crossed the room and took the big
fellow's hand.

"Much obliged," Jim answered gruffly. It was his only polite phrase, and
he had taught Polly to say it. Douglas waited until Jim had passed down
the steps, then turned to Toby, who still lingered near the table.

"You'll tell her how it was, me and Jim had to leave her without sayin'
'good-bye,' won't you, sir?" Toby pleaded.

"Yes, indeed," Douglas promised.

"I'll jes' put this little bit o' money into her satchel." He picked up
the little brown bag that was to have been Polly's birthday gift. "Me
an' Jim will be sendin' her more soon."

"You're going to miss her, I'm afraid," Douglas said, feeling an
irresistible desire to gain the old man's confidence.

"Lord bless you, yes, sir," Toby answered, turning upon him eagerly.
"Me an' Jim has been father an' mother and jes' about everythin' to that
little one. She wan't much bigger'n a handful of peanuts when we begun
a-worryin' about her."

"Well, Mandy will do the worrying now," Douglas laughed. "She's been
dying for a chance to mother somebody all along. Why, she even tried it
on me."

"I noticed as how some of those church people seemed to look kinder
queer at me," said Toby, "and I been a-wonderin' if mebbe they might
feel the same about her."

"Oh, they're all right," Douglas assured him; "they'll be her friends in
no time."

"She's fit for 'em, sir," Toby pleaded. "She's good, clean into the
middle of her heart."

"I'm sure of it," Douglas answered.

"I've heard how some church folks feels towards us circus people, sir,
and I jes' wanted ye to know that there ain't finer families, or better
mothers or fathers or grandfathers or grandmothers anywhere than we got
among us. Why, that girl's mother rode the horses afore her, and her
mother afore that, and her grandmother and grandfather afore that,
an' there ain't nobody what's cared more for their good name and their
children's good name an' her people has. You see, sir, circus folks
is all like that; they's jes' like one big family; they tends to their
business and takes good care o' theirselves--they has to--or they
couldn't do their work. It's 'cause I'm leavin' her with you that I'm
sayin' all this," the old man apologised.

"I'm glad you told me, Toby," Douglas answered, kindly. "I've never
known much about circus folks."

"I guess I'd better be goin'," Toby faltered, as his eyes roved hungrily
toward the stairway.

"I'll send you our route, and mebbe you'll be lettin' us know how she
is."

"Indeed I will," Douglas assured him, heartily.

"You might tell her we'll write ever' day or so," he added.

"I'll tell her," Douglas promised earnestly.

"Good night!" The old man hesitated, unwilling to go, but unable to find
further pretext for staying.

"Good night, Toby." Douglas extended his hand toward the bent figure
that was about to shuffle past him. The withered hand of the white-faced
clown rested in the strong grasp of the pastor, and his pale, little
eyes sought the face of the stalwart man before him; a numb desolation
was growing in his heart; the object for which he had gone on day by day
was being left behind and he must stumble forth into the night alone.

"It's hard to leave her," he mumbled; "but the show has got to go on."

The door shut out the bent, old figure. Douglas stood for some time
where Toby had left him, still thinking of his prophetic words. His
revery was broken by the sounds of the departing wagons, the low
muttered curses of the drivers, the shrieking and roaring of the
animals, as the circus train moved up the distant hill. "The show has
got to go on," he repeated as he crossed to his study table and seated
himself for work in the dim light of the old-fashioned lamp. He put out
one hand to draw the sheets of his interrupted sermon toward him, but
instead it fell upon a small sailor hat. He twisted the hat absently in
his fingers, not yet realising the new order of things that was coming
into his life. Mandy tiptoed softly down the stairs. She placed one
pudgy forefinger on her lips, and rolled her large eyes skyward. "Dat
sure am an angel chile straight from Hebben," she whispered. "She done
got a face jes' like a little flower."

"Straight from heaven," Douglas repeated, as she crossed softly to the
table and picked up the satchel and coat.

"You can leave the lamp, Mandy--I must finish to-morrow's sermon."

She turned at the threshold and shook her head rather sadly as she saw
the imprint of the day's cares on the young pastor's face.

"Yo' mus' be pow'ful tired," she said.

"No, no; not at all. Good night, Mandy!"

She closed the door behind her, and Douglas was alone. He gazed absently
at the pages of his unfinished sermon as he tapped his idle pen on the
desk. "The show has got to go on," he repeated, and far up the hillside
with the slow-moving wagons, Jim and Toby looked with unseeing eyes into
the dim, star-lit distance, and echoed the thought: "The show has got to
go on."



Chapter V

THE church bells were ringing their first warning for the morning
service when Mandy peeped into the spare bedroom for the second time,
and glanced cautiously at the wisp of hair that bespoke a feminine
head somewhere between the covers and the little white pillow on the
four-poster bed. There was no sound from the sleeper, so Mandy ventured
across the room on tiptoe and raised the shades. The drooping boughs of
Autumn foliage lay shimmering against the window panes, and through them
might be seen the grey outline of the church. Mandy glanced again toward
the bed to make sure that the burst of sunlight had not wakened
the invalid, then crossed to a small, rickety chair, laden with the
discarded finery of the little circus rider.

"Lawdy sakes!" she cried, holding up a spangled dress, admiringly.
"Ain't dat beautiful!" She drew near the mirror, attempting to see the
reflection of the tinsel and chiffon against her very ample background
of gingham and avoirdupois. "You'd sure be a swell nigger wid dat on,
Honey," she chuckled to herself. "Wouldn't dem deacons holler if dey
done see dat?"

The picture of the deacons' astonishment at such a spectacle so grew
upon Mandy, that she was obliged to cover her generous mouth to shut in
her convulsive laughter, lest it awaken the little girl in the bed.
She crossed to the old-fashioned bureau which for many months had stood
unused against the wall. The drawer creaked as she opened it to lay away
the gay, spangled gown.

"It'll be a mighty long time afore she puts on dem tings agin," she
said, with a doubtful shake of her large, round head.

Then she went back to the chair and picked up Polly's sandals, and
examined the bead-work with a great deal of interest. "Lawdy, lawdy!"
she cried, as she compared the size of the sandals to that of her
own rough, worn shoes. She was again upon the point of exploding with
laughter, as the church bell added a few, final and more emphatic clangs
to its warning.

She turned with a start, motioning a vain warning out of the window
for the bell to be silent, but the little sleeper was already stirring
uneasily on her pillow. One soft arm was thrown languidly over her head.
The large, blue eyes opened and closed dreamily as she murmured the
words of the clown song that Jim and Toby had taught her years ago:

     "Ting ling,
     That's what the bells sing----"

Mandy reached the side of the bed as the girl's eyes opened a second
time and met hers with a blank stare of astonishment. A tiny frown came
into the small, white forehead.

"What's the matter?" she asked faintly, trying to find something
familiar in the black face before her.

"Hush, child, hush," Mandy whispered; "jes' you lie puffickly still.
Dat's only de furs' bell a-ringin'."

"First bell?" the girl repeated, as her eyes travelled quickly about the
strange walls and the unfamiliar fittings of the room. "This ain't the
show!" she cried, suddenly.

"Lor' bless you, no; dis ain't no show," Mandy answered; and she laughed
reassuringly.

"Then where am I?" Polly asked, half breathless with bewilderment.

"Nebber you mind 'bout dat," was Mandy's unsatisfactory reply.

"But I DO mind," protested Polly, trying to raise herself to a sitting
position. "Where's the bunch?"

"De wat?" asked Mandy in surprise.

"The bunch--Jim and Toby and the rest of the push!"

"Lor' bless you!" Mandy exclaimed. "Dey's done gone 'long wid de circus,
hours ago."

"Gone! Show gone!" Polly cried in amazement. "Then what am I doing
here?"

"Hole on dar, honey! hole on!" Mandy cautioned. "Don't you 'cite
yo'se'f."

"Let me alone!" Polly put aside the arm that was trying to place a shawl
around her. "I got to get out a-here."

"You'se got plenty o' time for dat," Mandy answered, "yes' yo' wait
awhile."

"I can't wait, and I won't!" Polly shrieked, almost beside herself with
anxiety. "I got to get to the next burg--Wakefield, ain't it? What time
is it? Let me alone! Let me go!" she cried, struggling desperately.

The door opened softly and the young pastor stood looking down at the
picture of the frail, white-faced child, and her black, determined
captor.

"Here, here! What's all this about?" he asked, in a firm tone, though
evidently amused.

"Who are you?" returned the girl, as she shoved herself quickly back
against the pillows and drew the covers close under her chin, looking at
him oddly over their top.

"She done been cuttin' up somefin' awful," Mandy explained, as she tried
to regain enough breath for a new encounter.

"Cutting up? You surprise me, Miss Polly," he said, with mock
seriousness.

"How do you know I'm Polly?" the little rebel asked, her eyes gleaming
large and desperate above the friendly covers.

"If you will be VERY good and keep very quiet, I will try to tell you,"
he said, as he crossed to the bed.

"I won't be quiet, not for nobody," Polly objected, with a bold
disregard of double negatives. "I got to get a move. If you ain't goin'
to help me, you needn't butt in."

"I am afraid I can't help you to go just yet," Douglas replied. He was
beginning to perceive that there were tasks before him other than the
shaping of Polly's character.

"What are you trying to do to me, anyhow?" she asked, as she shot a
glance of suspicion from the pastor to Mandy. "What am I up against?"

"Don't yuh be scared, honey," Mandy reassured her. "You's jes' as safe
here as you done been in de circus."

"Safer, we hope," Douglas added, with a smile.

"Are you two bug?" Polly questioned, as she turned her head from one
side to the other and studied them with a new idea. "Well, you can't get
none the best of me. I can get away all right, and I will, too."

She made a desperate effort to put one foot to the floor, but fell back
with a cry of pain.

"Dar, dar," Mandy murmured, putting the pillow under the poor, cramped
neck, and smoothing the tangled hair from Polly's forehead. "Yuh done
hurt yo'sef for suah dis time."

The pastor had taken a step toward the bed. His look of amusement had
changed to one of pity.

"You see, Miss Polly, you have had a very bad fall, and you can't get
away just yet, nor see your friends until you are better."

"It's only a scratch," Polly whimpered. "I can do my work; I got
to." One more feeble effort and she succumbed, with a faint "Jimminy
Crickets!"

"Uncle Toby told me that you were a very good little girl," Douglas
said, as he drew up a chair and sat down by her side, confident by the
expression on her face that at last he was master of the situation. "Do
you think he would like you to behave like this?"

"I sure am on the blink," she sighed, as she settled back wearily upon
the pillow.

"You'll be all right soon," Douglas answered, cheerily. "Mandy and I
will help the time to go."

"I recollect now," Polly faltered, without hearing him. "It was the last
hoop. Jim seemed to have a hunch I was goin' to be in for trouble when
I went into the ring. Bingo must a felt it, too. He kept a-pullin' and
a-jerkin' from the start. I got myself together to make the last jump
an'--I can't remember no more." Her head drooped and her eyes closed.

"I wouldn't try just now if I were you," Douglas answered tenderly.

"It's my WHEEL, ain't it?" Polly questioned, after a pause.

"Yoah what, chile?" Mandy exclaimed, as she turned from the table, where
she had been rolling up the unused bandages left from the doctor's call
the night before.

"I say it's my creeper, my paddle," Polly explained, trying to locate
a few of her many pains. "Gee, but that hurts!" She tried to bend her
ankle. "Is it punctured?"

"Only sprained," Douglas answered, striving to control his amusement at
the expression on Mandy's puzzled face. "Better not talk any more about
it."

"Ain't anything the matter with my tongue, is there?" she asked, turning
her head to one side and studying him quizzically.

"I don't think there is," he replied good-naturedly.

"How did I come to fall in here, anyhow?" she asked, as she studied the
walls of the unfamiliar room.

"We brought you here."

"It's a swell place," she conceded grudgingly.

"We are comfortable," he admitted, as a tell-tale smile again hovered
about his lips. He was thinking of the changes that he must presently
make in Miss Polly's vocabulary.

"Is this the 'big top?' she asked.

"The--what?" he stammered.

"The main tent," she explained.

"Well, no; not exactly. It's going to be your room now, Miss Polly."

"My room! Gee! Think a' that!" she gasped, as the possibility of her
actually having a room all of her own took hold of her mind. "Much
obliged," she said with a nod, feeling that something was expected of
her. She knew no other phrase of gratitude than the one "Muvver" Jim and
Toby had taught her to say to the manager when she received from him the
first stick of red and white striped candy.

"You're very welcome," Douglas answered with a ring of genuine feeling
in his voice.

"Awful quiet, ain't it?" she ventured, after a pause. "Guess that's what
woke me up."

Douglas laughed good-naturedly at the thought of quiet as a disturber,
and added that he feared it might at first be rather dull for her, but
that Jim and Toby would send her news of the circus, and that she could
write to them as soon as she was better.

"I'll have to be a heap better 'an I ever was 'fore I can write much,"
Polly drawled, with a whimsical little smile.

"I will write for you," the pastor volunteered, understanding her
plight.

"You will?" For the first time he saw a show of real pleasure in her
eyes.

"Every day," Douglas promised solemnly.

"And you will show me how?"

"Indeed I will."

"How long am I in for?" she asked.

"The doctor can tell better about that when he comes."

"The doctor! So--it's as bad as that, eh?"

"Oh, that need not frighten you," Douglas answered consolingly.

"I ain't frightened," she bridled quickly; "I ain't never scared of
nothin.' It's only 'cause they need me in the show that I'm a-kickin'."

"Oh, they will get along all right," he said reassuringly.

"Get along?" Polly flashed with sudden resentment. "Get along WITHOUT
MY ACT!" It was apparent from her look of astonishment that Douglas had
completely lost whatever ground he had heretofore gained in her respect.
"Say, have you seen that show?" She waited for his answer with pity and
contempt.

"No," admitted John, weakly.

"Well I should say you ain't, or you wouldn't make no crack like
that. I'm the whole thing in that push," she said with an air of
self-complacency; "and with me down and out, that show will be on the
bum for fair."

"I beg your pardon," was all Douglas could say, confused by the sudden
volley of unfamiliar words.

"You're kiddin' me," she said, turning her head to one side as was her
wont when assailed by suspicion; "you MUST a seen me ride?"

"No, Miss Polly, I have never seen a circus," Douglas told her
half-regretfully, a sense of his deep privation stealing upon him.

"What!" cried Polly, incredulously.

"Lordy no, chile; he ain't nebber seed none ob dem tings," Mandy
interrupted, as she tried to arrange a few short-stemmed posies in a
variegated bouquet.

"Well, what do you think of that!" Polly gasped. "You're the first rube
I ever saw that hadn't." She was looking at him as though he were a
curiosity.

"So I'm a rube!" Douglas shook his head with a sad, little smile and
good-naturedly agreed that he had sometimes feared as much.

"That's what we always calls a guy like you," she explained ingenuously,
and added hopefully: "Well, you MUST a' seen our parade--all the pikers
see that--IT don't cost nothin'."

"I'm afraid I must also plead guilty to the charge of being a piker,"
Douglas admitted half-sheepishly, "for I did see the parade."

"Well, I was the one on the white horse right behind the lion cage," she
began excitedly. "You remember?"

"It's a little confused in my mind--" he caught her look of amazement,
"just AT PRESENT," he stammered, feeling her wrath again about to
descend upon him.

"Well, I'm the twenty-four sheet stand," she explained.

"Sheet!" Mandy shrieked from her corner.

"Yes--the billboards--the pictures," Polly said, growing impatient at
their persistent stupidity.

"She sure am a funny talkin' thing!" mumbled Mandy to herself, as she
clipped the withered leaves from a plant near the window.

"You are dead sure they know I ain't comin' on?" Polly asked with a
lingering suspicion in her voice.

"Dead sure"; and Douglas smiled to himself as he lapsed into her
vernacular.

There was a moment's pause. Polly realised for the first time that she
must actually readjust herself to a new order of things. Her eyes
again roved about the room. It was a cheerful place in which to be
imprisoned--even Polly could not deny that. The broad window at the back
with its white and pink chintz curtains on the inside, and its frame of
ivy on the outside, spoke of singing birds and sunshine all day long.
Everything from the white ceiling to the sweet-smelling matting that
covered the floor was spotlessly clean; the cane-bottomed rocker near
the curved window-seat with its pretty pillows told of days when
a convalescent might look in comfort at the garden beneath; the
counterpane, with its old-fashioned rose pattern, the little white
tidies on the back of each chair, and Mandy crooning beside the window,
all helped to make a homelike picture.

She wondered what Jim and Toby would say if they could see her now,
sitting like a queen in the midst of her soft coverlets, with no need to
raise even a finger to wait upon herself.

"Ain't it the limit?" she sighed, and with that Jim and Toby seemed to
drift farther away. She began to see their life apart from hers. She
could picture Jim with his head in his hands. She could hear his sharp
orders to the men. He was always short with the others when anything
went wrong with her.

"I'll bet 'Muvver Jim's' in the dumps," she murmured, as a cloud stole
across the flower-like face; then the tired muscles relaxed, and she
ceased to rebel.

"Muvver Jim"? Douglas repeated, feeling that he must recall her to a
knowledge of his presence.

"That's what I calls him," Polly explained, "but the fellows calls him
'Big Jim.' You might not think Jim could be a good mother just to look
at him, but he is; only, sometimes, you can't tell him things you could
a real mother," she added, half sadly.

"And your real mother went away when you were very young?"

"No, she didn't go AWAY----"

"No?" There was a puzzled note in the pastor's voice.

"She went out," Polly corrected.

"Out!" he echoed blankly.

"Yes--finished--Lights out."

"Oh, an accident." Douglas understood at last.

"I don't like to talk about it." Polly raised herself on her elbow and
looked at him solemnly, as though about to impart a bit of forbidden
family history. It was this look in the round eyes that had made Jim so
often declare that the kid knew everything.

"Why mother'd a been ashamed if she'd a knowed how she wound up. She
was the best rider of her time, everybody says so, but she cashed in by
fallin' off a skate what didn't have no more ginger 'an a kitten. If you
can beat that?" She gazed at him with her lips pressed tightly together,
evidently expecting some startling expression of wonder.

"And your father?" Douglas asked rather lamely, being at a loss for
any adequate comment upon a tragedy which the child before him was too
desolate even to understand.

"Oh, DAD'S finish was all right. He got his'n in a lion's cage where
he worked. There was nothing slow about his end." She looked up for his
approval.

"For de Lord's sake!" Mandy groaned as the wonder of the child's
conversation grew upon her.

"And now I'm down and out," Polly concluded with a sigh.

"But THIS is nothing serious," said the pastor, trying to cheer her.

"It's serious ENOUGH, with a whole show a'-dependin' on you. Maybe you
don't know how it feels to have to knock off work."

"Oh, yes, I do," Douglas answered quickly. "I was ill a while ago
myself. I had to be in bed day after day, thinking of dozens of things
that I ought to be doing."

"Was you ever floored?" Polly asked with a touch of unbelief as she
studied the fine, healthy physique at the side of her bed.

"'Deed he was, chile," Mandy cried, feeling that her opportunity had
now arrived; "an' I had the wors' time a-keepin' him in bed. He act jes'
like you did."

"Did he?" Polly was delighted to find that the pastor had "nothin' on
her," as she would have put it.

"You ought to have heard him," continued Mandy, made eloquent by Polly's
show of interest. "'What will dose poor folks do?' he kept a-sayin'.
'yes' yo' lie where yo' is,' I tole him. 'Dem poor folks will be better
off dan dey would be a-comin' to yoah funeral.'"

"Poor folks?" Polly questioned. "Do you give money to folks? We are
always itchin' to get it AWAY from 'em."

Before Douglas could think of words with which to defend his disapproved
methods, Mandy had continued eagerly:

"An' den on Sunday, when he can't go to church and preach--" She got
no further. A sharp exclamation brought both Mandy and Douglas to
attention.

"Preach!" Polly almost shouted. She looked at him with genuine alarm
this time.

"That will do, Mandy," Douglas commanded, feeling an unwelcome drama
gathering about his head.

"Great Barnum and Bailey!" Polly exclaimed, looking at him as though he
were the very last thing in the world she had ever expected to see. "Are
you a skypilot?"

"That's what he am, chile." Mandy slipped the words in slyly, for she
knew that they were against the pastor's wishes, but she was unable
to restrain her mischievous impulse to sow the seeds of curiosity that
would soon bear fruit in the inquisitive mind of the little invalid.

"Will you get onto me a-landin' into a mix-up like this?" She continued
to study the uncomfortable man at her side. "I never thought I'd be
a-talkin' to one of you guys. What's your name?"

"Douglas." He spoke shortly.

"Ain't you got no handle to it?"

"If you mean my Christian name, it's John."

"Well, that sounds like a skypilot, all right. But you don't look like I
s'posed they did."

"Why not?"

"I always s'posed skypilots was old and grouchy-like. You're a'most as
good lookin' as our strong man."

"I done tole him he was too good-lookin' to be an unmarried parson,"
Mandy chuckled, more and more amused at the pastor's discomfort.

"Looks don't play a very important part in my work," Douglas answered
curtly. Mandy's confidential snickers made him doubly anxious to get to
a less personal topic.

"Well, they count for a whole lot with us." She nodded her head
decidedly. "How long you been showin' in this town, anyhow?"

"About a year," Douglas answered, with something of a sigh.

"A year!" she gasped. "In a burg like this? You must have an awful lot
of laughs in your act to keep 'em a-comin' that long." She was wise in
the ways of professional success.

"Not many, I'm afraid." He wondered, for the first time, if this might
be the reason for his rather indifferent success.

"Do you give them the same stuff, or have you got a rep?"

"A rep?" he repeated in surprise.

"Sure, repertory--different acts--entries, some calls 'em. Uncle Toby's
got twenty-seven entries. It makes a heap of difference in the big towns
where you have a run."

"Oh, I understand," Douglas answered in a tone of relief. "Well, I try
to say something new each Sunday."

"What kind of spiels do you give 'em?" she inquired with growing
interest.

"I try to help my people to get on better terms with themselves and to
forget their week-day troubles." He had never had occasion to define his
efforts so minutely.

"Well, that's jes' the same as us," Polly told him with an air of
condescension; "only circuses draws more people 'an churches."

"YOURS does seem to be a more popular form of entertainment," Douglas
answered drily. He was beginning to feel that there were many tricks in
the entertainment trade which he had not mastered. And, after all, what
was his preaching but an effort at entertainment? If he failed to hold
his congregation by what he was saying, his listeners grew drowsy,
and his sermon fell short of its desired effect. It was true that
his position and hers had points of similarity. She was apparently
successful; as for himself, he could not be sure. He knew he tried very
hard and that sometimes a tired mother or a sad-faced child looked up at
him with a smile that made the service seem worth while.

Polly mistook the pastor's revery for envy, and her tender heart was
quick to find consolation for him.

"You ain't got all the worst of it," she said. "If we tried to play a
dump like this for six months, we'd starve to death. You certainly must
give 'em a great show," she added, surveying him with growing interest.

"It doesn't make much difference about the show--" Douglas began, but he
was quickly interrupted.

"That's right, it's jes' the same with a circus. One year ye give 'em
the rottenest kind of a thing, and they eat it up; the next year you
hand 'em a knock-out, and it's a frost. Is that the way it is with a
church show?"

"Much the same," Douglas admitted half-amusedly, half-regretfully. "Very
often when I work the hardest, I seem to do the least good."

"I guess our troubles is pretty much alike." Polly nodded with a
motherly air of condescension. "Only there ain't so much danger in your
act."

"I'm not so sure about that," he laughed.

"Well, you take my tip," she leaned forward as though about to impart
a very valuable bit of information. "Don't you never go in for ridin'.
There ain't no act on earth so hard as a ridin' act. The rest of the
bunch has got it easy alongside of us. Take the fellows on the trapeze.
They always get their tackle up in jes' the same place. Take the
balancin' acts; there ain't no difference in their layouts. Take any of
'em as depends on regular props; and they ain't got much chance a-goin'
wrong. But say, when yer have ter do a ridin' act, there ain't never no
two times alike. If your horse is feelin' good, the ground is stumbly;
if the ground ain't on the blink the horse is wobbly. Ther's always
somethin' wrong somewheres, and yer ain't never knowin' how it's goin'
ter end--especially when you got to do a careful act like mine. There's
a girl, Eloise, in our bunch, what does a SHOWY act on a horse what
Barker calls Barbarian. She goes on in my place sometimes--and say,
them rubes applauds her as much as me, an' her stunts is baby tricks
alongside o' mine. It's enough to make you sick o' art." She shook her
head dolefully, then sat up with renewed interest.

"You see, mine is careful balancin' an' all that, an' you got ter know
your horse an' your ground for that. Now you get wise ter what I'm
a-tellin' yer, and don't you NEVER go into ANYTHIN' what depends on
ANYTHIN' else."

"Thank you, Polly, I won't." Douglas somehow felt that he was very much
indebted to her.

"I seen a church show once," Polly said suddenly.

"You did?" Douglas asked, with new interest.

"Yes," she answered, closing her lips and venturing no further comment.

"Did you like it?" he questioned, after a pause.

"Couldn't make nothin' out of it--I don't care much for readin'."

"Oh, it isn't ALL reading," he corrected.

"Well, the guy I saw read all of his'n. He got the whole thing right out
of a book."

"Oh, that was only his text," laughed Douglas. "Text?"

"Yes. And later he tried to interpret to his congrega----"

"Easy! Easy!" she interrupted; "come again with that, will you?"

"He told them the meaning of what he read." "Well, I don't know what
he told 'em, but it didn't mean anythin' to me. But maybe your show is
better'n his was," she added, trying to pacify him.

Douglas was undecided whether to feel amused or grateful for Polly's
ever-increasing sympathy. Before he could trust his twitching lips to
answer, she had put another question to him.

"Are you goin' to do a stunt while I am here?"

"I preach every Sunday, if that's what you mean; I preach this morning."

"Is this Sunday?" she asked, sitting up with renewed energy and looking
about the room as though everything had changed colour.

"Yes."

"And YOU GOT A MATINEE?" she exclaimed, incredulously.

"We have services," he corrected, gently.

"WE rest up on SUNDAYS," she said in a tone of deep commiseration.

"Oh, I see," he answered, feeling it no time to enter upon another
discussion as to the comparative advantages of their two professions.

"What are you goin' ter spiel about to-day?"

"About Ruth and Naomi."

"Ruth and who?"

"Naomi," he repeated.

"Naomi," she echoed, tilting her head from side to side, as she listened
to the soft cadences of the word. "I never heard that name afore. It 'ud
look awful swell on a billboard, wouldn't it?"

"It's a Bible name, honey," Mandy said, eager to get into the
conversation. "Dar's a balful picture 'bout her. I seed it."

"I LIKE to look at PICTURES," Polly answered tentatively. Mandy crossed
the room to fetch the large Bible with its steel engravings.

"We got a girl named Ruth in our 'Leap of Death' stunt. Some of the
folks is kinder down on 'er, but I ain't."

She might have told Douglas more of her forlorn, little friend, but just
then Mandy came to the bed, hugging a large, old-fashioned Bible, and
Douglas helped to place the ponderous book before the invalid.

"See, honey, dar dey is," the old woman said, pointing to the picture of
Ruth and Naomi.

"Them's crackerjacks, ain't they?" Polly gasped, and her eyes shone with
wonder. "Which one 's Ruth?"

"Dis one," said Mandy, pointing with her thumb.

"Why, they're dressed just like our chariot drivers. What does it say
about 'em?"

"You can read it for yourself," Douglas answered gently. There was
something pathetic in the eagerness of the starved little mind.

"Well, I ain't much on readin'--OUT LOUD," she faltered, growing
suddenly conscious of her deficiencies. "Read it for me, will you?"

"Certainly," and he drew his chair nearer to the bed. One strong hand
supported the other half of the Bible, and his head was very near to
hers as his deep, full voice pronounced the solemn words in which Ruth
pleaded so many years before.

"'Entreat me not to leave thee,'" he read, "'or to return from following
after thee, for whither thou goest I will go, and where thou lodgest I
will lodge. Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God.'"

He stopped to ponder over the poetry of the lines.

"Kind o' pretty, ain't it?" Polly said softly. She felt awkward and
constrained and a little overawed.

"There are far more beautiful things than that," Douglas assured her
enthusiastically, as the echo of many such rang in his ears.

"There are?" And her eyes opened wide with wonder.

"Yes, indeed," he replied, pitying more and more the starvation of mind
and longing to bring to it floods of light and enrichment.

"I guess I'd LIKE to hear YOU spiel," and she fell to studying him
solemnly.

"You would?" he asked eagerly.

"Is there any more to that story?" she asked, ignoring his question.

"Yes, indeed."

"Would you read me a little more?" She was very humble now.

"Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried; the Lord do so
to me and more also, if ought but death part me and thee.'"

Their eyes met. There was a long pause. Suddenly the sharp, sweet notes
of the church bell brought John Douglas to his feet with a start of
surprise.

"Have you got to go?" Polly asked regretfully.

"Yes, I must; but I'll read the rest from the church. Open the window,
Mandy!" And he passed out of the door and quickly down the stairs.



Chapter VI

WHEN John Douglas's uncle offered to educate his nephew for the
ministry, the boy was less enthusiastic than his mother. He did not
remonstrate, however, for it had been the custom of generations for at
least one son of each Douglas family to preach the gospel of Calvinism,
and his father's career as an architect and landscape gardener had not
left him much capital.

Douglas, senior, had been recognised as an artist by the few who
understood his talents, but there is small demand for the builder of
picturesque houses in the little business towns of the Middle West, and
at last he passed away, leaving his son only the burden of his financial
failure and an ardent desire to succeed at the profession in which his
father had fared so badly. The hopeless, defeated look on the departed
man's face had always haunted the boy, who was artist enough to feel his
father's genius intuitively, and human enough to resent the injustice of
his fate.

Douglas's mother had suffered so much because of the impractical efforts
of her husband, that she discouraged the early tendencies of the son
toward drawing and mathematics and tried to direct his thoughts toward
creeds and Bible history. When he went away for his collegiate course,
she was less in touch with him; and he was able to steal time from his
athletics to devote to his art. He spent his vacations in a neighbouring
city before a drawing board in the office of a distinguished architect,
his father's friend.

Douglas was not a brilliant divinity student, and he was relieved when
at last he received his degree in theology and found himself appointed
to a small church in the Middle West.

His step was very bright the morning he first went up the path that
led to his new home. His artistic sense was charmed by the picturesque
approach to the church and parsonage. The view toward the tree-encircled
spire was unobstructed, for the church had been built on the outskirts
of the town to allow for a growth that had not materialised. He threw
up his head and gazed at the blue hills, with their background of soft,
slow-moving clouds. The smell of the fresh earth, the bursting of the
buds, the forming of new life, set him thrilling with a joy that was
very near to pain.

He stopped half way up the path and considered the advantages of a new
front to the narrow-eaved cottage, and when his foot touched the first
step of the vine-covered porch, he was far more concerned about a new
portico than with any thought of his first sermon.

His speculations were abruptly cut short by Mandy, who bustled out
of the door with a wide smile of welcome on her black face, and an
unmistakable ambition to take him immediately under her motherly wing.
She was much concerned because the church people had not met the new
pastor at the station and brought him to the house. Upon learning that
Douglas had purposely avoided their escort, preferring to come to his
new home the first time alone, she made up her mind that she was going
to like him.

Mandy had long been a fixture in the parsonage. She and her worse half,
Hasty Jones, had come to know and discuss the weaknesses of the many
clergymen who had come and gone, the deacons, and the congregation, both
individually and collectively. She confided to Hasty, that she "didn't
blame de new parson fer not wantin' to mix up wid dat ar crowd."

In the study that night, when she and Hasty helped Douglas to unpack his
many boxes of books, they were as eager as children about the drawings
and pictures which he showed them. His mind had gone beyond the
parsonage front now, and he described to them the advantage of adding an
extra ten feet to the church spire.

Mandy felt herself almost an artist when she and Hasty bade the pastor
good night, for she was still quivering from the contagion of Douglas's
enthusiasm. Here, at last, was a master who could do something besides
find fault with her.

"I jest wan' to be on de groun' de firs' time dat Mars Douglas and dat
ere Deacon Strong clinches," she said to Hasty as they locked the
doors and turned out the hall light. "Did yuh done see his jaw?" she
whispered. "He look laughin' enough NOW, but jes' yuh wait till he done
set dat'ere jaw a his'n and afar ain't nobody what's goin' ter unsot
it."

"Maybe dar ain't goin' ter be no clinchin'," said Hasty, hoping for
Mandy's assurance to the contrary.

"What?" shrieked Mandy. "Wid dat 'ere sneakin' Widow Willoughby already
a-tellin' de deacons how to start de new parson a-goin' proper?"

"Now, why you's always a-pickin' onto dat 'ere widow?" asked Hasty,
already enjoying the explosion which he knew his defence of the widow
was sure to excite.

"I don' like no woman what's allus braggin' 'bout her clean floors,"
answered Mandy, shortly. She turned out the last light, and tiptoed
upstairs, trying not to disturb the pastor.

John Douglas was busy already with pencil and paper, making notes of
the plans for the church and parsonage, which he would perfect later
on. Alas, for Douglas's day dreams! It was not many weeks before he
understood with a heavy heart that the deacons were far too dull and
uninspired to share his faith in beauty as an aid to man's spiritual
uplift.

"We think we've done pretty well by this church," said Deacon Strong,
who was the business head, the political boss, and the moral mentor
of the small town's affairs. "Just you worry along with the preachin',
young man, and we'll attend to the buyin' and buildin' operations."

Douglas's mind was too active to content itself wholly with the writing
of sermons and the routine of formal, pastoral calls. He was a keen
humanitarian, so little by little, he came to be interested in the heart
stories and disappointments of many of the village unfortunates, some of
whom were outside his congregation. The mentally sick, the despondent,
who needed words of hope and courage more than dry talks on theology,
found in him an ever ready friend and adviser, and these came to love
and depend on him. But he was never popular with the creed-bound element
of the church.

Mandy had her wish about being on the spot the first time that the
parson's jaw squared itself at Deacon Strong. The deacon had called
at the parsonage to demand that Douglas put a stop to the boys playing
baseball in the adjoining lot on Sunday. Douglas had been unable to see
the deacon's point of view. He declared that baseball was a healthy and
harmless form of exercise, that the air was meant to be breathed, and
that the boys who enjoyed the game on Sunday were principally those who
were kept indoors by work on other days. The close of the interview was
unsatisfactory both to Douglas and the deacon.

"Dey kinder made me cold an' prickly all up an' down de back," Mandy
said later, when she described their talk to Hasty. "Dat 'ere deacon
don' know nuffin' 'bout gittin' 'roun' de parson." She tossed her head
with a feeling of superiority. She knew the way. Make him forget himself
with a laugh. Excite his sympathy with some village underdog.



Chapter VII

MANDY had secretly enjoyed the commotion caused by the little
circus-rider being left in the parsonage, at first, because of her
inborn love of mischief, and later, because Polly had become second in
her heart only to the pastor. She went about her work, crooning softly
during the days of Polly's convalescence. The deep, steady voice of
the pastor reading aloud in the pretty window overhead was company. She
would often climb the stairs to tell them some bit of village gossip,
and leave them laughing at a quaint comment about some inquisitive
sister of the church, who had happened to incur her displeasure.

As spring came on, Douglas carried Polly down to the sun-lit garden
beneath the window; and Mandy fluttered about arranging the cushions
with motherly solicitude.

More days slipped by, and Polly began to creep through the little,
soft-leaved trees at the back of the church, and to look for the deep,
blue, sweet-scented violets. When she was able, Douglas took her with
him to visit some of the outlying houses of the poor. Her woman's
instinct was quick to perceive many small needs in their lives that he
had overlooked, and to suggest simple, inexpensive joys that made them
her devoted friends.

Their evenings were divided between making plans for these unfortunates
and reading aloud from the Bible or other books.

When Polly gained courage, Douglas sometimes persuaded her to read to
him--and the little corrections that he made at these times soon became
noticeable in her manner of speech. She was so eager, so starved for
knowledge, that she drank it as fast as he could give it. It was during
their talks about grammar that Mandy generally fell asleep in her
rocker, her unfinished sewing still in her lap.

When a letter came from Jim and Toby, it was always shared equally by
Mandy and Hasty, Polly and the pastor. But at last a letter came from
Jim only, and Douglas, who was asked to read it, faltered and stopped
after the first few words.

"It's no use my tryin' to keep it from you any longer, Poll," the letter
began, "we ain't got Toby with us no more. He didn't have no accident,
it wasn't that. He just seemed kinder sick and ailin' like, ever since
the night we had to leave you behind. I used to get him warm drinks and
things, and try to pull 'im through, but he was always a-chillin' and
a-achin'. If it wasn't one thing the matter, it was another. I done
all I knowed you'd a-wanted me to, an' the rest of the folks was mighty
white to him, too. I guess they kinder felt how lonesome he was. He
couldn't get no more laughs in the show, so Barker had to put on another
man with him. That kinder hurt him too--I s'pose--an' showed him the
way that things was a-goin'. It was just after that, he wrote the parson
a-tellin' him to never let you come back. He seemed to a' got an idee in
his head that you was happier where you was. He wouldn't let me tell ye
'bout his feelin' so rocky, 'cause he thought it might mebbe make you
come back. 'She's diff'runt from us,' he was allus a-sayin'. 'I never
'spected to keep 'er.'"

Douglas stopped. Polly was waiting, her face white and drawn. He had not
told her of Toby's letter, because with it had come a request to "say
nothin' to the kid."

He felt that Polly was controlling herself with an effort until he
should reach the end of Jim's letter, so he hurried on.

"The parson's promise didn't get to him none too quick," he read. "That
seemed to be what he was waitin' for. He give up the night it come, and
I got him a little room in a hotel after the show, and let one of the
other fellers get the stuff out o' town, so's I could stay with him up
to the finish. It come 'round mornin'. There wasn't much to it--he just
seemed tired and peaceful like. 'I'm glad he wrote what he did,' he
said, meanin' the parson. 'She knows, she allus knows,' he whispered,
meanin' you, Poll, and then he was on his way. He'd already give me what
was saved up for you, and I'm sendin' it along with this--" A blue money
order for two hundred and fifty dollars had fluttered from the envelope
when Douglas opened it.

"I got everythin' ready afore I went on the next day, an' I went up and
saw the little spot on the hill where they was goin' to stow him. It
looked kinder nice and the digger's wife said she'd put some flowers on
to it now and then. It was YOU what made me think o' that, Poll, 'cause
it seemed to me what you would a' done; you was always so daffy about
flowers, you and him.

"I guess this letter's too long for me to be a-sayin' much about the
show, but the 'Leap-a-Death' girl got hern last week. She wasn't strong
enough for the job, nohow. I done what I could for her outside the show,
'cause I knowed how you was always a-feelin' 'bout her. I guess the
'Leap-a-Death's' husband is goin' to jump his job soon, if he gets
enough saved up, 'cause him and Barker can't hit it off no more. We got
a good deal o' trouble among the animals, too. None o' the snakes is
sheddin' like they ought to, and Jumbo's a-carryin' a sixteen foot
bandage around that trunk a' hisn, 'cause he got too fresh with Trixy's
grub the other night, and the new giraffe's got the croup in that
seven-foot neck o' his'n. I guess you'll think I got the pip for fair
this time, so I'll just get onto myself now and cut this short. I'll be
writin' you agin when we hit Morgantown.

"Your old Muvver Jim."


Douglas laid the letter gently on the table, his hand still resting upon
it. He looked helplessly at the little, shrunken figure in the opposite
chair. Polly had made no sound, but her head had slipped lower and lower
and she now sat very quietly with her face in her hands. She had been
taught by Toby and Jim never to whimper.

"What a plucky lot they are," thought Douglas, as he considered these
three lonely souls, each accepting whatever fate brought with no
rebellion or even surprise. It was a strange world of stoics in which
these children of the amusement arena fought and lost. They came and
went like phantoms, with as little consciousness of their own best
interests as of the great, moving powers of the world about them. They
felt no throes of envy, no bitterness. They loved and worked and "went
their way."

For once the pastor was powerless in the presence of grief. Both he and
Mandy left the room quietly, feeling that Polly wished to be spared the
outburst of tears that a sympathetic word might bring upon her. They
allowed her to remain alone for a time, then Mandy entered softly with a
tender good night and Douglas followed her cheerily as though nothing at
all had happened.

It was many weeks before Polly again became a companion to Douglas and
Mandy, but they did not intrude upon her grief. They waited patiently
for the time when youth should again assert itself, and bring back their
laughing mate to them.



Chapter VIII

When Polly understood that Toby was ACTUALLY GONE, it seemed to her
that she could never laugh again. She had been too young to realise the
inevitableness of death when it came to her mother, and now she could
scarcely believe that Toby would never, never come back to her. She felt
that she must be able to DRAG him back, that she could not go on without
him. She wanted to tell him how grateful she was for all his care of
her. She thought of the thousand little things that she might have done
for him. She longed to recall every impatient word to him. His gentle
reproachful eyes were always haunting her. "You must come back, Toby!"
she cried. "You must!"

It was only when body and mind had worn themselves out with yearning,
that a numbness at last crept over her, and out of this grew a
gradual consciousness of things about her and a returning sense of her
obligation to others. She tried to answer in her old, smiling way and to
keep her mind upon what they were saying, instead of letting it wander
away to the past.

Douglas and Mandy were overjoyed to see the colour creeping back to her
cheeks.

She joined the pastor again in his visits to the poor. The women of
the town would often see them passing and would either whisper to
each other, shrug their shoulders, or lift their eyebrows with smiling
insinuations; but Polly and the pastor were too much absorbed in each
other to take much notice of what was going on about them.

They had not gone for their walk to-day, because Mandy had needed Polly
to help make ready for the social to be held in the Sunday-school-room
to-night.

Early in the afternoon, Polly had seen Douglas shut himself up in
the study, and she was sure that he was writing; so when the village
children stopped in on the way from school for Mandy's new-made cookies,
she used her customary trick to get them away. "Tag--you're it!" she
cried, and then dashed out the back door, pursued by the laughing,
screaming youngsters. Mandy followed the children to the porch and stood
looking after them, as the mad, little band scurried about the back
yard, darted in and out amongst the trees, then up the side of the
wooded hill, just beyond the church.

The leaves once more were red and yellow on the trees, but to-day
the air was warm, and the children were wearing their summer dresses.
Polly's lithe, girlish figure looked almost tall by comparison with the
children about her. She wore a plain, simple gown of white, which Mandy
had helped her to make. It had been cut ankle-length, for Polly was now
seventeen. Her quaint, old-fashioned manner, her serious eyes, and her
trick of knotting her heavy, brown hair low on her neck, made her seem
older.

Mandy waited until the children had disappeared over the hill, then
began bustling about looking for the step-ladder which Hasty had left
under the vines of the porch. It had been a busy day at the parsonage. A
social always meant perturbation for Mandy. She called sharply to Hasty,
as he came down the path which made a short cut to the village:

"So's you'se back, is you?" she asked, sarcastically.

"Sure, I'se back," answered Hasty, good-naturedly, as he sank upon an
empty box that had held some things for the social, and pretended to
wipe the perspiration from his forehead.

"Masse John done send you to de post office two hours ago," said Mandy,
as she took the letters and papers from his hand. "Five minutes is
plenty ob time for any nigger to do dat job."

"I done been detained," Hasty drawled.

"You'se always 'tained when dar's any work a-goin' on," Mandy snapped at
him.

"Whar's Miss Polly?" Hasty asked, ignoring Mandy's reference to work.

"Nebber you mind 'bout Miss Polly. She don't want you. Jes' you done
fetch that step-ladder into de Sunday-school-room."

"But I wants her," Hasty insisted. "I'se been on very 'ticular business
what she ought to know 'bout."

"Business?" she repeated. "What kind ob business?"

"I got to fix de Sunday-school-room," said Hasty, as he perceived her
growing curiosity.

"You come heah, nigger!" Mandy called, determined that none of the
village doings should escape her. "Out wid it!"

"Well, it's 'bout de circus," Hasty answered? seating himself again
on the box. "Dey's showin' in Wakefield to-night, and next month dey's
comin' here."

"Dat same circus what Miss Polly used to be wid?" Mandy's eyes grew
large with curiosity.

"De very same," and Hasty nodded mysteriously.

"How you know dat?" Mandy was uncertain whether to believe him.

"'Cause da's a big, red wagon downtown wid de name ob de show painted on
it. It's de advertisin' one what goes ahead wid all de pictures what dey
pastes up."

"And you been hangin' 'roun' dat wagon?"

"I done thought Miss Polly might want to know."

"See here, lazy nigger, don' you go puttin' no circus notions into Miss
Polly's head. She don' care no more 'bout dem things since her Uncle
Toby done die. She done been satisfied right whar she am. Jes' you let
her be."

"I ain't done nothin'," Hasty protested.

"Nebber do do nothin'," growled Mandy. "Go long now, and get a-work.
Mos' four o'clock and dat Sunday-school-room ain't ready yet."

Hasty picked up the empty box and the step-ladder and went out through
the gate. He had barely disappeared when a peal of laughter was heard
from the hillside, and before Mandy could get out of the way, the
youngsters came tumbling down the path again.

"Lawsy, lawsy," she gasped, as Polly circled around her, dodging the
children. "You'se cheeks is red as pineys, honey."

"Tag! you're it!" Polly cried, as she touched the widow's auburn-haired
offspring on the sleeve. There was much wailing when Willie passed the
tag to little Jennie, the smallest girl in the crowd.

"I won't play no more," she sobbed; "'cause I's always it."

To comfort her, Polly began to sing an old circus song that the children
had learned to love; and the little ones huddled about her in a circle
to hear of the wonderful "Van Amberg" who used to "walk right into the
lion's cage and put his head in the lion's mouth." The children were in
a state of nerves that did credit to Polly as an entertainer, when Hasty
broke in upon the song.

"When you get a minute I want ter tell yer somethin'."

"I have one right now." And turning to the eager mites at her side,
Polly told them to run along into the grove, and that she'd come pretty
soon to teach them a new game.

The youngsters went screaming and laughing on their way, and she
breathed a sigh of relief as she threw herself down on the rustic seat
that encircled the elm tree.

"What is it, Hasty?" she asked, suspecting that he was in trouble with
Mandy.

"It's 'bout de circus," Hasty informed her bluntly.

"The circus?" She rose and crossed to him quickly.

"It's in Wakefield--en' nex' month it's a-comin' here."

"Here?" Polly gasped.

"I thought you'd want ter know," said Hasty, little surprised at her
lack of enthusiasm.

"Yes, of course." She turned away and pretended to look at the flowers.

"Don' yous tell Mandy I been talkin' 'bout dat circus," said Hasty,
uneasily. He was beginning to fear that he had made a mistake; but
before Polly could answer, Mandy came out of the house, carrying baskets
and food, which Hasty was to take to the Sunday-school-room. She looked
at the girl's troubled face and drooping shoulders in surprise.

"What make you look so serious, Honey?"

"Just thinking," said Polly absently.

"My! Don' you look fine in your new dress!" She was anxious to draw the
girl out of her reverie.

"Do you like it?" Polly asked eagerly, forgetting her depression of a
moment before. "Do you think Mr. John will like it?"

"Masse John? Mercy me! He nebber takes no notice ob dem things. I done
got a bran', spankin' new allapaca, one time, an' do you think HE ebber
seed it? Lawsy, no! We might jes' well be goin' roun' like Mudder Eve
for all dat man know." Polly looked disappointed. "But udder folks
sees," Mandy continued, comfortingly, "an' you certainly look mighty
fine. Why, you's just as good now as you was afore you got hurled!"

"Yes, I'm well now and able to work again." There was no enthusiasm in
her tone, for Hasty's news had made her realise how unwelcome the old
life would be to her.

"Work! You does work all de time. My stars! de help you is to Massa
John."

"Do you think so? Do I help him?--Do I?"

"Of course you does. You tells him things to do in Sunday-school what
the chillun like, an' you learns him to laugh and 'joy himself, an' a
lot of things what nobody else could a-learned 'im."

"You mustn't say 'learned him,'" Polly corrected; "you must say 'taught
him.' You can't 'learn' anybody anything. You can only 'teach' them."

"Lordy sakes! I didn't know dat." She rolled her large eyes at her young
instructress, and saw that Polly looked very serious. "She's gwine ter
have anudder one a dem 'ticlar spells" thought Mandy, and she made ready
to protest.

"See here, ain't you nebber----"

She was interrupted by a quick "Have you never" from Polly.

"It dun make no difference what you say," Mandy snapped, "so long as
folks understands you." She always grew restive under these ordeals; but
Polly's firm controlled manner generally conquered.

"Oh, yes, it does," answered Polly. "I used to think it didn't; but
it does. You have to say things in a certain way or folks look down on
you."

"I's satisfied de way I be," declared Mandy, as she plumped herself down
on the garden bench and began to fidget with resentment.

"The way I am," Polly persisted, sweetly.

"See here, chile, is day why you been a-settin' up nights an' keepin de
light burnin'?"

"You mustn't say 'setting up;' you must say 'sitting up.' Hens set----"

"So do I," interrupted Mandy; "I's doin' it NOW." For a time she
preserved an injured silence, then turned upon Polly vehemently. "If I
had to think ob all dat ere foolishness eber' time I open my mouth, I'd
done been tongue-tied afore I was born."

"I could teach you in no time," volunteered Polly, eagerly.

"I don't want to be teached," protested Mandy, doggedly. "Hast Jones
says I's too smart anyhow. Men don't like women knowin' too much--it
skeers 'em. I's good enough for my old man, and I ain't a-tryin' to get
nobody else's," Mandy wound up flatly.

"But he'd like you all the better," persisted Polly, laughing.

"I don' WANT to be liked no better by NO nigger," snapped Mandy. "I's a
busy woman, I is." She made for the house, then curiosity conquered her
and she came back to Polly's side. "See here, honey, whose been l'arnin'
you all dem nonsense?"

"I learn from Mr. Douglas. I remember all the things he tells me, and at
night I write them down and say them over. Do you see this, Mandy?" She
took a small red book from her belt and put it into Mandy's black chubby
fists.

"I see some writin', if dat's what you mean," Mandy answered,
helplessly.

"These are my don'ts," Polly confided, as she pointed enthusiastically
to worn pages of finely written notes.

"You'se WHAT, chile?"

"The things I mustn't do or say."

"An' you'se been losin' yoah beauty sleep for dem tings?" Mandy looked
incredulous.

"I don't want Mr. John to feel ashamed of me," she said with growing
pride.

"Well, you'd catch Mandy a-settin' up for----"

"Oh, oh! What did I tell you, Mandy?" Polly pointed reproachfully to the
reminder in the little red book. It was a fortunate thing that Willie
interrupted the lesson at this point, for Mandy's temper was becoming
very uncertain. The children had grown weary waiting for Polly, and
Willie had been sent to fetch her. Polly offered to help Mandy with the
decorations, but Willie won the day, and she was running away hand in
hand with him when Douglas came out of the house.

"Wait a minute!" he called. "My, how fine you look!" He turned Polly
about and surveyed the new gown admiringly.

"He did see it! He did see it!" cried Polly, gleefully.

"Of course I did. I always notice everything, don't I, Mandy?"

"You suah am improvin' since Miss Polly come," Mandy grunted.

"Come, Willie!" called the girl, and ran out laughing through the trees.

"What's this?" Douglas took the small book from Mandy's awkward fingers,
and began to read: "'Hens set--'" He frowned.

"Oh, dem's jes' Miss Polly's 'don'ts,'" interrupted Mandy, disgustedly.

"Her 'don'ts'?"

"She done been set--sit--settin' up nights tryin' to learn what you done
tole her," stuttered Mandy.

"Dear little Polly," he murmured, then closed the book and put it into
his pocket.



Chapter IX

DOUGLAS was turning toward the house when the Widow Willoughby came
through the wicker gate to the left of the parsonage, carrying bunting
for the social. She was followed by Miss Perkins with a bucket of
pickles, which Mandy promptly placed on top of Mrs. Elverson's ice
cream. The women explained that they had come to put the finishing
touches to the decorations. If anything was needed to increase Mandy's
dislike of the widow, it was this announcement.

Mrs. Willoughby was greatly worried because her children had not been
home since the afternoon school session. Upon learning that they were
with Polly, she plainly showed her displeasure; and Douglas dispatched
Mandy for them. She saw that her implied distrust of Polly had annoyed
him, and she was about to apologise, when two of the deacons arrived on
the scene, also carrying baskets and parcels for the social.

Strong led the way. He always led the way and always told Elverson what
to think. They had been talking excitedly as they neared the parsonage,
for Strong disapproved of the recent changes which the pastor had made
in the church service. He and Douglas had clashed more than once since
the baseball argument, and the deacon had realised more and more that
he had met a will quite as strong as his own. His failure to bend the
parson to his way of thinking was making him irritable, and taking his
mind from his business.

"Can you beat that!" he would exclaim as he turned away from some
disagreement with Douglas, his temper ruffled for the day.

Polly was utterly unconscious of the unfriendly glances cast in her
direction as she came running into the garden, leading the widow's two
children.

She nodded gaily to Julia Strong, who was coming through the gate, then
hurried to Mrs. Willoughby, begging that the children be allowed to
remain a little longer. She was making up a new game, she said, and
needed Willie and Jennie for the set.

"My children do not play in promiscuous games," said the widow, icily.

"Oh, but this isn't pro-pro-pro"--Polly stammered. "It's a new game. You
put two here, and two here, and----"

"I don't care to know." The widow turned away, and pretended to talk to
Julia.

"Oh!" gasped Polly, stunned by the widow's rebuff.

She stood with bowed head in the centre of the circle. The blood flew
from her cheeks, then she turned to go.

Douglas stepped quickly to her side. "Wait a minute," he said. She
paused, all eyes were turned upon them. "Is this a game that grown-ups
can play?"

"Why, yes, of course."

"Good! Then I'll make up your set. I need a little amusement just now.
Excuse me," he added, turning to the deacons. Then he ran with her out
through the trees.

The deacons and the women stared at each other, aghast.

"Well, what do you think of that?" said Mrs. Willoughby, as the flying
skirts of the girl and the black figure of the man disappeared up the
path.

"I think it's scandalous, if you are talking to me," said Miss Perkins.
"The idea of a full-grown parson a-runnin' off to play children's games
with a circus ridin' girl!"

"She isn't such a child," sneered Julia.

"It's ENOUGH to make folks talk," put in Mrs. Willoughby, with a sly
look at the deacons.

"And me a-waitin' to discuss the new church service," bellowed Strong.

"And me a-waiting to give him Mrs. Elverson's message," piped Elverson.

"The church bore all this in silence so long as that girl was sick,"
snapped Miss Perkins. "But now she's perfectly well, and still a-hanging
on. No wonder folks are talking."

"Who's talking?" thundered Strong.

"Didn't you know?" simpered Mrs. Willoughby, not knowing herself nor
caring, so long as the suspicion grew.

"Know what?" yelled the excited deacon. Mrs. Willoughby floundered. Miss
Perkins rushed into the breach.

"Well, if _I_ was deacon of this church, it seems to me I'd know
something about what's going on in it."

"What IS goin' on?" shrieked the now desperate deacon.

The women looked at him pityingly, exchanged knowing glances, then shook
their heads at his hopeless stupidity.

Strong was not accustomed to criticism. He prided himself upon his
acuteness, and was, above all, vain about his connection with the
church. He looked from one woman to the other. He was seething with
helpless rage. The little deacon at his side coughed nervously. Strong's
pent up wrath exploded. "Why didn't YOU tell me, Elverson, that people
was a-talkin'," he roared in the frightened man's ear.

Elverson sputtered and stammered, but nothing definite came of the
sounds; so Strong again turned to Miss Perkins:

"What is going on?" he demanded.

The spinster shrugged her shoulders and lifted her eyes heavenward,
knowing that nothing could so madden the deacon as this mysterious
inference of things too terrible to mention. She was right. Strong
uttered a desperate "Bah!" and began pacing up and down the garden with
reckless strides.

Mrs. Willoughby watched him with secret delight, and when he came to a
halt, she wriggled to his side with simpering sweetness.

"What COULD folks say?" she asked. "A minister and a young circus riding
girl living here like this with no one to--" She found no words at this
point and Strong, now thoroughly roused, declared that the congregation
should have no further cause for gossip, and went out quickly in search
of Douglas.

When Strong was gone, Elverson looked at the set faces of the women, and
attempted a weak apology for the pastor. "I dare say the young man was
very lonely--very--before she came."

"Lonely?" snapped Miss Perkins. "Well, if HE was LONELY, _I_ didn't know
it."

The deacon excused himself nervously, and went to join Strong.

The women gathered up their buntings, and retired with bland smiles to
the Sunday-school-room, feeling that they had accomplished enough for
the time being.

Strong and Elverson crossed the yard, still in search of the pastor.
They turned at the sound of fluttering leaves and beheld Douglas,
hatless, tearing down the path. Strong called to him, but Douglas
darted quickly behind the hedge. The deacons looked at one another in
speechless astonishment. Presently the silence was broken by the distant
voice of Polly counting from one to one hundred. The secret was out! The
pastor, a leader of the church, was playing hide-and-seek.

"Mr. Douglas!" shouted Strong, when his breath had returned.

"Hush, hush!" whispered Douglas, looking over the hedge. He peeped
cautiously about him, then came toward the men with a sigh of relief.
"It's all right. She has gone the other way."

"It'll be a good thing for you if she never comes back," said Strong,
and Douglas's quick ear caught an unpleasant meaning in his tone.

"What's that?" the pastor asked, in a low, steady voice.

"We don't like some of the things that are going on here, and I want to
talk to you about 'em."

"Very well, but see if you can't talk in a lower key."

"Never mind about the key," shouted Strong, angrily.

"But I DO mind." Something in his eyes made the deacon lower his voice.

"We want to know how much longer that girl is goin' to stay here?"

"Indeed! And why?" The colour was leaving Douglas's face, and his jaw
was becoming very square.

"Because she's been here long enough."

"I don't agree with you there."

"Well, it don't make no difference whether you do or not. She's got to
go."

"Go?" echoed Douglas.

"Yes, sir-e-bob. We've made up our minds to that."

"And who do you mean by 'we'?"

"The members of this congregation," replied Strong, impatiently.

"Am I to understand that YOU are speaking for THEM?" There was a deep
frown between the young pastor's eyes. He was beginning to be perplexed.

"Yes, and as deacon of this church."

"Then, as deacon of this church, you tell the congregation for me that
that is MY affair."

"Your affair!" shouted Strong. "When that girl is living under the
church's roof, eating the church's bread!"

"Just one moment! You don't quite understand. I am minister of this
church, and for that position I receive, or am supposed to receive, a
salary to live on, and this parsonage, rent free, to live in. Any
guests that I may have here are MY guests, and NOT guests of the church.
Remember that, please."

There was an embarrassing silence. The deacons recalled that the
pastor's salary WAS slightly in arrears. Elverson coughed meekly. Strong
started.

"You keep out of this, Elverson!" he cried. "I'm running this affair and
I ain't forgetting my duty nor the parson's."

"I shall endeavour to do MY duty as I see it," answered Douglas, turning
away and dismissing the matter.

"Your duty is to your church," thundered Strong.

"You're right about that, Deacon Strong'" answered Douglas, wheeling
about sharply, "and my duty to the church is reason enough for my acting
exactly as I am doing in this case."

"Is your duty to the church the ONLY reason you keep that girl here?"

"No, there are other reasons."

"I thought so."

"You've heard her story--you MUST have heard. She was left with me by an
old clown who belonged in the circus where she worked. Before he died
he asked me to look after her. She has no one else. I shall certainly do
so."

"That was when she was hurt. She's well now, and able to go back where
she came from. Do you expect us to have our young folks associatin' with
a circus ridin' girl?"

"So, that's it!" cried the pastor, with a pitying look. "You think this
child is unfit for your homes because she was once in a circus. For
some reason, circus to you spells crime. You call yourself a Christian,
Deacon Strong, and yet you insist that I send a good, innocent girl
back to a life which you say is sinful. I'm ashamed of you, Strong--I'm
ashamed of you!"

"That talk don't do no good with me," roared Strong. He was desperate at
being accused of an unchristian attitude.

"I ain't askin' you to send her back to the circus. I don't care WHERE
you send her. Get her away from HERE, that's all."

"Not so long as she wishes to stay."

"You won't?" Strong saw that he must try a new attack. He came close to
Douglas and spoke with a marked insinuation. "If you was a friend to
the girl, you wouldn't want the whole congregation a-pointin' fingers at
her."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that you're living here alone with her and it looks bad--bad for
the girl, and bad for YOU--and folks is talkin'."

"Are you trying to tell me that my people are evil-minded enough to
think that I--" Douglas stopped. He could not frame the question. "I
don't believe it," he concluded shortly.

"You'll be MADE to believe it if you don't get rid of that girl."

"Do YOU believe it?" He turned upon the little man at his side! "Do you
believe it, Elverson?"

Elverson had been so accustomed to Strong monopolising the conversation,
that he had become hopelessly lost as the discussion went on, and the
sudden appeal to him all but paralysed his power of speech. He was still
gurgling and sputtering when Strong interrupted, impatiently.

"It makes no difference whether we believe it or not. We're going to do
our duty by the church, and that girl must leave or----"

"Or I must." Douglas pieced out Strong's phrase for himself. "That
threat doesn't frighten me at all, deacon. After what you have said,
I should refuse to remain in this church"--the deacon stepped forward
eagerly--"were it not that I realise more than ever before how much
you need me, how much you ignorant, narrow-minded creatures need to
be taught the meaning of true Christianity." The deacon was plainly
disappointed.

"Is it possible?" gasped Elverson, weakly.

"Well, what are you going to do about it?" asked Strong, when he could
trust himself to speak again.

"I shall do what is best for Miss Polly," said the pastor quietly but
firmly.

He turned away to show that the interview was at an end. Strong followed
him. Douglas pointed to the gate with a meaning not to be mistaken.
"Good afternoon, deacon."

Strong hesitated. He looked at the pastor, then at the gate, then at the
pastor again. "I'll go," he shouted; "but it ain't the end!" He slammed
the gate behind him.

"Quite so, quite so," chirped Elverson, not having the slightest idea of
what he was saying. He saw the frigid expression on the pastor's face,
he coughed behind his hat, and followed Strong.



Chapter X

Douglas dropped wearily onto the rustic bench. He sat with drooped head
and unseeing eyes. He did not hear Polly as she scurried down the path,
her arms filled with autumn leaves. She glanced at him, dropped the
bright-coloured foliage, and slipped quickly to the nearest tree. "One,
two, three for Mr. John," she cried, as she patted the huge, brown
trunk.

"Is that you, Polly?" he asked absently.

"Now, it's your turn to catch me," she said, lingering near the tree.
The pastor was again lost in thought. "Aren't you going to play any
more?" There was a shade of disappointment in her voice. She came slowly
to his side.

"Sit here, Polly," he answered gravely, pointing to a place on the
bench. "I want to talk to you."

"Now, I've done something wrong," she pouted. She gathered up her
garlands and brought them to a place near his feet, ignoring the seat at
his side. "You might just as well tell me and get it over."

"You couldn't do anything wrong," he answered, looking down at her.

"Oh, yes, I could--and I've done it--I can see it in your face. What is
it?"

"What have you there?" he asked, trying to gain time, and not knowing
how to broach the subject that in justice to her must be discussed.

"Some leaves to make garlands for the social," Polly answered more
cheerfully. "Would you mind holding this?" She gave him one end of a
string of leaves.

"Where are the children?"

"Gone home."

"You like the children very much, don't you, Polly?" Douglas was
striving for a path that might lead them to the subject that was
troubling him.

"Oh, no, I don't LIKE them, I LOVE them." She looked at him with tender
eyes.

"You're the greatest baby of all." A puzzled line came between his eyes
as he studied her more closely. "And yet, you're not such a child, are
you, Polly? You're quite grown up, almost a young lady." He looked at
her from a strange, unwelcome point of view. She was all of that as she
sat at his feet, yearning and slender and fair, at the turning of her
seventeenth year.

"I wonder how you would like to go way?" Her eyes met his in terror.
"Away to a great school," he added quickly, flinching from the very
first hurt that he had inflicted; "where there are a lot of other young
ladies."

"Is it a place where you would be?" She looked up at him anxiously. She
wondered if his "show" was about to "move on."

"I'm afraid not," Douglas answered, smiling in spite of his heavy heart.

"I wouldn't like any place without you," she said decidedly, and seemed
to consider the subject dismissed.

"But if it was for your GOOD," Douglas persisted.

"It could never be for my good to leave you."

"But just for a little while," he pleaded. How was she ever to
understand? How could he take from her the sense of security that he had
purposely taught her to feel in his house?

"Not even for a moment," Polly answered, with a decided shake of her
head.

"But you must get ahead in your studies," he argued.

She looked at him anxiously. She was beginning to be alarmed at his
persistence.

"Maybe I've been playing too many periscous games."

"Not periscous, Polly, promiscuous."

"Pro-mis-cuous," she repeated, haltingly. "What does that mean?"

"Indiscriminate." He rubbed his forehead as he saw the puzzled look on
her face. "Mixed up," he explained, more simply.

"Our game wasn't mixed up." She was thinking of the one to which the
widow had objected. "Is it promiscuous to catch somebody?"

"It depends upon whom you catch," he answered with a dry, whimsical
smile.

"Well, I don't catch anybody but the children." She looked up at him
with serious, inquiring eyes.

"Never mind, Polly. Your games aren't promiscuous." She did not hear
him. She was searching for her book.

"Is this what you are looking for?" he asked, drawing the missing
article from his pocket.

"Oh!" cried Polly, with a flush of embarrassment. "Mandy told you."

"You've been working a long time on that."

"I thought I might help you if I learned everything you told me," she
answered, timidly. "But I don't suppose I could."

"I can never tell you how much you help me, Polly."

"Do I?" she cried, eagerly.

"I can help more if you will only let me. I can teach a bigger class in
Sunday-school now. I got to the book of Ruth to-day."

"You did?" He pretended to be astonished. He was anxious to encourage
her enthusiasm.

"Um hum!" She answered solemnly. A dreamy look came into her eyes. "Do
you remember the part that you read to me the first day I came?" He
nodded. He was thinking how care-free they were that day. How impossible
such problems as the present one would have seemed then. "I know every
bit of what you read by heart. It's our next Sunday-school lesson."

"So it is."

"Do you think now that it would be best for me to go away?" She looked
up into his troubled face.

"We'll see, we'll see," he murmured, then tried to turn her mind
toward other things. "Come now, let's find out whether you DO know your
Sunday-school lesson. How does it begin?" There was no answer. She had
turned away with trembling lips. "And Ruth said"--he took her two small
hands and drew her face toward him, meaning to prompt her.

"Entreat me not to leave thee," she pleaded. Her eyes met his. His face
was close to hers. The small features before him were quivering with
emotion. She was so frail, so helpless, so easily within his grasp. His
muscles grew tense and his lips closed firmly. He was battling with an
impulse to draw her toward him and comfort her in the shelter of his
strong, brave arms. "They shan't!" he cried, starting toward her.

Polly drew back, overawed. Her soul had heard and seen the things
revealed to each of us only once. She would never again be a child.

Douglas braced himself against the back of the bench.

"What was the rest of the lesson?" he asked in a firm, hard voice.

"I can't say it now," Polly murmured. Her face was averted; her white
lids fluttered and closed.

"Nonsense, of course you can. Come, come, I'll help you." Douglas spoke
sharply. He was almost vexed with her and with himself for the weakness
that was so near overcoming them. "And Ruth said, 'Entreat me not to
leave thee----'"

"'Or to return from following after thee.'" She was struggling to keep
back the tears. "'For whither thou goest, I will go, and where thou
lodgest, I will lodge. Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my'
"--She stopped.

"That's right, go on," said Douglas, striving to control the
unsteadiness in his own voice.

"Where thou diest, will I die'"--her arms went out blindly.

"Oh, you won't send me away, will you?" she sobbed. "I don't want to
learn anything else just--except--from you." She covered her face and
slipped, a little, broken heap at his feet.

In an instant the pastor's strong arms were about her, his stalwart body
was supporting her. "You shan't go away. I won't let you--I won't! Do
you hear me, Polly? I won't!"

Her breath was warm against his cheek. He could feel her tears, her arms
about him, as she clung to him helplessly, sobbing and quivering in the
shelter of his strong embrace. "You are never going to leave me--never!"

A new purpose had come into his life, the realisation of a new
necessity, and he knew that the fight which he must henceforth make for
this child was the same that he must make for himself.



Chapter XI

"I'se goin' into de Sunday-school-room to take off dat ere widow's
finishin' touches," said Mandy, as she came down the steps.

"All right!" called Douglas. "Take these with you, perhaps they may
help." He gathered up the garlands which Polly had left on the ground.
His eyes were shining, he looked younger than Mandy had ever seen him.

Polly had turned her back at the sound of Mandy's voice and crossed to
the elm tree, drying her tears of happiness and trying to control her
newly awakened emotions. Douglas felt intuitively that she needed this
moment for recovery, so he piled the leaves and garlands high in Mandy's
arms, then ran into the house with the light step of a boy.

"I got the set-sit-settin' room all tidied up," said Mandy as she shot a
sly glance at Polly.

"That's good," Polly answered, facing Mandy at last and dimpling and
blushing guiltily.

"Mos' de sociable folks will mos' likely be hangin' roun' de parsonage
to-night, 'stead ob stayin' in de Sunday-school-room, whar dey belongs.
Las' time dat ere Widow Willoughby done set aroun' all ebenin' a-tellin'
de parson as how folks could jes' eat off'n her kitchen floor, an' I
ups an' tells her as how folks could pick up a good, squar' meal off'n
MANDY'S floor, too. Guess she'll be mighty careful what she says afore
Mandy to-night." She chuckled as she disappeared down the walk to the
Sunday-school-room.

Polly stood motionless where Mandy had left her. She hardly knew which
way to turn. She was happy, yet afraid. She felt like sinking upon her
knees and begging God to be good to her, to help her. She who had once
been so independent, so self-reliant, now felt the need of direction
from above. She was no longer master of her own soul, something had
gone from her, something that would never, never come again. While
she hesitated, Hasty came through the gate looking anxiously over his
shoulder.

"Well, Hasty?" she said, for it was apparent that Hasty had something
important on his mind.

"It's de big one from de circus," he whispered, excitedly.

"The big one?"

"You know--De one what brung you."

"You don't mean--?" Polly's question was answered by Jim himself who had
followed Hasty quickly through the gate. Their arms were instantly about
each other. Jim forgot Hasty and every one in the world except Polly,
and neither of them noticed the horrified Miss Perkins and the Widow
Willoughby, who had been crossing the yard on their way from the
Sunday-school-room with Julia.

"You're just as big as ever," said Polly, when she could let go of Jim
long enough to look at him. "You haven't changed a bit."

"You've changed enough for both of us." He looked at the unfamiliar long
skirts and the new way of doing her hair. "You're bigger, Poll; more
grown up like."

"Oh, Jim!" She glanced admiringly at the new brown suit, the rather
startling tie, and the neat little posy in Jim's buttonhole.

"The fellows said I'd have to slick up a bit if I was a-comin' to see
you, so as not to make you ashamed of me. Do you like 'em?" he asked,
looking down approvingly at his new brown clothes.

"Very much." For the first time Jim noticed the unfamiliar manner of her
speech. He began to feel self-conscious. A year ago she would have said,
"You bet!" He looked at her awkwardly. She hurried on: "Hasty told me
you were showing in Wakefield. I knew you'd come to see me. How's Barker
and all the boys?" She stopped with a catch in her throat, and added
more slowly: "I suppose everything's different, now that Toby is gone."

"He'd a-liked to a-seen you afore he cashed in," Jim answered; "but
maybe it was just as well he didn't. You'd hardly a-knowed him toward
the last, he got so thin an' peeked like. He wasn't the same after we
lost you, nobody was, not even Bingo."

"Have you still got Bingo?" she asked, through her tears.

"Yep, we got him," drawled Jim, "but he ain't much good no more. None
of the other riders can get used to his gait like you was. There ain't
nobody with the show what can touch you ridin', there never will be.
Say, mebbe you think Barker won't let out a yell when he sees yer comin'
back." Jim was jubilant now, and he let out a little yell of his own at
the mere thought of her return. He was too excited to notice the look
on Polly's face. "Toby had a notion before he died that you was never
a-comin' back, but I told him I'd change all that once I seed yer, and
when Barker sent me over here to-day to look arter the advertisin',
he said he guessed you'd had all you wanted a' church folks. 'Jes' you
bring her along to Wakefield,' he said, 'an' tell her that her place
is waitin' for her,' and I will, too." He turned upon Polly with sudden
decision. "Why, I feel jes' like pickin' yer up in my arms and carryin'
you right off now."

"Wait, Jim!" She put one tiny hand on his arm to restrain him.

"I don't mean--not--to-day--mebbe"--he stammered, uncertainly, "but
we'll be back here a-showin' next month."

"Don't look at me now," Polly answered, as the dog-like eyes searched
her face, "because I have to say something that is going to hurt you,
Jim."

"You're comin', ain't yer, Poll?" The big face was wrinkled and
care-worn with trouble.

"No, Jim," she replied in a tone so low that he could scarcely hear her.

"You mean that you ain't NEVER comin' back?" He tried to realise what
such a decision might mean to him.

"No, Jim." She answered tenderly, for she dreaded the pain that she must
cause the great, good-hearted fellow. "You mustn't care like that," she
pleaded, seeing the blank desolation that had come into his face. "It
isn't because I don't love you just the same, and it was good of Barker
to keep my place for me, but I can't go back."

He turned away; she clung to the rough, brown sleeve. "Why, Jim, when I
lie in my little room up there at night"--she glanced toward the window
above them--"and everything is peaceful and still, I think how it used
to be in the old days, the awful noise and the rush of it all, the
cheerless wagons, the mob in the tent, the ring with its blazing lights,
the whirling round and round on Bingo, and the hoops, always the hoops,
till my head got dizzy and my eyes all dim; and then the hurry after the
show, and the heat and the dust or the mud and the rain, and the rumble
of the wheels in the plains at night, and the shrieks of the animals,
and then the parade, the awful, awful parade, and I riding through the
streets in tights, Jim! Tights!" She covered her face to shut out the
memory. "I couldn't go back to it, Jim! I just couldn't!" She turned
away, her face still hidden in her hands. He looked at her a long while
in silence.

"I didn't know how you'd come to feel about it," he said doggedly.

"You aren't ANGRY, Jim?" She turned to him anxiously, her eyes pleading
for his forgiveness.

"Angry?" he echoed, almost bitterly. "I guess it couldn't ever come
to that a-tween you an' me. I'll be all right." He shrugged his great
shoulders. "It's just kinder sudden, that's all. You see, I never
figured on givin' yer up, and when you said you wasn't comin' back, it
kinder seemed as though I couldn't see nothin' all my life but long,
dusty roads, and nobody in 'em. But it's all right now, and I'll just be
gettin' along to the wagon."

"But, Jim, you haven't seen Mr. Douglas," Polly protested, trying to
keep him with her until she could think of some way to comfort him.

"I'll look in on him comin' back," said Jim, anxious to be alone with
his disappointment. He was out of the gate before she could stop him.

"Hurry back, won't you, Jim? I'll be waiting for you." She watched
him going quickly down the road, his fists thrust into his brown coat
pockets, and his hat pulled over his eyes. He did not look back, as he
used to do, to wave a parting farewell, and she turned toward the house
with a troubled heart. She had reached the lower step when Strong and
Elverson approached her from the direction of the church.

"Was that feller here to take you back to the circus?" demanded Strong.

She opened her lips to reply, but before she could speak, Strong assured
her that the congregation wouldn't do anything to stop her if she wished
to go. He saw the blank look on her face. "We ain't tryin' to pry into
none of your private affairs," he explained; "but my daughter saw you
and that there feller a makin' up to each other. If you're calculatin'
to run away with him, you'll save a heap of trouble for the parson by
doin' it quick."

"The parson!"

"YOU can't blame the congregation for not wantin' him to keep you here.
You got sense enough to see how it looks. HE'D see it, too, if he wasn't
just plain, bull-headed. Well he'd better get over his stubbornness
right now, if he don't we'll get another minister, that's all."

"Another minister? You don't mean--?" It was clear enough now. She
recalled Douglas's troubled look of an hour ago. She remembered how he
had asked if she couldn't go away. It was this that he meant when he
promised not to give her up, no matter what happened. In an instant
she was at the deacon's side pleading and terrified. "You wouldn't get
another minister! Oh, please, Deacon Strong, listen to me, listen! You
were right about Jim, he DID come to get me and I am going back to the
circus--only you won't send Mr. Douglas away, you won't! Say you won't!"
She was searching his eyes for mercy. "It wasn't HIS fault that I kept
staying on. He didn't know how to get rid of me. He DID try, he tried
only to-day."

"So he's comin' 'round," sneered Strong.

"Yes, yes, and you won't blame him any more, will you?" she hurried on
anxiously. "You'll let him stay, no matter what he does, if I promise to
go away and never, never come back again?"

"I ain't holdin' no grudge agin him," Strong grumbled. "He talks
pretty rough sometimes, but he's been a good enough minister. I ain't
forgettin' that."

"Oh, thank you, Mr. Strong, thank you. I'll get my things; it won't take
a minute." She was running up the steps when a sudden thought stopped
her. She returned quickly to Strong. "We'd better not let him know just
yet. You can tell him afterward. Tell him that I ran away--Tell him
that----"

She was interrupted by Douglas, who came from the house. "Hello, Strong,
back again?" he asked, in some surprise. Polly remained with her eyes
fixed upon the deacon, searching for some way of escape. The pastor
approached; she burst into nervous laughter. "What's the joke?" Douglas
asked.

"It's only a little surprise that the deacon and I are planning." She
tried to control the catch in her voice. "You'll know about it soon,
won't he, deacon? Good afternoon, Mr. Strong!" She flew into the house,
laughing hysterically.

Douglas followed her to the steps with a puzzled frown. It was unlike
Polly to give way to her moods before others. "Have you gentlemen
changed your minds about the little girl staying on?" he asked,
uneasily.

"It's all right now," said Strong, seating himself with a complacent
air.

"All right? How so?" questioned Douglas, more and more puzzled by the
deacon's evident satisfaction.

"Because," said Strong, rising and facing the pastor, "because your
circus-ridin' gal is goin' to leave you of her own accord."

"Have you been talking to that girl?" asked Douglas, sternly.

"I have," said Strong, holding his ground.

"See here, deacon, if you've been browbeating that child, I may forget
that I'm a minister." The knuckles on Douglas's large fists grew whiter.

"She's goin', I tell yer, and it ain't because of what I said either.
She's goin' back to the circus."

"I don't believe you."

"You would a-believed me if you'd seen the fellow that was just
a-callin' on her, and her a-huggin' and a-kissin' of him and a-promisin'
that she'd be a-waitin' for him here when he come back."

"You lie!" cried Douglas, taking a step toward the retreating deacon.

"There's the fellow now," cried Strong, as he pointed to the gate.
"Suppose you ask him afore yer call me a liar."

Douglas turned quickly and saw Jim approaching. His face lighted up with
relief at the sight of the big, lumbering fellow.

"How are yer, Mr. Douglas?" said Jim, awkwardly.

"You've seen Polly?" asked Douglas, shaking Jim cordially by the hand.

"Yes, I've seen her."

"The deacon here has an idea that Polly is going back to the circus with
you." He nodded toward Strong, almost laughing at the surprise in store
for him.

"Back to the circus?" asked Jim.

"Did she say anything to you about it?" He was worried by the
bewilderment in Jim's manner.

Before Jim could reply, Polly, who had reached the steps in time to
catch the last few words, slipped quickly between them. She wore her
coat and hat, and carried a small brown satchel.

"Of course I did, didn't I, Jim?" she said, turning her back upon the
pastor and motioning to Jim not to answer. Douglas gazed at her in
astonishment.

"What do you mean?" he asked in a hoarse, strained voice. He glanced at
the coat and hat. "Where are you going?"

Polly avoided his eyes and continued nervously to Jim.

"What made you come back? Why didn't you wait for me down the street?
Now, you've spoiled everything." She pretended to be very vexed with
him. The big fellow looked puzzled. He tried to protest, but she put a
warning finger to her lips and pressed the little brown satchel into his
hand. "It's no use," she went on hurriedly. "We might as well tell them
everything now." She turned to Douglas and pretended to laugh. "You have
found us out."

The deacons were slightly uneasy; the frown on Douglas's forehead was
deepening.

"Oh, see how serious he looks," she teased, with a toss of her head
toward the grim-visaged pastor.

"Is this some trick?" he demanded, sternly.

"Don't be angry," she pleaded. "Wish me luck."

She held out one small hand; he did not take it. She wavered, then she
felt the eyes of the deacons upon her. Courage returned and she spoke in
a firm, clear voice: "I am going to run away."

Douglas stepped before her and studied her keenly.

"Run away?" he exclaimed incredulously.

"Yes, to the circus with Jim."

"You couldn't DO such a thing," he answered, excitedly. "Why, only a
moment ago you told me you would never leave me."

"Oh, but that was a moment ago," she cried, in a strained, high voice.
"That was before Jim came. You see, I didn't know HOW I felt until I saw
Jim and heard all about my old friends, how Barker is keeping my place
for me, and how they all want to see me. And I want to see them, and
to hear the music and the laughter and the clown songs--Oh, the clown
songs!" She waltzed about, humming the snatch of melody that Mandy had
heard the morning that Polly first woke in the parsonage.

        "Ting, ling.
        That's how the bells ring,
        Ting, ling, pretty young thing."

She paused, her hands clasped behind her head, and gazed at them with a
brave, little smile. "Oh, it's going to be fine! Fine!"

"You don't know what you're doing," said Douglas. He seized her roughly
by the arm. Pain was making him brutal. "I won't LET you go! Do you hear
me? I won't--not until you've thought it over."

"I have thought it over," Polly answered, meeting his eyes and trying
to speak lightly. Her lips trembled. She could not bear for him to
think her so ungrateful. She remembered his great kindness; the many
thoughtful acts that had made the past year so precious to her.

"You've been awfully good to me, Mr. John." She tried to choke back a
sob. "I'll never forget it--never! I'll always feel the same toward you.
But you mustn't ask me to stay. I want to get back to them that knew me
first--to my OWN! Circus folks aren't cut out for parsons' homes, and
I was born in the circus. I love it--I love it!" She felt her strength
going, and cried out wildly: "I want Bingo! I want to go round and round
the ring! I want the lights and the music and the hoops! I want the
shrieks of the animals, and the rumble of the wheels in the plains at
night! I want to ride in the big parade! I want to live and die--just
die--as circus folks die! I want to go back! I want to go back!"

She put out one trembling hand to Jim and rushed quickly through the
gate laughing and sobbing hysterically and calling to him to follow.



Chapter XII

LONELY days followed Polly's desertion of the parsonage. Mandy went
about her duties very quietly, feeling that the little comments which
once amused the pastor had now become an interruption to thoughts in
which she had no part. He would sit for hours with his head in his
hands, taking no notice of what passed before him. She tried to think of
new dishes to tempt his appetite, and shook her head sadly as she bore
the untasted food back to the kitchen.

She sometimes found a portfolio of drawings lying open upon his study
table. She remembered the zeal with which he had planned to remodel the
church and parsonage, when he first came to them; how his enthusiasm had
gradually died for lack of encouragement; and how he had at last put
his books in a cupboard, where they grew dusty from long neglect. She
marvelled at their reappearance now, but something in his set, far-away
look made her afraid to inquire. Thus she went on from day to day,
growing more impatient with Hasty and more silent with the pastor.

Mandy needed humor and companionship to oil the wheels of her humdrum
life; there was no more laughter in the house, and she began to droop.

Polly had been away from the parsonage a month, when the complacency
of the village was again upset by the arrival of the "Great American
Circus."

There were many callers at the parsonage that day, for speculation was
now at fever heat about the pastor. "Would he try to see her? had he
forgotten her? and what had he ever found in her?" were a few of the
many questions that the women were asking each other. Now, that the
cause of their envy was removed, they would gladly have reinstated the
pastor as their idol; for, like all truly feminine souls, they could
not bear to see a man unhappy without wishing to comfort him, nor happy
unless they were the direct cause of his state. "How dare any man be
happy without me?" has been the cry of each woman since Eve was created
to mate with Adam.

Douglas had held himself more and more aloof from the day of Polly's
disappearance. He expressed no opinion about the deacons or their recent
disapproval of him. He avoided meeting them oftener than duty required;
and Strong felt so uncomfortable and tongue-tied in his presence that
he, too, was glad to make their talks as few as possible.

Nothing was said about the pastor's plans for the future, or about his
continued connection with the church, and the inquisitive sisterhood
was on the point of exploding from an over-accumulation of unanswered
questions.

He delivered his sermons conscientiously, called upon his poor, listened
to the sorrows, real and fancied, of his parishioners, and shut himself
up with his books or walked alone on the hill behind the church.

He had been absent all day, when Mandy looked out on the circus lot for
the dozenth time, and saw that the afternoon performance was closing.
It had driven her to desperation to learn that Miss Polly was not in the
parade that morning, and to know that the pastor had made no effort
to find out about her. For weeks both she and Hasty had hoped that the
return of the circus might bring Polly back to them; but now it was
nearly night and there had been no word from her. Why didn't she come
running in to see them, as Mandy had felt so sure she would? Why had the
pastor stayed away on the hills all day?

Unanswered questions were always an abomination to Mandy, so finally she
drew a quarter from the knotted gingham rag that held her small wad of
savings, and told Hasty "to go long to de show and find out 'bout Miss
Polly."

She was anxiously waiting for him, when Deacon Strong knocked at the
door for the second time that afternoon.

"Is Mr. Douglas back yet?' he asked.

"No, sah, he ain't," said Mandy, very shortly. She felt that Strong
and Elverson had been "a-tryin' to spy on de parson all day," and she
resented their visits more than she usually did.

"What time are you expectin' him?"

"I don't nebber spec' Massa Douglas till I sees him."

Strong grunted uncivilly, and went down the steps. She saw from the
window that he met Elverson in front of the church.

"Dey sure am a-meanin' trouble," she mumbled.

The band had stopped playing; the last of the audience had straggled
down the street. She opened the door and stood on the porch; the house
seemed to suffocate her. What was keeping Hasty?

He came at last, but Mandy could tell from his gait that he brought
unwelcome news.

"Ain't she dar?"

"She's wid 'em, all right," said Hasty.

"Yuh seed her?"

"Naw, I didn't done SEED her."

"What?"

"She want in de show."

"What you jes' tell me?"

"She's a-trabbelin' wid 'em, Mandy, but she didn't done ride."

"See heah, Hasty Jones, is dat ere chile sick?"

"I don' rightly know," said Hasty. "A great big man, what wored clothes
like a gemmen, comed out wid a whip in his hand and says as how he's
'bliged to 'nounce anudder gal in Miss Polly's place. An' den he says
as how de udder gal was jes' as good, an' den everybody look disappinted
like, an' den out comes de udder gal on a hoss an' do tricks, an' I
ain't heard no more 'bout Miss Polly."

"Why didn't you done ask somebody?"

"Warn't nobody ter ask but de man what wuz hurryin' ever'body to get
out of de tent. I done ast him, but he say as 'didn't I git ma money's
worth?' an' den ebberbody laugh, an' he shove me 'long wid de rest of de
folks, an' here I is."

"She's sick, dat's what _I_ says," Mandy declared, excitedly; "an'
somebody's got to do somethin'!"

"I done all I knowed," drawled Hasty, fearing that Mandy was regretting
her twenty-five-cent investment.

"Go 'long out an' fix up dat ere kitchen fire," was Mandy's impatient
reply. "I got to keep dem vittels warm fer Massa John."

She wished to be alone, so that she could think of some way to get hold
of Polly. "Dat baby-faced mornin'-glory done got Mandy all wobbly 'bout
de heart," she declared to herself, as she crossed to the window for a
sight of the pastor.

It was nearly dark when she saw him coming slowly down the path from the
hill. She lighted the study-lamp, rearranged the cushions, and tried to
make the room look cheery for his entrance. He stopped in the hall and
hung up his hat. There was momentary silence. Would he shut himself in
his room for the night, or would he come into the study? At last the
door opened and Mandy hastened to place a chair for him.

"Ah's 'fraid you'se mighty tired," she said.

"Oh, no," answered Douglas, absently.

"Mebbe you'd like Mandy to be sarvin' your supper in here to-night. It's
more cheerfuller."

The side-showman was already beginning his spiel in the lot below. The
lemonade venders{sic} and the popcorn sellers were heard crying their
wares. Douglas did not answer her. She bustled from the room, declaring
"she was jes' goin' ter bring him a morsel."

He crossed to the window and looked out upon the circus lot. The flare
of the torches and the red fire came up to meet his pale, tense face.
"How like the picture of thirteen months ago," he thought, and old
Toby's words came back to him--"The show has got to go on."

Above the church steeple, the moon was battling its way through the
clouds. His eyes travelled from heaven to earth. There was a spirit
of unreality in it all. Something made him mistrust himself, his very
existence. He longed to have done with dreams and speculation, to feel
something tangible, warm, and real within his grasp. "I can't go on
like this!" he cried. "I can't!" He turned from the window and walked
hurriedly up and down the room; indoors or out, he found no rest. He
threw himself in the armchair near the table, and sat buried in thought.

Mandy came softly into the room. She was followed by Hasty, who carried
a tray, laden with things that ought to have tempted any man. She
motioned for Hasty to put the tray on the table, and then began
arranging the dishes. Hasty stole to the window, and peeped out at the
tempting flare of red fire.

When Douglas discovered the presence of his two "faithfuls" he was
touched with momentary contrition. He knew that he often neglected to
chat with them now, and he made an effort to say something that might
restore the old feeling of comradeship.

"Have you had a hard day with the new gravel walk?" he asked
Hasty, remembering that he had been laying a fresh path to the
Sunday-school-room.

Hasty glanced uneasily at Mandy, afraid either to lie or tell the truth
about the disposition she had made of his afternoon.

"Jes' you come eat yo' supper," Mandy called to Douglas. "Don' yous
worry your head 'bout dat lazy husban' ob mine. He ain' goin' ter work
'nuff to hurt hisself." For an instant she had been tempted to let the
pastor know how Hasty had gone to the circus and seen nothing of Polly;
but her motherly instinct won the day and she urged him to eat before
disturbing him with her own anxieties. It was no use. He only toyed with
his food; he was clearly ill at ease and eager to be alone. She gave up
trying to tempt his appetite, and began to lead up in a roundabout way
to the things which she wished to ask.

"Dar's quite some racket out dar in de lot tonight," she said; Douglas
did not answer. After a moment, she went on: "Hasty didn't work on no
walk to-day." Douglas looked at her quizzically, while Hasty, convinced
that for reasons of her own she was going to get him into trouble, was
making frantic motions. "He done gone to de circus," she blurted out.
Douglas's face became suddenly grave. Mandy saw that she had touched an
open wound.

"I jes' couldn't stan' it, Massa John. I HAD to find out 'bout dat angel
chile." There was a pause. She felt that he was waiting for her to go
on.

"She didn't done ride to-day."

He looked up with the eyes of a dumb, persecuted animal. "And de gemmen
in de show didn't tell nobody why--jes' speaked about de udder gal
takin' her place."

"Why DIDN'T she ride?" cried Douglas, in an agony of suspense.

"Dat's what I don' know, sah." Mandy began to cry. It was the first time
in his experience that Douglas had ever known her to give way to any
such weakness. He walked up and down the room, uncertain what to do.

Hasty came down from the window and tried to put one arm about Mandy's
shoulders.

"Leab me alone, you nigga!" she exclaimed, trying to cover her tears
with a show of anger that she did not feel; then she rushed from the
room, followed by Hasty.

The band was playing loudly; the din of the night performance was
increasing. Douglas's nerves were strained to a point of breaking. He
would not let himself go near the window. He stood by the side of the
table, his fists clenched, and tried to beat back the impulse that was
pulling him toward the door. Again and again he set his teeth.

It was uncertainty that gnawed at him so. Was she ill? Could she need
him? Was she sorry for having left him? Would she be glad if he went for
her and brought her back with him? He recalled the hysterical note in
her behaviour the day that she went away; how she had pleaded, only a
few moments before Jim came, never to be separated from him. Had she
really cared for Jim and for the old life? Why had she never written?
Was she ashamed? Was she sorry for what she had done? What could it
mean? He threw his hands above his head with a gesture of despair. A
moment later, he passed out into the night.



Chapter XIII

JIM was slow to-night. The big show was nearly over, yet many of the
props used in the early part of the bill were still unloaded.

He was tinkering absent-mindedly with one of the wagons in the back lot,
and the men were standing about idly, waiting for orders, when Barker
came out of the main tent and called to him sharply:

"Hey, there, Jim! What's your excuse to-night?"

"Excuse for what?" Jim crossed slowly to Barker.

"The cook tent was started half an hour late, and the side show top
ain't loaded yet."

"Your wagons is on the bum, that's what! Number thirty-eight carries the
cook tent and the blacksmith has been tinkering with it all day. Ask HIM
what shape it's in."

"You're always stallin'," was Barker's sullen complaint. "It's the
wagons, or the black-smiths, or anything but the truth. _I_ know what's
the matter, all right."

"What do you mean by that?" asked Jim, sharply.

"I mean that all your time's took up a-carryin' and a-fetchin' for that
girl what calls you 'Muvver Jim.'"

"What have yer got to say about her?" Jim eyed him with a threatening
look.

"I got a-plenty," said Barker, as he turned to snap his whip at the
small boys who had stolen into the back lot to peek under the rear edge
of the "big top." "She's been about as much good as a sick cat since she
come back. You saw her act last night."

"Yes," answered Jim, doggedly.

"Wasn't it punk? She didn't show at ALL this afternoon--said she was
sick. And me with all them people inside what knowed her, waitin' ter
see 'er."

"Give her a little time," Jim pleaded. "She ain't rode for a year."

"Time!" shouted Barker. "How much does she want? She's been back a month
and instead o' bracin' up, she's a-gettin' worse. There's only one thing
for me to do."

"What's that?" asked Jim, uneasily.

"I'm goin' ter call her, and call her hard."

"Look here, Barker," and Jim squared his shoulders as he looked steadily
at the other man; "you're boss here, and I takes orders from you, but if
I catches you abusin' Poll, your bein' boss won't make no difference."

"You can't bluff me," shouted Barker.

"I ain't bluffin'; I'm only TELLIN' yer," said Jim, very quietly.

"Well, you TELL her to get onto her job. If she don't she quits, that's
all." He hurried into the ring.

Jim took one step to follow him, then stopped and gazed at the ground
with thoughtful eyes. He, too, had seen the change in Polly. He had
tried to rouse her; it was no use. She had looked at him blankly. "If
she would only complain," he said to himself. "If she would only get
mad, anything, anything to wake her." But she did not complain. She
went through her daily routine very humbly and quietly. She sometimes
wondered how Jim could talk so much about her work, but before she could
answer the question, her mind drifted back to other days, to a garden
and flowers, and Jim stole away unmissed, and left her with folded hands
and wide, staring eyes, gazing into the distance.

The memory of these times made Jim helpless to-night. He had gone on
hoping from day to day that Barker might not notice the "let-down" in
her work, and now the blow had fallen. How could he tell her?

One of the acts came tumbling out of the main tent. There was a moment's
confusion, as clowns, acrobats and animals passed each other on their
way to and from the ring, then the lot cleared again, and Polly came
slowly from the dressing tent. She looked very different from the little
girl whom Jim had led away from the parson's garden in a simple, white
frock one month before. Her thin, pensive face contrasted oddly with
her glittering attire. Her hair was knotted high on her head {a}nd
intertwined with flowers and jewels. Her slender neck seemed scarcely
able to support its burden. Her short, full skirt and low cut bodice
were ablaze with white and coloured stones.

"What's on, Jim?" she asked.

"The 'Leap o' Death.' You got plenty a' time."

Polly's mind went back to the girl who answered that call a year ago.
Her spirit seemed very near to-night. The band stopped playing. Barker
made his grandiloquent announcement about the wonderful act about to be
seen, and her eyes wandered to the distant church steeple. The moonlight
seemed to shun it to-night. It looked cold and grim and dark. She
wondered whether the solemn bell that once called its flock to worship
had become as mute as her own dead heart. She did not hear the whirr of
the great machine inside the tent, as it plunged through space with its
girl occupant. These things were a part of the daily routine, part of
the strange, vague dream through which she must stumble for the rest of
her life.

Jim watched her in silence. Her face was turned from him. She had
forgotten his presence.

"Star gazin', Poll?" he asked at length, dreading to disturb her revery.

"I guess I was, Jim." She turned to him with a little, forced smile. He
longed to save her from Barker's threatened rebuke.

"How yer feelin' to-night?"

"I'm all right," she answered, cheerfully

"Anythin' yer want?"

"Want?" she turned upon him with startled eyes. There was so much that
she wanted, that the mere mention of the word had opened a well of pain
in her heart.

"I mean, can I do anythin' for you?"

"Oh, of course not." She remembered how little ANY ONE could do.

"What is it, Poll?" he begged; but she only turned away and shook her
head with a sigh. He followed her with anxious eyes. "What made yer cut
out the show to-day? Was it because you didn't want ter ride afore folks
what knowed yer? Ride afore HIM, mebbe?"

"HIM?" Her face was white. Jim feared she might swoon. "You don't mean
that he was----"

"Oh, no," he answered, quickly, "of course not. Parsons don't come to
places like this one. I was only figurin' that yer didn't want OTHER
folks to see yer and to tell him how you was ridin'." She did not
answer.

"Was that it, Poll?" he urged.

"I don't know." She stared into space.

"Was it?"

"I guess it was," she said, after a long time.

"I knowed it," he cried. "I was a fool to a-brung you back. Yer don't
belong with us no more."

"Oh, don't, Jim! don't! Don't make me feel I'm in the way here, too!"

"Here, too?" He looked at her in astonishment. "Yer wasn't in HIS way,
was yer, Poll?"

"Yes, Jim." She saw his look of unbelief and continued hurriedly. "Oh,
I tried not to be. I tried so hard. He used to read me verses out of a
Bible about my way being his way and my people his people, but it isn't
so, Jim. Your way is the way you are born, and your people are the
people you are born with, and you can't change it, Jim, no matter how
hard you try."

"YOU was changin' it," he answered, savagely. "You was gettin' jes'
like them people. It was me what took yer away and spoiled it all. You
oughtn't to a come. What made yer, after yer said yer wouldn't?"

She did not answer. Strange things were going through the mind of the
slow-witted Jim. He braced himself for a difficult question.

"Will yer answer me somethin' straight?" he asked.

"Why, of course," she said as she met his gaze.

"Do you love the parson, Poll?"

She started.

"Is that it?"

Her lids fluttered and closed, she caught her breath quickly, her lips
apart, then looked far into the distance.

"Yes, Jim, I'm afraid--that's it." The little figure drooped, and
she stood before him with lowered eyes, unarmed. Jim looked at her
helplessly, then shook his big, stupid head.

"Ain't that hell?"

It seemed such a short time to Jim since he had picked her up, a cooing
babe, at her dead mother's side. He watched the tender, averted face.
Things had turned out so differently from what he had planned.

"And he didn't care about you--like that?" he asked, after a pause.

"No, not in that way." She was anxious to defend the pastor from even
the thought of such a thing. "He was good and kind always, but he didn't
care THAT WAY. He's not like that."

"I guess I'll have a talk with him," said Jim, and he turned to go.

"Talk!" she cried.

He stopped and looked at her in astonishment. It was the first time
that he had ever heard that sharp note in her voice. Her tiny figure was
stiffened with decision. Her eyes were blazing.

"If you ever DARE to speak to him--about me, you'll never see me again."

Jim was perplexed.

"I mean it, Jim. I've made my choice, and I've come back to you. If you
ever try to fix up things between him and me, I'll run away--really and
truly away--and you'll never, never get me back."

He shuffled awkwardly to her side and reached apologetically for
the little, clenched fist. He held it in his big, rough hand, toying
nervously with the tiny fingers.

"I wouldn't do nothin' that you wasn't a-wantin', Poll. I was just a
tryin' to help yer, only I--I never seem to know how."

She turned to him with tear-dimmed eyes, and rested her hands on his
great, broad shoulders, and he saw the place where he dwelt in her
heart.



Chapter XIV

THE "Leap of Death" implements were being carried from the ring, and Jim
turned away to superintend their loading.

Performers again rushed by each other on their way to and from the main
tent.

Polly stood in the centre of the lot, frowning and anxious. The mere
mention of the pastor's name had made it seem impossible for her to ride
to-night. For hours she had been whipping herself up to the point of
doing it, and now her courage failed her. She followed Barker as he came
from the ring.

"Mr. Barker, please!"

He turned upon her sharply.

"Well, what is it NOW?"

"I want to ask you to let me off again to-night." She spoke in a short,
jerky, desperate way.

"What?" he shrieked. "Not go into the ring, with all them people inside
what's paid their money a-cause they knowed yer?"

"That's it," she cried. "I can't! I can't!"

"YER gettin' too tony!" Barker sneered. "That's the trouble with you.
You ain't been good for nothin' since you was at that parson's house.
Yer didn't stay there, and yer no use here. First thing yer know yer'll
be out all 'round."

"Out?"

"Sure. Yer don't think I'm goin' ter head my bill with a 'dead one,' do
you?"

"I am not a 'dead one,'" she answered, excitedly. "I'm the best rider
you've had since mother died. You've said so yourself."

"That was afore yer got in with them church cranks. You talk about yer
mother! Why, she'd be ashamed ter own yer."

"She wouldn't," cried Polly. Her eyes were flashing, her face was
scarlet. The pride of hundreds of years of ancestry was quivering with
indignation. "I can ride as well as I EVER could, and I'll do it, too.
I'll do it to-morrow."

"To-morrow?" echoed Barker. "What do you mean by that?"

"I mean that I CAN'T go into that ring TO-NIGHT," she declared, "and I
won't."

She was desperate now, and trading upon a strength beyond her own.

He looked at her with momentary indecision. She WAS a good rider--the
best since her mother, as he had often told her. He could see this meant
an issue. He felt she would be on her mettle to-morrow, as far as her
work was concerned, if he left her alone to-night.

"All right," he said, sullenly. "Yer can stay off to-night. I got the
crowd in there, anyway, and I got their money. I'll let Eloise do a turn
on Barbarian, but TO-MORROW you'd better show me your old act."

"I'll show you!" she cried. "I'll show you!"

"Well, see that you do." He crossed into the ring.

Polly stood where Barker had left her, white and tense. Jim came toward
her from the direction of the wagons. He glanced at her uneasily.
"What's he been a-sayin' ter you?"

"He says I can't ride any more." Her lips closed tightly. She stared
straight ahead of her. "He says I was no good to the people that took me
in, and I'm no use here."

"It's not so!" thundered Jim.

"No; it's not!" she cried. "I'll show him, Jim! I'll show
him--to-morrow!" She turned toward the dressing tent; Jim caught her
firmly by the wrist.

"Wait, Poll! You ain't ever goin' into the ring a-feelin' THAT WAY." Her
eyes met his, defiantly.

"What's the difference? What's the difference?" She wrenched her wrist
quickly from him, and ran into the dressing tent laughing hysterically.

"And I brung her back to it," mumbled Jim as he turned to give orders to
the property men.

Most of the "first-half props" were loaded, and some of the men were
asleep under the wagons. The lot was clear. Suddenly he felt some one
approaching from the back of the enclosure. He turned and found himself
face to face with the stern, solitary figure of the pastor, wrapped
in his long, black cloak. The moonlight slipped through a rift in the
clouds, and fell in a circle around them.

"What made you come here?" was all Jim said.

"I heard that Miss Polly didn't ride to-day. I was afraid she might be
ill."

"What's that to you?"

"She ISN'T ill?" Douglas demanded anxiously, oblivious to the gruffness
in the big fellow's voice.

"She's all right," Jim answered shortly as he shifted uneasily from one
foot to the other, and avoided the pastor's burning gaze.

"And she's happy? she's content?"

"Sure."

"I'm glad," said Douglas, dully. He tried to think of some way to
prolong their talk. "I've never heard from her, you know."

"Us folks don't get much time to write." Jim turned away and began
tinkering with one of the wagons.

Douglas had walked up and down in front of the tents again and again,
fighting against a desire to do the very thing that he was doing, but
to no purpose, and now that he was here, it seemed impossible that he
should go away so unsatisfied. He crossed to Jim and came determinedly
to the point.

"Can't I see her, Jim?"

"It's agin the rules." He did not turn.

There was another pause, then Douglas started slowly out of the lot.

"Wait a minute," called Jim, as though the words had been wrung from
him. The pastor came back with a question in his eyes.

"I lied to you."

"She's NOT well, then?"

"Oh, yes, she's well enough. It ain't that; it's about her being happy."

"She isn't?" There was a note of unconscious exultation in his voice.

"No. She AIN'T happy here, and she WAS happy WITH YOU."

"Then, why did she leave me?"

"I don't know. She wasn't goin' ter do it at first. Somethin' must
a-happened afterwards, somethin' that you an' me didn't know about."

"We WILL know about it, Jim. Where is she?" His quick eye searched the
lot. His voice had regained it's old command. He felt that he could
conquer worlds.

"You can't do no good that way," answered Jim. "She don't want ter see
you again."

"Why not?"

"I don't know, but she told me she'd run away if I ever even talked to
you about her."

"You needn't talk, Jim; I'll talk for myself. Where is she?"

"She'll be comin' out soon. You can wait around out here with me. I'll
let you know in time." He led the way through a narrow passage between
the wagons.

Jim and Douglas had barely left the lot when Deacon Elverson's small,
round head slipped cautiously around the corner of the dressing tent.
The little deacon glanced exultantly about him. He was monarch of all he
surveyed. It was very thrilling to stand here, on this forbidden ground,
smelling the saw-dust, gazing at the big red wagons, studying the
unprotected circus properties, and listening to the lightening tempo of
the band.

"Did you see him?" shouted Strong, who had followed closely upon
Elverson's heels.

The little deacon started. Strong was certainly a disturbing factor at
times.

"Yes, I--I saw him."

"Well?"

"He--he--didn't see HER."

"What DID he do?" Strong was beside himself with impatience.

"He--he just talked to the big 'un, and went out that way." Elverson
nodded toward the wagons.

"I guess he ain't gone far," sneered Strong. "He come over to this lot
to see her, and he ain't goin' ter give up till he does it. You wait
here; I'll take a look round." He went quickly in the direction of the
wagons.

Elverson needed no second invitation to wait. He was congratulating
himself upon his good fortune, when he all but collided with a flying
apparition, vanishing in the direction of the main tent. Sophisticated
eyes would have seen only a rather stout acrobat clad in pink tights;
but Elverson was not sophisticated, and he teetered after the flitting
angel, even unto the forbidden portals of the "big top."

He was peeping through the curtains which had fallen behind her, and was
getting his first glimpse of the great, sawdust world beyond, when one
of the clowns dashed from the dressing tent on his way to the ring.

The clown was late. He saw the limp coat tails of the deacon, who was
three-quarters in the tent. Here was a chance to make a funny entrance.
He grabbed the unsuspecting little man from the rear. The terrified
deacon struck out blindly in all directions, his black arms and legs
moving like centipede, but the clown held him firmly by the back and
thrust him, head foremost, into the tent.

Strong returned almost immediately from his unsuccessful search for the
pastor. He looked about the lot for Elverson.

"Hey, there, Elverson!" he called lustily. There was no response.

"Now where's he got to," grumbled Strong. He disappeared quickly around
the corner of the dressing tent, resolved to keep a sharp lookout for
Douglas.

Elverson was thrust from the tent soon after, spitting sawdust and
much discomfited by the laughing performers who followed him. His knees
almost gave way beneath him when Barker came out of the ring, snapping
his long, black whip.

"Get out of here, you bloke!" roared Barker. And Elverson "got."

No one had remembered to tell the groom that Polly was not to ride
to-night. So Bingo was brought out as usual, when their "turn"
approached.

"Take him back, Tom," Polly called from the entrance, when she learned
that Bingo was waiting, "and bring Barbarian. I'm not going on to-night.
Eloise is going to ride in my place."

This was the second time to-day that Bingo had been led away without
going into the ring. Something in his big, wondering eyes made Polly
follow him and apologise. He was very proud, was Bingo, and very
conscientious. He felt uneasy when he saw the other horses going to
their work without him.

"Never mind, Bingo," she said, patting his great, arched neck, "we'll
show 'em to-morrow." He rubbed his satiny nose against her cheek. "We'll
make them SIT UP again. Barker says our act's no good--that I've let
down. But it's not YOUR fault, Bingo. I've not been fair to you. I'll
give you a chance to-morrow. You wait. He'll never say it again, Bingo!
Never again!" She watched him go out of the lot, and laughed a little as
he nipped the attendant on the arm. He was still irritated at not going
into the ring.

Polly had nothing more to do to-night except to get into her street
clothes. The wagons would soon be moving away. For a moment she glanced
at the dark church steeple, then she turned to go inside the tent. A
deep, familiar voice stopped her.

"Polly!"

She turned quickly. She could not answer. Douglas came toward her. He
gazed at her in amazement. She drew her cape about her slightly clad
figure. She seemed older to him, more unapproachable with her hair
heaped high and sparkling with jewels. Her bodice of satin and lace
shimmered through the opening of her cape. The moonlight lent mystery
and indecision to her betinselled attire. The band was playing the
andante for the balancing act.

She found strength at last to open her lips, but still no sound came
from them. She and the pastor looked at each other strangely, like
spirits newly met from far-apart worlds. She, too, thought her companion
changed. He was older, the circles beneath his eyes were deeper, the
look in their depths more grave.

"We were such close neighbours to-day, I--I rather thought you'd call,"
he stammered. He was uncertain what he was saying--it did not matter--he
was there with her.

"When you're in a circus there isn't much time for calling."

"That's why I've come to call on you." They might have been sheppherd
and sheppherdess on a May-day wooing, for the halting way in which their
words came.

"You're all right?" he went on. "You're happy?"

"Yes, very," she said. Her eyes were downcast.

He did not believe her, the effort in her voice, her drawn, white face
belied her words. How COULD he get the truth from her?

"Jim said you might not want to see me."

She started.

"Has Jim been talking to you?"

"Yes, but I didn't let him stop me, for you told me the day you left
that you'd never change--toward me. Have you, Poll?" He studied her,
anxiously.

"Why, no, of course not," she said, evasively.

"And you'll be quite frank when I ask you something?"

"Yes, of course." She was growing more and more uneasy. She glanced
about for a way of escape.

"Why did you leave me as you did?"

"I told you then." She tried to cross toward the dressing tent.

He stepped quickly in front of her.

"You aren't answering FRANKLY, and you aren't happy."

She was growing desperate. She felt she must get away, anywhere,
anywhere.

He seized her small wrists and forced her to look at him.

"And _I_ am not happy without YOU, and I never, NEVER can be." The
floodgates were open, his eyes were aglow, he bent toward her eagerly.

"Oh, you mustn't," she begged. "You MUSTN'T."

"You've grown so close," he cried. "So close!" She struggled to be free.
He did not heed her. "You know--you must know what I mean." He drew her
toward him and forced her into his arms. "You're more precious to me
than all else on this earth."

For the first time he saw the extreme pallor on her face. He felt her
growing limp and lifeless in his arms. A doubt crossed his mind. "If
I am wrong in thinking you feel as I do, if you honestly care for all
this," he glanced about at the tents, "more than for any life that I can
give you, I shan't interfere. You'll be going on your way in an hour.
I'll say good-bye and God bless you; but if you do care for me, Polly,"
he was pleading now, "if you're NOT happy here--won't you come back to
me? Won't you, Polly?"

She dared not meet his eyes, nor yet to send him away. She stood
irresolute. The voice of Deacon Strong answered for her.

"So! You're HERE, are you?"

"Yes, Deacon Strong, I'm here," answered the pastor, as he turned to
meet the accusing eyes of the deacon, who had come quickly from behind
the dressing tent.

"As for you, miss," continued Strong, with an insolent nod toward Polly,
"I might have known how you'd keep your part of the bargain."

"Bargain?" echoed Douglas. "What bargain?"

"Oh, please, Deacon Strong, please. I didn't mean to see him, I didn't,
truly." She hardly knew what she was saying.

"What bargain?" demanded Douglas sternly.

"She told me that you and her wasn't ever goin' ter see each other
agin," roared Strong. "If I'd a-knowed she was goin' to keep on with
this kind o' thing, you wouldn't er got off so easy."

"So! That's it!" cried Douglas. It was all clear to him now. He recalled
everything, her hysterical behaviour, her laughter, her tears. "It was
you who drove that child back to this." He glanced at Polly. The narrow
shoulders were bent forward. The nervous little fingers were clasping
and unclasping each other. Never before had she seemed so small and
helpless.

"Oh, please, Mr. John, please! Don't make him any worse!"

"Why didn't you tell me?" he demanded.

"It would have done no good," she sobbed. "Oh, why--why won't you leave
me alone?"

"It would have done all the good in the world. What right had he to send
you back to this?"

"I had every right," said Strong, stubbornly.

"What?" cried Douglas.

"It was my duty."

"Your duty? Your narrow-minded bigotry!"

"I don't allow no man to talk to me like that, not even my parson."

"I'm NOT your parson any longer," declared Douglas. He faced Strong
squarely. He was master of his own affairs at last. Polly clung to him,
begging and beseeching.

"Oh, Mr. John! Mr. John!"

"What do you mean by that?" shouted Strong.

"I mean that I stayed with you and your narrow-minded congregation
before, because I believed you needed me. But now this girl needs me
more. She needs me to protect her from just such injustice as yours."

"You'd better be protectin' YOURSELF. That's my advice to you."

"I can do that WITHOUT your advice."

"Maybe you can find another church with that circus ridin' girl
a-hangin' 'round your neck."

"He's right," cried Polly. "You couldn't." She clung to the pastor in
terrified entreaty. "You COULDN'T get another church. They'd never,
never forgive you. It's no use. You've got to let me go! you've GOT to!"

"Listen, Polly." He drew her toward him. "God is greater than any church
or creed. There's work to be done EVERYWHERE--HIS work."

"You'll soon find out about that," thundered Strong.

"So I will," answered Douglas, with his head thrown high. "This child
has opened a new world to me; she has shown me a broader, deeper
humanity; she and I will find the way together."

"It won't be an easy one, I'll promise you that." Strong turned to go.

"I'm not looking for the easy way!" Douglas called after him, then he
turned to draw Polly's arm within his; but Polly had slipped from his
side to follow the deacon.

"Oh, please, Deacon Strong, please!" she pleaded. "You won't go away
like that. He'll be all right if you'll only wait. I'm NOT coming back.
I'm not--honestly. I'm going on with the show, to-night, and I'm going
this time FOREVER."

"You are going to stay here with me," cried Douglas.

"No, no, Mr. John. I've made up my mind, and I won't be to blame for
your unhappiness." She faced him firmly now. "I don't belong to your
world, and I don't want to try any more. I'm what he called me--I'm a
circus riding girl. I was born in the circus, and I'll never change.
That's my work--riding, and it's yours to preach. You must do your work,
and I'LL do MINE."

She started toward the ring. Eloise and Barbarian were already waiting
at the entrance.

"Eloise!" She took one step toward her, then stopped at the sound of
Barker's voice.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he called. "Although we are obliged to announce
that our star rider, Miss Polly, will not appear to-night, we offer
you in her place an able substitute, Mademoiselle Eloise, on her black,
untamed horse, Barbarian."

Eloise put her hands on the horse's back to mount.

"No! No!" cried Polly.

The other girl turned in astonishment at the agony in her voice.

"Polly!"

"Wait, Eloise! I'M going to ride!"

"You can't, not Barbarian! He don't know your turn."

"So much the better!" She seized the bridle from the frightened girl's
hand.

"Polly!" shouted Douglas. He had followed her to the entrance.

"I must! I will!"

She flew into the ring before he could stop her. He took one step to
follow her.

"You'd better let her alone and get out o' here," said Strong. His voice
was like a firebrand to Douglas. He turned upon him, white with rage.

"You drove her to this." His fists were clenched. He drew back to
strike.

Jim came from behind the wagons just in time to catch the uplifted arm.

"Leave HIM to ME, this ain't no parson's job." The pastor lowered his
arm, but kept his threatening eyes on the deacon's face.

"Where's Poll?" asked Jim.

"In there! Douglas pointed toward the main tent without turning his
head. He was still glaring at the deacon, and breathing hard.

"What?" cried Jim, in alarm. He faced about and saw Eloise. He guessed
the truth. A few quick strides brought him to the entrance curtains. He
threw them back and looked into the ring.

"My God! Why don't Barker stop her?"

"What is it?" called Douglas. He forgot the deacon in his terror at
Jim's behaviour, and Strong was able to slip away, unnoticed.

"She's goin' ter ride! She's goin' ter ride Barbarian!"

Douglas crossed to his side and looked.

Polly was springing onto the back of Barbarian. He was a poorly trained
horse, used by the other girl for more showy, but less dangerous feats
than Polly's.

"She's goin' through her regular turn with him, she's tryin' ter break
her neck," said Jim. "She wants ter do it. It's your fault!" he cried,
turning upon Douglas with bloodshot eyes. He was half insane, he cared
little whom he wounded.

"Why can't we stop her?" cried Douglas, unable to endure the strain. He
took one step inside the entrance.

"No, no; not that!" Jim dragged him back roughly. "If she sees you now,
it will be the end." They watched in silence. "She's over the first
part," Jim whispered, at last.

Douglas drew back, his muscles tense, as he watched the scene inside
the ring. Eloise stood at the pastor's side, horror-stricken at Polly's
reckless behaviour. She knew Barbarian. It was easy to guess the end.

"She's comin' to the hoops," Jim whispered, hoarsely.

"Barbarian don't know that part, I never trained him," the other girl
said.

Polly made the first leap toward the hoops. The horse was not at fault;
it was Polly. She plunged wildly, the audience started. She caught her
footing with an effort. One, two, three hoops were passed. She threw
herself across the back of the horse and hung, head downward, as he
galloped around the ring. The band was playing loudly, the people were
cheering. She rose to meet the last two hoops.

"She's swayin'," Jim shrieked in agony. "She's goin' to fall." He covered
his face with his hands.

Polly reeled and fell at the horse's side. She mounted and fell again.
She rose and staggered in pursuit.

"I can't bear it," groaned Douglas. He rushed into the ring, unconscious
of the thousands of eyes bent upon his black, ministerial garb, and
caught the slip of a girl in his arms just as she was about to sink
fainting beneath the horse's hoofs.

Barker brought the performance to a halt with a crack of his whip. The
audience stood on tiptoe. White-faced clowns and gaily attired acrobats
crowded around Polly and the pastor.

Douglas did not see them. He had come into his own.

"He's bringin' her out," whispered Eloise, who still watched at the
entrance. Jim dared not look up, his head was still in his hands.

"Is it over?" he groaned.

"I don't know. I can't tell yet." She stepped aside as Douglas came out
of the tent, followed by a swarm of performers. He knelt on the soft
grass and rested Polly's head upon his knee. The others pressed about
them. It seemed to Douglas that he waited hours; then her white lids
quivered and opened and the colour crept back to her lips.

"It's all right, Jim!" called one of the men from the crowd. "She's only
fainted." The big fellow had waited in his tracks for the verdict.

Polly's eyes looked up into those of the parson--a thrill shot through
his veins.

"It was no use, was it?" She shook her head with a sad little smile. He
knew that she was thinking of her failure to get out of his way.

"That's because I need you so much, Polly, that God won't let you go
away from me." He drew her nearer to him, and the warm blood that shot
to her cheeks brought back her strength. She rose unsteadily, and looked
about her. Jim came toward her, white and trembling.

"All right, Poll?"

"Oh, Muvver Jim!" She threw herself into his arms and clung to him,
sobbing weakly.

No one could ever remember just how the audience left the big top that
night, and even Barker had no clear idea of how Jim took down the tents,
loaded the great wagons, and sent the caravan on its way.

When the last wagon was beginning to climb the long, winding road of
the moon-lit hill, Jim turned to Polly, who stood near the side of the
deserted ring. His eyes travelled from her to the parson, who waited
near her. She was in her street clothes now, the little brown Quakerish
dress which she had chosen to wear so much since her return from the
parsonage.

"I guess I won't be makin' no mistake this time," he said, and he placed
her hand in that of the parson.

"Good-bye, Muvver Jim," faltered Polly.

He stooped and touched her forehead with his lips. A mother's spirit
breathed through his kiss.

"I'm glad it's like this," he said, then turned away and followed the
long, dotted line of winding lights disappearing slowly over the hill.

Her eyes travelled after him.

Douglas touched the cold, little hand at her side.

"I belong with them," she said, still gazing after Jim and the wagons.

"You belong with me," he answered in a firm, grave voice, and something
in the deep, sure tones told her that he was speaking the truth. She
lifted one trembling hand to his shoulder, and looked up into his face.

"Whither thou goest, will I go, where thou diest, will I die."

He drew her into his arms.

"The Lord do so to me and more also, if aught but death part thee and
me."


THE END

========================================
