========================================

version by Al Haines.










Note:

In this Etext, text in italics has been written in capital letters.

Many French words in the text have accents, etc. which have been
omitted.





FROM THE MEMOIRS OF A MINISTER OF FRANCE

BY

STANLEY WEYMAN




CONTENTS.

    I.--THE CLOCKMAKER OF POISSY
   II.--THE TENNIS BALLS
  III.--TWO MAYORS OF BOTTITORT
   IV.--LA TOUSSAINT
    V.--THE LOST CIPHER
   VI.--THE MAN OF MONCEAUX
  VII.--THE GOVERNOR OF GUERET
 VIII.--THE OPEN SHUTTER
   IX.--THE MAID OF HONOUR
    X.--FARMING THE TAXES
   XI.--THE CAT AND THE KING
  XII.--AT FONTAINEBLEAU




I.

THE CLOCKMAKER OF POISSY.


Foreseeing that some who do not love me will be swift to allege that in
the preparation of these memoirs I have set down only such things as
redound to my credit, and have suppressed the many experiences not so
propitious which fall to the lot of the most sagacious while in power,
I take this opportunity of refuting that calumny.  For the truth stands
so far the other way that my respect for the King's person has led me
to omit many things creditable to me; and some, it may be, that place
me in a higher light than any I have set down.  And not only that:  but
I propose in this very place to narrate the curious details of an
adventure wherein I showed to less advantage than usual; and on which I
should, were I moved by the petty feelings imputed to me by malice, be
absolutely silent.

One day, about a fortnight after the quarrel between the King and the
Duchess of Beaufort, which I have described, and which arose, it will
be remembered, out of my refusal to pay the christening expenses of her
second son on the scale of a child of France, I was sitting in my
lodgings at St. Germains when Maignan announced that M. de Perrot
desired to see me.  Knowing Perrot to be one of the most notorious
beggars about the court, with an insatiable maw of his own and an
endless train of nephews and nieces, I was at first for being employed;
but, reflecting that in the crisis in the King's affairs which I saw
approaching--and which must, if he pursued his expressed intention of
marrying the Duchess, be fraught with infinite danger to the State and
himself--the least help might be of the greatest moment, I bade them
admit him; privately determining to throw the odium of any refusal upon
the overweening influence of Madame de Sourdis, the Duchess's aunt.

Accordingly I met him with civility, and was not surprised when, with
his second speech, he brought out the word FAVOUR.  But I was
surprised--for, as I have said, I knew him to be the best practised
beggar in the world--to note in his manner some indications of
embarrassment and nervousness; which, when I did not immediately
assent, increased to a sensible extent.

"It is a very small thing, M. de Rosny," he said, breathing hard.

On that hint I declared my willingness to serve him.  "But," I added,
shrugging my shoulders and speaking in a confidential tone, "no one
knows the Court better than you do, M. de Perrot. You are in all our
secrets, and you must be aware that at present--I say nothing of the
Duchess, she is a good woman, and devoted to his Majesty--but there are
others--"

"I know," he answered, with a flash of malevolence that did not escape
me.  "But this is a private favour, M. de Rosny.  It is nothing that
Madame de Sourdis can desire, either for herself or for others."

That aroused my curiosity.  Only the week before, Madame de Sourdis had
obtained a Hat for her son, and the post of assistant Deputy
Comptroller of Buildings for her Groom of the Chambers. For her niece
the Duchess she meditated obtaining nothing less than a crown.  I was
at pains, therefore, to think of any office, post, or pension that
could be beyond the pale of her desires; and in a fit of gaiety I bade
M. de Perrot speak out and explain his riddle.

"It is a small thing," he said, with ill-disguised nervousness. "The
King hunts to-morrow."

"Yes," I said.

"And very commonly he rides back in your company, M. le Marquis."

"Sometimes," I said; "or with M. d'Epernon.  Or, if he is in a mood for
scandal, with M. la Varenne or Vitry."

"But with you, if you wish it, and care to contrive it so," he
persisted, with a cunning look.

I shrugged my shoulders.  "Well?"  I said, wondering more and more what
he would be at.

"I have a house on the farther side of Poissy," he continued. "And I
should take it as a favour, M. de Rosny, if you could induce the King
to dismount there to-morrow and take a cup of wine."

"That is a very small thing," I said bluntly, wondering much why he had
made so great a parade of the matter, and still more why he seemed so
ill at ease.  "Yet, after such a prelude, if any but a friend of your
tried loyalty asked it, I might expect to find Spanish liquorice in the
cup."

"That is out of the question, in my case," he answered with a slight
assumption of offence, which he immediately dropped.  "And you say it
is a small thing; it is the more easily granted, M. de Rosny."

"But the King goes and comes at his pleasure," I replied warily. "Of
course, he might-take it into his head to descend at your house.  There
would be nothing surprising in such a visit.  I think that he has paid
you one before, M. de Perrot?"

He assented eagerly.

"And he may do so," I said, smiling, "to-morrow.  But then, again, he
may not.  The chase may lead him another way; or he may be late in
returning; or--in fine, a hundred things may happen."

I had no mind to go farther than that; and I supposed that it would
satisfy him, and that he would thank me and take his leave. To my
surprise, however, he stood his ground, and even pressed me more than
was polite; while his countenance, when I again eluded him, assumed an
expression of chagrin and vexation so much in excess of the occasion as
to awaken fresh doubts in my mind.  But these only the more confirmed
me in my resolution to commit myself no farther, especially as he was
not a man I loved or could trust; and in the end he had to retire with
such comfort as I had already given him.

In itself, and on the surface, the thing seemed to be a trifle,
unworthy of the serious consideration of any man.  But in so far as it
touched the King's person and movements, I was inclined to view it in
another light; and this the more, as I still had fresh in my memory the
remarkable manner in which Father Cotton, the Jesuit, had given me a
warning by a word about a boxwood fire. After a moment's thought,
therefore, I summoned Boisrueil, one of my gentlemen, who had an
acknowledged talent for collecting gossip; and I told him in a casual
way that M. de Perrot had been with me.

"He has not been at Court for a week," he remarked.

"Indeed?"  I said.

"He applied for the post of Assistant Deputy Comptroller of Buildings
for his nephew, and took offence when it was given to Madame de
Sourdis' Groom of the Chambers."

"Ha!"  I said; "a dangerous malcontent."

Boisrueil smiled.  "He has lived a week out of the sunshine of his
Majesty's countenance, your excellency.  After that, all things are
possible."

This was my own estimate of the man, whom I took to be one of those
smug, pliant self-seekers whom Courts and peace breed up. I could
imagine no danger that could threaten the King from such a quarter;
while curiosity inclined me to grant his request.  As it happened, the
deer the next day took us in the direction of Poissy, and the King, who
was always itching to discuss with me the question of his projected
marriage, and as constantly, since our long talk in the garden at
Rennes, avoiding the subject when with me, bade me ride home with him.
On coming within half a mile of Perrot's I let fall his name, and in a
very natural way suggested that the King should alight there for a few
minutes.

It was one of the things Henry delighted to do, for, endowed with the
easiest manners, and able in a moment to exchange the formality of the
Louvre for the freedom of the camp, he could give to such cheap favours
their full value.  He consented on the instant, therefore; and turning
our horses into a by-road, we sauntered down it with no greater
attendance than a couple of pages.

The sun was near setting, and its rays, which still gilded the
tree-tops, left the wood below pensive and melancholy.  The house stood
in a solitary place on the edge of the forest, half a mile from Poissy;
and these two things had their effect on my mind.  I began to wish that
we had brought with us half a troop of horse, or at least two or three
gentlemen; and, startled by the thought of the unknown chances to
which, out of mere idle curiosity, I was exposing the King, I would
gladly have turned back.  But without explanation I could not do so;
and while I hesitated Henry cried out gaily that we were there.

A short avenue of limes led from the forest road to the door.  I looked
curiously before us as we rode under the trees, in some fear lest M. de
Perrot's preparations should discover my complicity, and apprise the
King that he was expected.  But so far was this from being the case
that no one appeared; the house rose still and silent in the mellow
light of sunset, and, for all that we could see, might have been the
fabled palace of enchantment.

"'He is Jean de Nivelle's dog; he runs away when you call him,'" the
King quoted.  "Get down, Rosny.  We have reached the palace of the
Sleeping Princess.  It remains only to sound the horn, and--"

I was in the act of dismounting, with my back to him, when his words
came to this sudden stop.  I turned to learn what caused it, and saw
standing in the aperture of the wicket, which had been silently opened,
a girl, little more than a child, of the most striking beauty.
Surprise shone in her eyes, and shyness and alarm had brought the
colour to her cheeks; while the level rays of the sun, which forced her
to screen her eyes with one small hand, clothed her figure in a robe of
lucent glory.  I heard the King whistle low.  Before I could speak he
had flung himself from his horse and, throwing the reins to one of the
pages, was bowing before her.

"We were about to sound the horn, Mademoiselle," he said, smiling.

"The horn, Monsieur?"  she exclaimed, opening her eyes in wonder, and
staring at him with the prettiest face of astonishment.

"Yes, Mademoiselle; to awaken the sleeping princess," he rejoined.
"But I see that she is already awake."

Through the innocence of her eyes flashed a sudden gleam of archness.
"Monsieur flatters himself," she said, with a smile that just revealed
the whiteness of her teeth.

It was such an answer as delighted the King; who loved, above all
things, a combination of wit and beauty, and never for any long time
wore the chains of a woman who did not unite sense to more showy
attractions.  From the effect which the grace and freshness of the girl
had on me, I could judge in a degree of the impression made on him; his
next words showed not only its depth, but that he was determined to
enjoy the adventure to the full. He presented me to her as M. de Sage,
and inquiring affectionately after Perrot, learned in a trice that she
was his niece, not long from a convent at Loches; finally, begging to
be allowed to rest awhile, he dropped a gallant hint that a cup of wine
from her hands would be acceptable.

All this, and her innocent doubt what she ought to do, thus brought
face to face with two strange cavaliers, threw the girl into such a
state of blushing confusion as redoubled her charms. It appeared that
her uncle had been summoned unexpectedly to Marly, and had taken his
son with him; and that the household had seized the occasion to go to a
village FETE at Acheres.  Only an old servant remained in the house;
who presently appeared and took her orders.  I saw from the man's start
of consternation that he knew the King; but a glance from Henry's eyes
bidding me keep up the illusion, I followed the fellow and charged him
not to betray the King's incognito.  When I returned, I found that
Mademoiselle had conducted her visitor to a grassy terrace which ran
along the south side of the house, and was screened from the forest by
an alley of apple trees, and from the east wind by a hedge of yew.
Here, where the last rays of the sun threw sinuous shadows on the turf,
and Paris seemed a million miles away, they were walking up and down,
the sound of their laughter breaking the woodland silence.
Mademoiselle had a fan, with which and an air of convent coquetry she
occasionally shaded her eyes.  The King carried his hat in his hand.
It was such an adventure as he loved, with all his heart; and I stood a
little way off, smiling, and thinking grimly of M. de Perrot.

On a sudden, hearing a step behind me, I turned, and saw a young man in
a riding-dress come quickly through an opening in the yew hedge.  As I
turned, he stopped; his jaw fell, and he stood rooted to the ground,
gazing at the two on the terrace, while his face, which a moment before
had worn an air of pleased expectancy, grew on a sudden dark with
passion, and put on such a look as made me move towards him.  Before I
reached him, However, M. de Perrot himself appeared at his side.  The
young man flashed round on him.  "MON DIEU, sir!"  he cried, in a voice
choked with anger; "I see it all now!  I understand why I was carried
away to Marly!  I--but it shall not be!  I swear it shall not!"

Between him and me--for, needless to say, I, too, understood all--M. de
Perrot was awkwardly placed.  But he showed the presence of mind of the
old courtier.  "Silence, sir!"  He exclaimed imperatively.  "Do you not
see M. de Rosny?  Go to him at once and pay your respects to him, and
request him to honour you with his protection.  Or--I see that you are
overcome by the honour which the King does us.  Go, first, and change
your dress.  Go, boy!"

The lad retired sullenly, and M. de Perrot, free to deal with me alone,
approached me, smiling assiduously, and trying hard to hide some
consciousness and a little shame under a mask of cordiality.  "A
thousand pardons, M. de Rosny," he cried with effusion, "for an absence
quite unpardonable.  But I so little expected to see his Majesty after
what you said, and--"

"Are in no hurry to interrupt him now you are here," I replied bluntly,
determined that, whoever he deceived, he should not flatter himself he
deceived me.  "Pooh, man!  I am not a fool," I continued.

"What is this?"  he cried, with a desperate attempt to keep up the
farce.  "I don't understand you!"

"No, the shoe is on the other foot--I understand you," I replied drily.
"Chut, man!"  I continued, "you don't make a cats-paw of me.  I see the
game.  You are for sitting in Madame de Sourdis' seat, and giving your
son a Hat, and your groom a Comptrollership, and your niece a--"

"Hush, hush, M. de Rosny," he muttered, turning white and red, and
wiping his brow with his kerchief.  "MON DIEU!  your words might--"

"If overheard, make things very unpleasant for M. de Perrot," I said.

"And M. de Rosny?"

I shrugged my shoulders contemptuously.  "Tush, man!"  I said. "Do you
think that I sit in no safer seat than that?"

"Ah!  But when Madame de Beaufort is Queen?"  he said slily.

"If she ever is," I replied, affecting greater confidence than I at
that time felt.

"Well, to be sure," he said slowly, "if she ever is."  And he looked
towards the King and his companion, who were still chatting gaily.
Then he stole a crafty glance at me.  "Do you wish her to be?"  he
muttered.

"Queen?"  I said, "God forbid!"

"It would be a disgrace to France?"  he whispered; and he laid his hand
on my arm, and looked eagerly into my face.

"Yes," I said.

"A blot on his fame?"

I nodded.

"A--a slur on a score of noble families?"

I could not deny it.

"Then--is it not worth while to avoid all that?"  he murmured, his face
pale, and his small eyes glued to mine.  "Is it not worth a
little--sacrifice, M. de Rosny?"

"And risk?"  I said.  "Possibly."

While the words were still on my lips, something stirred close to us,
behind the yew hedge beside which we were standing.  Perrot darted in a
moment to the opening, and I after him.  We were just in time to catch
a glimpse of a figure disappearing round the corner of the house.
"Well," I said grimly, "what about being overheard now?"

M. de Perrot wiped his face.  "Thank Heaven!"  he said, "it was only my
son.  Now let me explain to you--"

But our hasty movement had caught the King's eye, and he came towards
us, covering himself as he approached.  I had now an opportunity of
learning whether the girl was, in fact, as innocent as she seemed, and
as every particular of our reception had declared her; and I watched
her closely when Perrot's mode of address betrayed the King's identity.
Suffice it that the vivid blush which on the instant suffused her face,
and the lively emotion which almost overcame her, left me in no doubt.
With a charming air of bashfulness, and just so much timid awkwardness
as rendered her doubly bewitching, she tried to kneel and kiss the
King's hand.  He would not permit this, however, but saluted her cheek.

"It seems that you were right, sire," she murmured, curtseying in a
pretty confusion, "The princess was not awake."

Henry laughed gaily.  "Come now; tell me frankly, Mademoiselle," he
said.  "For whom did you take me?"

"Not for the King, sire," she answered, with a gleam of roguishness.
"You told me that the King was a good man, whose benevolent impulses
were constantly checked--"

"Ah!"

"By M. de Rosny, his Minister."

The outburst of laughter which greeted this apprised her that she was
again at fault; and Henry, who liked nothing better than such
mystifications, introducing me by my proper name, we diverted ourselves
for some minutes with her alarm and excuses.  After that it was time to
take leave, if we would sup at home and the King would not be missed;
and accordingly, but not without some further badinage, in which
Mademoiselle de Brut displayed wit equal to her beauty, and an
agreeable refinement not always found with either, we departed.

It should be clearly understood at this point, that, notwithstanding
all I have set down, I was fully determined (in accordance with a rule
I have constantly followed, and would enjoin on all who do not desire
to find themselves one day saddled with an ugly name) to have no part
in the affair; and this though the advantage of altering the King's
intentions towards Madame de Beaufort was never more vividly present to
my mind.  As we rode, indeed, he put several questions concerning the
Baron, and his family, and connections; and, falling into a reverie,
and smiling a good deal at his thoughts, left me in no doubt as to the
impression made upon him.  But being engaged at the time with the
Spanish treaty, and resolved, as I have said, to steer a course
uninfluenced by such intrigues, I did not let my mind dwell upon the
matter; nor gave it, indeed, a second thought until the next afternoon,
when, sitting at an open window of my lodging, I heard a voice in the
street ask where the Duchess de Beaufort had her apartment.

The voice struck a chord in my memory, and I looked out.  The man who
had put the question, and who was now being directed on his way--by
Maignan, my equerry, as it chanced had his back to me, and I could see
only that he was young, shabbily dressed, and with the air of a workman
carried a small frail of tools on his shoulder.  But presently, in the
act of thanking Maignan, he turned so that I saw his face, and with
that it flashed upon me in a moment who he was.

Accustomed to follow a train of thought quickly, and to act; on its
conclusion with energy, I had Maignan called and furnished with his
instructions before the man had gone twenty paces; and within the
minute I had the satisfaction of seeing the two return together.  As
they passed under the window I heard my servant explaining with the
utmost naturalness that he had misunderstood the stranger, and that
this was Madame de Beaufort's; after which scarce a minute elapsed
before the door of my room opened, and he appeared ushering in young
Perrot!

Or so it seemed to me; and the start of surprise and consternation
which escaped the stranger when he first saw me confirmed me in the
impression.  But a moment later I doubted; so natural was the posture
into which the man fell, and so stupid the look of inquiry which he
turned first on me and then on Maignan.  As he stood before me,
shifting his feet and staring about him in vacant wonder, I began to
think that I had made a mistake; and, clearly, either I had done so or
this young man was possessed of talents and a power of controlling his
features beyond the ordinary.  He unslung his tools, and saluting me
abjectly waited in silence.  After a moment's thought, I asked him
peremptorily what was his errand with the Duchess de Beaufort.

"To show her a watch, your excellency," he stammered, his mouth open,
his eyes staring.  I could detect no flaw in his acting.

"What are you, then?"  I said.

"A clockmaker, my lord."

"Has Madame sent for you?"

"No, my lord," he stuttered, trembling.

"Do you want to sell her the watch?"

He muttered that he did; and that he meant no harm by it.

"Show it to me, then," I said curtly.

He grew red at that, and seemed for an instant not to understand. But
on my repeating the order he thrust his hand into his breast, and
producing a parcel began to unfasten it.  This he did so slowly that I
was soon for thinking that there was no watch in it; but in the end he
found one and handed it to me.

"You did not make this," I said, opening it.

"No, my lord," he answered; "it is German, and old."

I saw that it was of excellent workmanship, and I was about to hand it
back to him, almost persuaded that I had made a mistake, when in a
second my doubts were solved.  Engraved on the thick end of the egg,
and partly erased by wear, was a dog's head, which I knew to be the
crest of the Perrots.

"So," I said, preparing to return it to him, "you are a clockmaker?"

"Yes, your excellency," he muttered.  And I thought that I caught the
sound of a sigh of relief.

I gave the watch to Maignan to hand to him.  "Very well," I said. "I
have need of one.  The clock in the next room--a gift from his
Majesty--is out of order, and at a standstill.  You can go and attend
to it; and see that you do so skilfully.  And do you, Maignan," I
continued with meaning, "go with him.  When he has made the clock go,
let him go; and not before, or you answer for it.  You understand,
sirrah?"

Maignan saluted obsequiously, and in a moment hurried young Perrot from
the room; leaving me to congratulate myself on the strange and
fortuitous circumstance that had thrown him in my way, and enabled me
to guard against a RENCONTRE that might have had the most embarassing
consequences.

It required no great sagacity to foresee the next move; and I was not
surprised when, about an hour later, I heard a clatter of hoofs
outside, and a voice inquiring hurriedly for the Marquis de Rosny.  One
of my people announced M. de Perrot, and I bade them admit him.  In a
twinkling he came up, pale with heat, and covered with dust, his eyes
almost starting from his head and his cheeks trembling with agitation.
Almost before the door was shut, he cried out that we were undone.

I was willing to divert myself with him for a time, and I pretended to
know nothing.  "What?"  I said, rising.  "Has the King met with an
accident?"

"Worse!  worse!"  he cried, waving his hat with a gesture of despair.
"My son--you saw my son yesterday?"

"Yes," I said.

"He overheard us!"

"Not us," I said drily.  "You.  But what then, M. de Perrot?  You are
master in your own house."

"But he is not in my house," he wailed.  "He has gone!  Fled! Decamped!
I had words with him this morning, you understand."

"About your niece?"

M. de Perrot's face took a delicate shade of red, and he nodded; he
could not speak.  He seemed for an instant in danger of some kind of
fit.  Then he found his voice again.  "The fool prated of love!  Of
love!"  he said with such a look--like that of a dying fowl--that I
could have laughed aloud.  "And when I bade him remember his duty he
threatened me.  He, that unnatural boy, threatened to betray me, to
ruin me, to go to Madame de Beaufort and tell her all--all, you
understand.  And I doing so much, and making such sacrifices for him!"

"Yes," I said, "I see that.  And what did you do?"

"I broke my cane on his back," M. de Perrot answered with unction, "and
locked him in his room.  But what is the use?  The boy has no natural
feelings!"

"He got out through the window?"

Perrot nodded; and being at leisure, now that he had explained his
woes, to feel their full depth, shed actual tears of rage and terror;
now moaning that Madame would never forgive him, and that if he escaped
the Bastille he would lose all his employments and be the
laughing-stock of the Court; and now striving to show that his peril
was mine, and that it was to my interest to help him.

I allowed him to go on in this strain for some time, and then, having
sufficiently diverted myself with his forebodings, I bade him in an
altered voice to take courage.  "For I think I know," I said, "where
your son is."

"At Madame's?"  he groaned.

"No; here," I said.

"MON DIEU!  Where?"  he cried.  And he sprang up, startled out of his
lamentations.

"Here; in my lodging," I answered.

"My son is here?"  he said.

"In the next room," I replied, smiling indulgently at his astonishment,
which was only less amusing than his terror.  "I have but to touch this
bell, and Maignan will bring him to you."

Full of wonder and admiration, he implored me to ring and have him
brought immediately; since until he had set eyes on him he could not
feel safe.  Accordingly I rang my hand-bell, and Maignan opened the
door.  "The clockmaker," I said nodding.

He looked at me stupidly.  "The clock-maker, your excellency?"

"Yes; bring him in," I said.

"But--he has gone!"  he exclaimed.

"Gone?" I cried, scarcely able to believe my ears.  "Gone, sirrah!  and
I told you to detain him!"

"Until he had mended the clock, my lord," Maignan stammered, quite out
of countenance.  "But he set it going half-an-hour ago; and I let him
go, according to your order."

It is in the face of such CONTRETEMPS as these that the low-bred man
betrays himself.  Yet such was my chagrin on this occasion, and so
sudden the shock, that it was all I could do to maintain my SANGFROID,
and, dismissing Maignan with a look, be content to punish M. de Perrot
with a sneer.  "I did not know that your son was a tradesman," I said.
He wrung his hands.  "He has low tastes," he cried.  "He always had.
He has amused himself that way, And now by this time he is with Madame
de Beaufort and we are undone!"

"Not we," I answered curtly; "speak for yourself, M. de Perrot."

But though, having no mind to appear in his eyes dependent on Madame's
favour or caprice, I thus checked his familiarity, I am free to confess
that my calmness was partly assumed; and that, though I knew my
position to be unassailable--based as it was on solid services rendered
to the King, my master, and on the familiar affection with which he
honoured me through so many years--I could not view the prospect of a
fresh collision with Madame without some misgiving.  Having gained the
mastery in the two quarrels we had had, I was the less inclined to
excite her to fresh intrigues; and as unwilling to give the King reason
to think that we could not live at peace.  Accordingly, after a
moment's consideration, I told Perrot that, rather than he should
suffer, I would go to Madame de Beaufort myself, and give such
explanations as would place another complexion on the matter.

He overwhelmed me with thanks, and, besides, to show his gratitude--for
he was still on thorns, picturing her wrath and resentment he insisted
on accompanying me to the Cloitre de St. Germain, where Madame had her
apartment.  By the way, he asked me what I should say to her.

"Whatever will get you out of the scrape," I answered curtly.

"Then anything!"  he cried with fervour.  "Anything, my dear friend.
Oh, that unnatural boy!"

"I suppose that the girl is as big a fool?"  I said.

"Bigger!  bigger!"  he answered.  "I don't know where she learned such
things!"

"She prated of love, too, then?"

"To be sure," he groaned, "and without a sou of DOT!"

"Well, well," I said, "here we are.  I will do what I can."

Fortunately the King was not there, and Madame would receive me. I
thought, indeed, that her doors flew open with suspicious speed, and
that way was made for me more easily than usual; and I soon found that
I was not wrong in the inference I drew from these facts.  For when I
entered her chamber that remarkable woman, who, whatever her enemies
may say, combined with her beauty a very uncommon degree of sense and
discretion, met me with a low courtesy and a smile of derision.  "So,"
she said, "M. de Rosny, not satisfied with furnishing me with evidence,
gives me proof."

"How, Madame?"  I said; though I well understood.

"By his presence here," she answered.  "An hour ago," she continued,
"the King was with me.  I had not then the slightest ground to expect
this honour, or I am sure that his Majesty would have stayed to share
it.  But I have since seen reason to expect it, and you observe that I
am not unprepared."

She spoke with a sparkling eye, and an expression of the most lively
resentment; so that, had M. de Perrot been in my place I think that he
would have shed more tears.  I was myself somewhat dashed, though I
knew the prudence that governed her in her most impetuous sallies;
still, to avoid the risk of hearing things which we might both
afterwards wish unsaid, I came to the point. "I fear that I have timed
my visit ill, Madame," I said.  "You have some complaint against me."

"Only that you are like the others," she answered with a fine contempt.
"You profess one thing and do another."

"As for example?"

"For example!"  she replied, with a scornful laugh.  "How many times
have you told me that you left women, and intrigues in which women had
part, on one side?"

I bowed.

"And now I find you--you and that Perrot, that creature!--intriguing
against me; intriguing with some country chit to--"

"Madame!"  I said, cutting her short with a show of temper, "where did
you get this?"

"Do you deny it?"  she cried, looking so beautiful in her anger that I
thought I had never seen her to such advantage.  "Do you deny that you
took the King there?"

"No.  Certainly I took the King there."

"To Perrot's?  You admit it?"

"Certainly," I said, "for a purpose."

"A purpose!"  she cried with withering scorn.  "Was it not that the
King might see that girl?"

"Yes," I replied patiently, "it was."

She stared at me.  "And you can tell me that to my face!"  she said.

"I see no reason why I should not, Madame," I replied easily--"I cannot
conceive why you should object to the union--and many why you should
desire to see two people happy.  Otherwise, if I had had any idea, even
the slightest, that the matter was obnoxious to you, I would not have
engaged in it."

"But--what was your purpose then?"  she muttered, in a different tone.

"To obtain the King's good word with M. de Perrot to permit the
marriage of his son with his niece; who is, unfortunately, without a
portion."

Madame uttered a low exclamation, and her eyes wandering from me, she
took up--as if her thoughts strayed also--a small ornament; from the
table beside her.  "Ah!"  she said, looking at it closely.  "But
Perrot's son did he know of this?"

"No," I answered, smiling.  "But I have heard that women can love as
well as men, Madame.  And sometimes ingenuously."

I heard her draw a sigh of relief, and I knew that if I had not
persuaded her I had accomplished much.  I was not surprised when,
laying down the ornament with which she had been toying, she turned on
me one of those rare smiles to which the King could refuse nothing; and
wherein wit, tenderness, and gaiety were so happily blended that no
conceivable beauty of feature, uninspired by sensibility, could vie
with them.  "Good friend, I have sinned," she said.  "But I am a woman,
and I love.  Pardon me. As for your PROTEGEE, from this moment she is
mine also.  I will speak to the King this evening; and if he does not
at once," Madame continued, with a gleam of archness that showed me
that she was not yet free from suspicion, "issue his commands to M. de
Perrot, I shall know what to think; and his Majesty will suffer!"

I thanked her profusely, and in fitting terms.  Then, after a word or
two about some assignments for the expenses of her household, in
settling which there had been delay--a matter wherein, also, I
contrived to do her pleasure and the King's service no wrong--I very
willingly took my leave, and, calling my people, started homewards on
foot.  I had not gone twenty paces, however, before M. de Perrot, whose
impatience had chained him to the spot, crossed the street and joined
himself to me.  "My dear friend," he cried, embracing me fervently, "is
all well?"

"Yes," I said.

"She is appeased?"

"Absolutely."

He heaved a deep sigh of relief, and, almost crying in his joy, began
to thank me, with all the extravagance of phrase and gesture to which
men of his mean spirit are prone.  Through all I heard him silently,
and with secret amusement, knowing that the end was not yet.  At length
he asked me what explanation I had given.

"The only explanation possible," I answered bluntly.  "I had to combat
Madame's jealousy.  I did it in the only way in which it could be done:
by stating that your niece loved your son, and by imploring her good
word on their behalf."

He sprang a pace from me with a cry of rage and astonishment. "You did
that?"  he screamed.

"Softly, softly, M. de Perrot," I said, in a voice which brought him
somewhat to his senses.  "Certainly I did.  You bade me say whatever
was necessary, and I did so.  No more.  If you wish, however," I added
grimly, "to explain to Madame that--"

But with a wail of lamentation he rushed from me, and in a moment was
lost in the darkness; leaving me to smile at this odd termination of an
intrigue that, but for a lad's adroitness, might have altered the
fortunes not of M. de Perrot only but of the King my master and of
France.




II.

THE TENNIS BALLS.


A few weeks before the death of the Duchess of Beaufort, on Easter Eve,
1599, made so great a change in the relations of all at Court that
"Sourdis mourning" came to be a phrase for grief, genuine because
interested, an affair that might have had a serious issue began,
imperceptibly at the time, in the veriest trifle.

One day, while the King was still absent from Paris, I had a mind to
play tennis, and for that purpose summoned La Trape, who had the charge
of my balls, and sometimes, in the absence of better company, played
with me.  Of late the balls he bought had given me small satisfaction,
and I bade him bring me the bag, that I might choose the best.  He did
so, and I had not handled half-a-dozen before I found one, and later
three others, so much more neatly sewn than the rest, and in all points
so superior, that even an untrained eye could not fail to detect the
difference.

"Look, man!"  I said, holding out one of these for his inspection.
"These are balls; the rest are rubbish.  Cannot you see the difference?
Where did you buy these?  At Constant's?"

He muttered, "No, my lord," and looked confused.

This roused my curiosity.  "Where, then?"  I said sharply.

"Of a man who was at the gate yesterday."

"Oh!"  I said.  "Selling tennis balls?"

"Yes, my lord."

"Some rogue of a marker," I exclaimed, "from whom you bought filched
goods!  Who was it, man?"

"I don't know his name," La Trape answered.  "He was a Spaniard."

"Well?"

"Who wanted to have an audience of your excellency."

"Ho!"  I said drily.  "Now I understand.  Bring me your book. Or, tell
me, what have you charged me for these balls?"

"Two francs," he muttered reluctantly.

"And never gave a sou, I'll swear!"  I retorted.  "You took the poor
devil's balls, and left him at the gate!  Ay, it is rogues like you get
me a bad name!"  I continued, affecting more anger than I felt--for, in
truth, I was rather pleased with my quickness in discovering the cheat.
"You steal and I bear the blame, and pay to boot!  Off with you and
find the fellow, and bring him to me, or it will be the worse for you!"

Glad to escape so easily, La Trape ran to the gate; but he failed to
find his friend, and two or three days elapsed before I thought again
of the matter, such petty rogueries being ingrained in a great man's
VALETAILLE, and being no more to be removed than the hairs from a man's
arm.  At the end of that time La Trape came to me, bringing the
Spaniard; who had appeared again at the gate.  The stranger proved to
be a small, slight man, pale and yet brown, with quick-glancing eyes.
His dress was decent, but very poor, with more than one rent neatly
darned.  He made me a profound reverence, and stood waiting, with his
cap in his hand, to be addressed; but, with all his humility, I did not
fail to detect an easiness of deportment and a propriety that did not
seem absolutely strange since he was a Spaniard, but which struck me,
nevertheless, as requiring some explanation.  I asked him, civilly, who
he was.  He answered that his name was Diego.

"You speak French?"

"I am of Guipuzcoa, my lord," he answered, "where we sometimes speak
three tongues."

"That is true," I said.  "And it is your trade to make tennis balls?"

"No, my lord; to use them," he answered with a certain dignity.

"You are a player, then?"

"If it please your excellency."

"Where have you played?"

"At Madrid, where I was the keeper of the Duke of Segovia's court; and
at Toledo, where I frequently had the honour of playing against M. de
Montserrat."

"You are a good player?"

"If your excellency," he answered impulsively, "will give me an
opportunity--"

"Softly, softly," I said, somewhat taken aback by his earnestness.
"Granted that you are a player, you seem to have played to small
purpose.. Why are you here, my friend, and not in Madrid?"

He drew up his sleeves, and showed me that his wrists were deeply
scarred.

I shrugged my shoulders.  "You have been in the hands of the Holy
Brotherhood?"  I said.

"No, my lord," he answered bitterly.  "Of the Holy Inquisition."

"You are a Protestant?"

He bowed.

On that I fell to considering him with more attention, but at the same
time with some distrust; reflecting that he was a Spaniard, and
recalling the numberless plots against his Majesty of which that nation
had been guilty.  Still, if his tale were true he deserved support;
with a view therefore to testing this I questioned him farther, and
learned that he had for a long time disguised his opinions, until,
opening them in an easy moment to a fellow servant, he found himself
upon the first occasion of quarrel betrayed to the Fathers.  After
suffering much, and giving himself up for lost in their dungeons, he
made his escape in a manner sufficiently remarkable, if I might believe
his story.  In the prison with him lay a Moor, for whose exchange
against a Christian taken by the Sallee pirates an order came down.  It
arrived in the evening; the Moor was to be removed in the morning.  An
hour after the arrival of the news, however, and when the two had just
been locked up for the night, the Moor, overcome with excess of joy,
suddenly expired.  At first the Spaniard was for giving the alarm; but,
being an ingenious fellow, in a few minutes he summoned all his wits
together and made a plan.  Contriving to blacken his face and hands
with charcoal he changed clothes with the corpse, and muffling himself
up after the fashion of the Moors in a cold climate he succeeded in the
early morning in passing out in his place.  Those who had charge of him
had no reason to expect an escape, and once on the road he had little
difficulty in getting away, and eventually reached France after a
succession of narrow chances.

All this the man told me so simply that I knew not which to admire
more, the daring of his device--since for a white man to pass for a
brown is beyond the common scope of such disguises--or his present
modesty in relating it.  However, neither of these things seemed to my
mind a good reason for disbelief.  As to the one, I considered that an
impostor would have put forward something more simple; and as to the
other, I have all my life long observed that those who have had strange
experiences tell them in a very ordinary way.  Besides, I had fresh in
my mind the diverting escape of the Duke of Nemours from Lyons, which I
have elsewhere related.  On the other hand, and despite all these
things, the story might be false; so with a view to testing one part of
it, at least, I bade him come and play with me that afternoon.

"My lord," he said bluntly, "I had rather not.  For if I defeat your
excellency, I may defeat also your good intentions.  And if I permit
you to win, I shall seem to be an impostor."

Somewhat surprised by his forethought, I reassured him on this point;
and his game, which proved to be one of remarkable strength and
finesse, and fairly on an equality, as it seemed to me, with that of
the best French players, persuaded me that at any rate the first part
of his tale was true.  Accordingly I made him a present, and, in
addition, bade Maignan pay him a small allowance for a while.  For this
he showed his gratitude by attaching himself to my household; and as it
was the fashion at that time to keep tennis masters of this class, I
found it occasionally amusing to pit him against other well-known
players. In the course of a few weeks he gained me great credit; and
though I am not so foolish as to attach importance to such trifles,
but, on the contrary, think an old soldier who stood fast at Coutras,
or even a clerk who has served the King honestly--if such a prodigy
there be--more deserving than these professors, still I do not err on
the other side; but count him a fool who, because he has solid cause to
value himself, disdains the ECLAT which the attachment of such persons
gives him in the public eye.

The man went by the name of Diego the Spaniard, and his story, which
gradually became known, together with the excellence of his play, made
him so much the fashion that more than one tried to detach him from my
service.  The King heard of him, and would have played with him, but
the sudden death of Madame de Beaufort, which occurred soon afterwards,
threw the Court into mourning; and for a while, in pursuing the
negotiations for the King's divorce, and in conducting a correspondence
of the most delicate character with the Queen, I lost sight of my
player--insomuch, that I scarcely knew whether he still formed part of
my suite or not.

My attention was presently recalled to him, however, in a rather
remarkable manner.  One morning Don Antonio d'Evora, Secretary to the
Spanish Embassy, and a brother of that d'Evora who commanded the
Spanish Foot at Paris in '94, called on me at the Arsenal, to which I
had just removed, and desired to see me.  I bade them admit him; but as
my secretaries were at the time at work with me, I left them and
received him in the garden--supposing that he wished to speak to me,
about the affair of Saluces, and preferring, like the King my master,
to talk of matters of State in the open air.

However, I was mistaken.  Don Antonio said nothing about Savoy, but
after the usual preliminaries, which a Spaniard never omits, plunged
into a long harangue upon the comity which, now that peace reigned,
should exist between the two nations.  For some time I waited patiently
to learn what he would be at; but he seemed to be lost in his own
eloquence, and at last I took him up.

"All this is very well, M. d'Evora," I said.  "I quite agree with you
that the times are changed, that amity is not the same thing as war,
and that a grain of sand in the eye is unpleasant," for he had said all
of these things.  "But I fail, being a plain man and no diplomatist, to
see what you want me to do."

"It is the smallest matter," he said, waving his hand gracefully.

"And yet," I retorted, "you seem to find a difficulty in coming at it."

"As you do at the grain of sand in the eye," he answered wittily.
"After all, however, in what you say, M. de Rosny, there is some truth.
I feel that I am, on delicate ground; but I am sure that you will
pardon me.  You have in your suite a certain Diego."

"It may be so," I said, masking my surprise, and affecting indifference.

"A tennis-player."

I shrugged my shoulders.  "The man is known," I said.

"A Protestant?"

"It is not impossible."

"And a subject of the King, my master.  A man," Don Antonio continued,
with increasing stiffness, "in fine, M. de Rosny, who, after committing
various offences, murdered his comrade in prison, and, escaping in his
clothes, took refuge in this country."

I shrugged my shoulders again.

"I have no knowledge of that," I said coldly.

"No, or I am sure that you would not harbour the fellow," the secretary
answered.  "Now that you do know it, however, I take it for granted
that you will dismiss him?  If you held any but the great place you do
hold, M. de Rosny, it would be different; but all the world see who
follow you, and this man's presence stains you, and is an offence to my
master."

"Softly, softly, M. d'Evora," I said, with a little warmth.  "You go
too fast.  Let me tell you first, that, for my honour, I take care of
it myself; and, secondly, for your master, I do not allow even my own
to meddle with my household."

"But, my lord," he said pompously, "the King of Spain--"

"Is the King of Spain," I answered, cutting him short without much
ceremony.  "But in the Arsenal of Paris, which, for the present, is my
house, I am king.  And I brook no usurpers, M. d'Evora."

He assented to that with a constrained smile.

"Then I can say no more," he answered.  "I have warned you that the man
is a rogue.  If you will still entertain him, I wash my hands of it.
But I fear the consequences, M. de Rosny, and, frankly, it lessens my
opinion of your sagacity."

Thereat I bowed in my turn, and after the exchange of some civilities
he took his leave.  Considering his application after he was gone, I
confess that I found nothing surprising in it; and had it come from a
man whom I held in greater respect I might have complied with it in an
indirect fashion.  But though it might have led me under some
circumstances to discard Diego, naturally, since it confirmed his story
in some points, and proved besides that he was not a persona grata at
the Spanish Embassy, it did not lead me to value him less.  And as
within the week he was so fortunate as to defeat La Varenne's champion
in a great match at the Louvre, and won also a match, at M. de
Montpensier's which put fifty crowns into my pocket, I thought less and
less of d'Evora's remonstrance; until the king's return put it quite
out of my head.  The entanglement with Mademoiselle d'Entragues, which
was destined to be the most fatal of all Henry's attachments, was then
in the forming; and the king plunged into every kind of amusement with
fresh zest.  The very day after his return he matched his marker, a
rogue, but an excellent player, against my man; and laid me twenty
crowns on the event, the match to be played on the following Saturday
after a dinner which M. de Lude was giving in honour of the lady.

On the Thursday, however, who should come in to me, while I was sitting
alone after supper, but Maignan:  who, closing the door and dismissing
the page who waited there, told me with a very long face and an air of
vast importance that he had discovered something.

"Something?"  I said, being inclined at the moment to be merry. "What?
A plot to reduce your perquisites, you rascal?"

"No, my lord," he answered stoutly.  "But to tap your excellency's
secrets."

"Indeed," I said pleasantly, not believing a word of it.  "And who is
to hang?"

"The Spaniard," he answered in a low voice.

That sobered me, by putting the matter in a new light; and I sat a
moment looking at him and reviewing Diego's story, which assumed on the
instant an aspect so uncommon and almost incredible that I wondered how
I had ever allowed it to pass. But when I proceeded from this to the
substance of Maignan's charge I found an IMPASSE in this direction
also, and I smiled. "So it is Diego, is it?"  I said.  "You think that
he is a spy?"

Maignan nodded.

"Then, tell me," I asked, "what opportunity has he of learning more
than all the world knows?  He has not been in my apartments since I
engaged him.  He has seen none of my papers.  The youngest footboy
could tell all he has learned."

"True, my lord," Maignan answered slowly; "but--"

"Well?"

"I saw him this evening, talking with a Priest in the Rue Petits Pois;
and he calls himself a Protestant."

"Ah!  You are sure that the man was a priest?"

"I know him."

"For whom?"

"One of the chaplains at the Spanish Embassy."

It was natural that after this I should take a more serious view of the
matter; and I did so.  But my former difficulty still remained, for,
assuming this to be a cunning plot, and d'Evora's application to me a
ruse to throw me off my guard, I could not see where their advantage
lay; since the Spaniard's occupation was not of a nature to give him
the entry to my confidence or the chance of ransacking my papers.  I
questioned Maignan further, therefore, but without result.  He had seen
the two together in a secret kind of way, viewing them himself from the
window of a house where he had an assignation.  He had not been near
enough to hear what they said, but he was sure that no quarrel took
place between them, and equally certain that it was no chance meeting
that brought them together.

Infected by his assurance, I could still see no issue; and no object in
such an intrigue.  And in the end I contented myself with bidding him
watch the Spaniard closely, and report to me the following evening;
adding that he might confide the matter to La Trape, who was a supple
fellow, and of the two the easier companion.

Accordingly, next evening Maignan again appeared, this time with a face
even longer; so that at first I supposed him to have discovered a plot
worse than Chastel's; but it turned out that he had discovered nothing.
The Spaniard had spent the morning in lounging and the afternoon in
practice at the Louvre, and from first to last had conducted himself in
the most innocent manner possible.  On this I rallied Maignan on his
mare's nest, and was inclined to dismiss the matter as such; still,
before doing so, I thought I would see La Trape, and dismissing Maignan
I sent for him.

When he was come, "Well," I said, "have you anything to say?"

"One little thing only, your excellency," he answered slyly, "and of no
importance."

"But you did not tell it to Maignan?"

"No, my Lord," he replied, his face relaxing in a cunning smile.

"Well?"

"Once to-day I saw Diego where he should not have been."

"Where?"

"In the King's dressing-room at the tennis-court."

"You saw him there?"

"I saw him coming out," he answered.

It may be imagined how I felt on hearing this; for although I might
have thought nothing of the matter before my suspicions were
aroused--since any man might visit such a place out of curiosity--now,
my mind being disturbed, I was quick to conceive the worst, and saw
with horror my beloved master already destroyed through my
carelessness.  I questioned La Trape in a fury, but could learn nothing
more.  He had seen the man slip out, and that was all.

"But did you not go in yourself?"  I said, restraining my impatience
with difficulty.

"Afterwards?  Yes, my lord."

"And made no discovery?"

He shook his head.

"Was anything prepared for his Majesty?"

"There was sherbet; and some water."

"You tried them?"

La Trape grinned.  "No, my lord," he said.  "But I gave some to
Maignan."

"Not explaining?"

"No, my lord."

"You sacrilegious rascal!"  I cried, amused in spite of my anxiety.
"And he was none the worse?"

"No, my lord."

Not satisfied yet, I continued to press him, but with so little success
that I still found myself unable to decide whether the Spaniard had
wandered in innocently or to explore his ground. In the end, therefore,
I made up my mind to see things for myself; and early next morning, at
an hour when I was not likely to be observed, I went out by a back
door, and with my face muffled and no other attendance than Maignan and
La Trape, went to the tennis-court and examined the dressing-room.

This was a small closet on the first floor, of a size to hold two or
three persons, and with a casement through which the King, if he wished
to be private, might watch the game.  Its sole furniture consisted of a
little table with a mirror, a seat for his Majesty, and a couple of
stools, so that it offered small scope for investigation.  True, the
stale sherbet and the water were still there, the carafes standing on
the table beside an empty comfit box, and a few toilet necessaries; and
it will be believed that I lost no time in examining them.  But I made
no discovery, and when I had passed my eye over everything else that
the room contained, and noticed nothing that seemed in the slightest
degree suspicious, I found myself completely at a loss. I went to the
window, and for a moment looked idly into the court.

But neither did any light come thence, and I had turned again and was
about to leave, when my eye alighted on a certain thing and I stopped.

"What is that?"  I said.  It was a thin case, book-shaped, of Genoa
velvet, somewhat worn.

"Plaister," Maignan, who was waiting at the door, answered.  "His
Majesty's hand is not well yet, and as your excellency knows, he--"

"Silence, fool!"  I cried, and I stood rooted to the spot, overwhelmed
by the conviction that I held the clue to the mystery, and so shaken by
the horror which that conviction naturally brought with it that I could
not move a finger.  A design so fiendish and monstrous as that which I
suspected might rouse the dullest sensibilities, in a case where it
threatened the meanest; but being aimed in this at the King, my master,
from whom I had received so many benefits, and on whose life the
well-being of all depended, it goaded me to the warmest resentment.  I
looked round the tennis-court--which, empty, shadowy and silent, seemed
a fit place for such horrors--with rage and repulsion; apprehending in
a moment of sad presage all the accursed strokes of an enemy whom
nothing could propitiate, and who, sooner or later, must set all my
care at nought, and take from France her greatest benefactor.

But, it will be said, I had no proof, only a conjecture; and this is
true, but of it hereafter.  Suffice it that, as soon as I had swallowed
my indignation, I took all the precautions affection could suggest or
duty enjoin, omitting nothing; and then, confiding the matter to no one
the two men who were with me excepted--I prepared to observe the issue
with gloomy satisfaction.

The match was to take place at three in the afternoon.  A little after
that hour, I arrived at the tennis-court, attended by La Font and other
gentlemen, and M. l'Huillier, the councillor, who had dined with me.
L'Huillier's business had detained me somewhat, and the men had begun;
but as I had anticipated this, I had begged my good friend De Vic to
have an eye to my interests. The King, who was in the gallery, had with
him M. de Montpensier, the Comte de Lude, Vitry, Varennes, and the
Florentine Ambassador, with Sancy and some others.  Mademoiselle
d'Entragues and two ladies had taken possession of his closet, and from
the casement were pouring forth a perpetual fire of badinage and BONS
MOTS.  The tennis-court, in a word, presented as different an aspect as
possible from that which it had worn in the morning. The sharp crack of
the ball, as it bounded from side to side, was almost lost in the crisp
laughter and babel of voices; which as I entered rose into a perfect
uproar, Mademoiselle having just flung a whole lapful of roses across
the court in return for some witticism.  These falling short of the
gallery had lighted on the head of the astonished Diego, causing a
temporary cessation of play, during which I took my seat.

Madame de Lude's saucy eye picked me out in a moment.  "Oh, the grave
man!"  she cried.  "Crown him, too, with roses."

"As they crowned the skull at the feast, madame?"  I answered, saluting
her gallantly.

"No, but as the man whom the King delighteth to honour," she answered,
making a face at me.  "Ha!  ha!  I am not afraid!  I am not afraid!  I
am not afraid!"

There was a good deal of laughter at this.  "What shall I do to her, M.
de Rosny?"  Mademoiselle cried out, coming to my rescue.

"If you will have the goodness to kiss her, mademoiselle," I answered,
"I will consider it an advance, and as one of the council of the King's
finances, my credit should be good for the re--"

"Thank you!"  the King cried, nimbly cutting me short.  "But as my
finances seem to be the security, faith, I will see to the repayment
myself!  Let them start again; but I am afraid that my twenty crowns
are yours, Grand Master; your man is in fine play."

I looked into the court.  Diego, lithe and sinewy, with his cropped
black hair, high colour, and quick shallow eyes, bounded here and
there, swift and active as a panther.  Seeing him thus, with his heart
in his returns, I could not but doubt; more, as the game proceeded,
amid the laughter and jests and witty sallies of the courtiers, I felt
the doubt grow; the riddle became each minute more abstruse, the man
more mysterious.  But that was of no moment now.

A little after four o'clock the match ended in my favour; on which the
King, tired of inaction, sprang up, and declaring that he would try
Diego's strength himself, entered the court.  I followed, with Vitry
and others, and several strokes which had been made were tested and
discussed.  Presently, the King going to talk with Mademoiselle at her
window, I remarked the Spaniard and Maignan, with the King's marker,
and one or two others waiting at the further door.  Almost at the same
moment I observed a sudden movement among them, and voices raised
higher than was decent, and I called out sharply to know what it was.

"An accident, my lord," one of the men answered respectfully.

"It is nothing," another muttered.  "Maignan was playing tricks, your
excellency, and cut Diego's hand a little; that is all."

"Cut his hand now!"  I exclaimed angrily "And the King about to play
with him.  Let me see it!"

Diego sulkily held up his hand, and I saw a cut, ugly but of no
importance.

"Pooh!"  I said; "it is nothing.  Get some plaister.  Here, you," I
continued wrathfully, turning to Maignan, "since you have done the
mischief, booby, you must repair it.  Get some plaister, do you hear?
He cannot play in that state."

Diego muttered something, and Maignan that he had not got any; but
before I could answer that he must get some, La Trape thrust his may to
the front, and producing a small piece from his pocket, proceeded with
a droll air of extreme carefulness to treat the hand.  The other knaves
fell into the joke, and the Spaniard had no option but to submit;
though his scowling face showed that he bore Maignan no good-will, and
that but for my presence he might not have been so complaisant.  La
Trape was bringing his surgery to an end by demanding a fee, in the
most comical manner possible, when the King returned to our part of the
court.  "What is it?"  he said.  "Is anything the matter?"

"No, sire," I said.  "My man has cut his hand a little, but it is
nothing."

"Can he play?"  Henry asked with his accustomed good-nature.

"Oh, yes, sire," I answered.  "I have bound it up with a strip of
plaister from the case in your Majesty's closet."

"He has not lost blood?"

"No, sire."

And he had not.  But it was small wonder that the King asked; small
wonder, for the man's face had changed in the last ten seconds to a
strange leaden colour; a terror like that of a wild beast that sees
itself trapped had leapt into his eyes.  He shot a furtive glance round
him, and I saw him slide his hand behind him.  But I was prepared for
that, and as the King moved off a space I slipped to the man's side, as
if to give him some directions about his game.

"Listen," I said, in a voice heard only by him; "take the dressing off
your hand, and I have you broken on the wheel.  You understand?  Now
play."

Assuring myself that he did understand, and that Maignan and La Trape
were at hand if he should attempt anything, I went back to my place,
and sitting down by De Vic began to watch that strange game; while
Mademoiselle's laughter and Madame de Lude's gibes floated across the
court, and mingled with the eager applause and more dexterous
criticisms of the courtiers.  The light was beginning to sink, and for
this reason, perhaps, no one perceived the Spaniard's pallor; but De
Vic, after a rally or two, remarked that he was not playing his full
strength.

"Wise man!"  he added.

"Yes," I said.  "Who plays well against kings plays ill."

De Vic laughed.  "How he sweats!"  he said, "and he never turned a hair
when he played Colet.  I suppose he is nervous."

"Probably," I said.

And so they chattered and laughed--chattered and laughed, seeing an
ordinary game between the King and a marker; while I, for whom the
court had grown sombre as a dungeon, saw a villain struggling in his
own toils, livid with the fear of death, and tortured by horrible
apprehensions.  Use and habit were still so powerful with the man that
he played on mechanically with his hands, but his eyes every now and
then sought mine with the look of the trapped beast; and on these
occasions I could see his lips move in prayer or cursing.  The sweat
poured down his face as he moved to and fro, and I, fancied that his
features were beginning to twitch.  Presently--I have said that the
light was failing, so that it was not in my imagination only that the
court was sombre--the King held his ball.  "My friend, your man is not
well," he said, turning to me.

"It is nothing, sire; the honour you do him makes him nervous," I
answered.  "Play up, sirrah," I continued; "you make too good a
courtier."

Mademoiselle d'Entragues clapped her hands and laughed at the hit; and
I saw Diego glare at her with an indescribable look, in which hatred
and despair and a horror of reproach were so nicely mingled with
something as exceptional as his position, that the whole baffled words.
Doubtless the gibes and laughter he heard, the trifling that went on
round him, the very game in which he was engaged, and from which he
dared not draw back, seemed in his eyes the most appalling mockery; but
ignorant who were in the secret, unable to guess how his diabolical
plot had been discovered, uncertain even whether the whole were not a
concerted piece, he went on playing his part mechanically; with
starting eyes and labouring chest, and lips that, twitching and
working, lost colour each minute.  At length he missed a stroke, and
staggering leaned against the wall, his-face livid and ghastly. The
King took the alarm at that, and cried out that something was wrong.
Those who were sitting rose.  I nodded to Maignan to go to the man.

"It is a fit," I said.  "He is subject to them, and doubtless the
excitement--but I am sorry that it has spoiled your Majesty's game.

"It has not," Henry answered kindly.  "The light is gone.  But have him
looked to, will you, my friend?  If La Riviere were here he might do
something for him."

While he spoke, the servants had gathered round the man, but with the
timidity which characterises that class in such emergencies, they would
not touch him.  As I crossed the court, and they made way for me, the
Spaniard, who was still standing, though in a strange and distorted
fashion, turned his bloodshot eyes on me.

"A priest!"  he muttered, framing the words with difficulty, "a priest!"

I directed Maignan to fetch one.  "And do you," I continued to the
other servants, "take him into a room somewhere."

They obeyed, reluctantly.  As they carried him out, the King, content
with my statement, was giving his hand to Mademoiselle to descend the
stairs; and neither he nor any, save the two men in my confidence, had
the slightest suspicion that aught was the matter beyond a natural
illness.  But I shuddered when I considered how narrow had been the
King's escape, how trifling the circumstance which had led to
suspicion, how fortuitous the inspiration by which I had chanced on
discovery.  The delay of a single day, the occurrence of the slightest
mishap, might have been fatal not to him only but to the best interests
of France; which his death at a time when he was still childless must
have plunged into the most melancholy of wars.

Of the wretched Spaniard I need say little more.  Caught in his own
snare, he was no sooner withdrawn from the court than he fell into
violent convulsions, which held him until midnight when he died with
symptoms and under circumstances so nearly resembling those which had
attended the death of Madame de Beaufort at Easter, that I have several
times dwelt on the strange coincidence, and striven to find the
connecting link.  But I never hit on it; and the King's death, and that
unexplained tendency to imitate great crimes under which the vulgar
labour, prevailed with me to keep the matter secret.  Nay, as I
believed that d'Evora had played the part of an unconscious tool, and
as a hint pressed home sufficed to procure the withdrawal of the
chaplain whom Maignan had named, I did not think it necessary to
disclose the matter even to the King my master.




III.

TWO MAYORS OF BOTTITORT.


Believing that I have now set down all those particulars of the treaty
with Epernon and the consequent pacification of Brittany in the year
1598 which it will be of advantage to the public to know, that it may
the better distinguish in the future those who have selfishly
impoverished the State from those who, in its behalf, have incurred
obloquy and high looks, I proceed next to the events which followed the
King's return to Paris.

But, first, and by way of sampling the diverting episodes that will
occur from time to time in the most laborious existence, and for the
moment reduce the minister to the level of the man, I am tempted to
narrate an adventure that befell me on my return, between Rennes and
Vitre; when the King having preceded me at speed under the pretext of
urgency, but really that he might avoid the prolix addresses that
awaited him in every town, I found myself no more minded to suffer.
Having sacrificed my ease, therefore, in two of the more important
places, and come within as many stages of Vitre, I determined also on a
holiday. Accordingly, directing my baggage and the numerous escort and
suite that attended me to the full tale of four-score horses--to keep
the high road, I struck myself into a byway, intending to seek
hospitality for the night at a house of M. de Laval's; and on the
second evening to render myself with a good grace to the eulogia and
tedious mercies of the Vitre townsfolk.

I kept with me only La Font and two servants.  The day was fine, and
the air brisk; the country open, affording many distant prospects which
the sun rendered cheerful.  We rode for some time, therefore, with the
gaiety of schoolboys released from their tasks, and dining at noon in
the lee of one of the great boulders that there dot the plain, took
pleasure in applying to the life of courts every evil epithet that came
to mind.  For a little time afterwards we rode as cheerfully; but about
three in the afternoon the sky became overcast, and almost at the same
moment we discovered that we had strayed from the track.  The country
in that district resembles the more western parts of Brittany, in
consisting of huge tracts of bog and moorland strewn with rocks and
covered with gorse; which present a cheerful aspect in sunshine, but
are savage and barren to a degree when viewed through sheets of rain or
under a sombre sky.

The position, therefore, was not without its discomforts.  I had taken
care to choose a servant who was familiar with the country, but his
knowledge seemed now at fault.  However, under his direction we
retraced our steps, but still without regaining the road; and as a
small rain presently began to fall and the day to decline, the
landscape which in the morning had flaunted a wild and rugged beauty,
changed to a brown and dreary waste set here and there with ghost-like
stones.  Once astray on this, we found our path beset with sloughs and
morasses; among which we saw every prospect of passing the night, when
La Font espied at a little distance a wind-swept wood that, clothing a
low shoulder of the moor, promised at least a change and shelter.  We
made towards it, and discovered not only all that we had expected to
see, but a path and a guide.

The latter was as much surprised to see us as we to see her, for when
we came upon her she was sitting on the bank beside the path weeping
bitterly.  On hearing us, however, she sprang up and discovered the
form of a young girl, bare-foot and bareheaded, wearing only a short
ragged frock of homespun.  Nevertheless, her face was neither stupid
nor uncomely; and though, at the first alarm, supposing us to be either
robbers or hobgoblins--of which last the people of that country are
peculiarly fearful--she made as if she would escape across the moor,
she stopped as soon as she heard my voice.  I asked her gently where we
were.

At first she did not understand, but the servant who had played the
guide so ill, speaking to her in the PATOIS of the country, she
answered that we were near St. Brieuc, a hamlet not far from Bottitort,
and considerably off our road.  Asked how far it was to Bottitort, she
answered--between two and three leagues, and an indifferent road.

We could ride the distance in a couple of hours, and there remained
almost as much daylight.  But the horses were tired, so, resigning
myself to the prospect of some discomfort, I asked her if there was an
inn at St. Brieuc.

"A poor place for your honours," she answered, staring at us in
innocent wonder, the forgotten tears not dry on her cheeks.

"Never mind; take us to it," I answered.

She turned at the word and tripped on before us.  I bade the servant
ask her, as we went, why she had been crying, and learned through him
that she had been to her uncle's two leagues away to borrow money for
her mother; that the uncle would not lend it, and that now they would
be turned out of their house; that her father was lately dead, and that
her mother kept the inn, and owed the money for meal and cider.

"At least, she says that she does not owe it," the man corrected
himself, "for her father paid as usual at Corpus Christi; but after his
death M. Grabot said that he had not paid, and--"

"M. Grabot?"  I said.  "Who is he?"

"The Mayor of Bottitort."

"The creditor?"

"Yes."

"And how much is owing?"  I asked.

"Nothing, she says."

"But how much does he say?"

"Twenty crowns."

Doubtless some will view my conduct on this occasion with surprise; and
wonder why I troubled myself with inquiries so minute upon a matter so
mean.  But these do not consider that ministers are the King's eyes;
and that in a State no class is so unimportant that it can be safely
overlooked.  Moreover, as the settlement of the finances was one of the
objects of my stay in those parts--and I seldom had the opportunity of
checking the statements made to me by the farmers and lessees of the
taxes, the receivers, gatherers, and, in a word, all the corrupt class
that imparts such views of a province as suit its interests--I was glad
to learn anything that threw light on the real condition of the
country:  the more, as I had to receive at Vitre a deputation of the
notables and officials of the district.

Accordingly, I continued to put questions to her until, crossing a
ridge, we came at last within sight of the inn, a lonely house of
stone, standing in the hollow of the moor and sheltered on one side by
a few gnarled trees that took off in a degree from the bleakness of its
aspect.  The house was of one story only, with a window on either side
of the door, and no other appeared in sight; but a little smoke rising
from the chimney seemed to promise a better reception than the desolate
landscape and the girl's scanty dress had led us to expect.

As we drew nearer, however, a thing happened so remarkable as to draw
our attention in a moment from all these points, and bring us, gaping,
to a standstill.  The shutters of the two windows were suddenly closed
before our eyes with a clap that came sharply on the wind.  Then, in a
twinkling, one window flew open again and a man, seemingly naked,
bounded from it, fled with inconceivable rapidity across the front of
the house and vanished through the other window, which opened to
receive him.  He had scarcely gained that shelter before a coal-black
figure followed him, leaping out of the one window and in at the other
with the same astonishing swiftness--a swiftness which was so great
that before any of us could utter more than an exclamation, the two
figures appeared again round the corner of the house, in the same
order, but this time with so small an interval that the fugitive barely
saved himself through the window.  Once more, while we stared in
stupefaction, they flashed out and in; and this time it seemed to me
that as they vanished the black spectre seized its victim.

When I say that all this time the two figures uttered no sound, that
there was no other living being in sight, and that on every side of the
solitary house the moor, growing each minute more eerie as the day
waned, spread to the horizon, the more superstitious among us may be
pardoned if they gave way to their fears.  La Font was the first to
speak.

"MON DIEU!"  he cried--while the girl moaned in terror, the Breton
crossed himself, and La Trape looked uncomfortable--"the place is
bewitched!"

"Nonsense!"  I said.  "Who is in the house, girl?"

"Only my mother," she wailed.  "Oh, my poor mother!"

I silenced her, scolding them all for fools, and her first; and La
Font, recovering himself, did the same.  But this was the year of that
strange appearance of the spectre horseman at Fontainebleau of which so
much has been said; and my servants, when we had approached the house a
little nearer, and it still remained silent and, as it were, dead to
the eye, would go no farther, but stood in sheer terror and permitted
me to go on alone with La Font.  I confess that the loneliness of the
house, and the dreary waste that surrounded it (which seemed to exclude
the idea of trickery) were not without their effect on my spirits; and
that as I dismounted and approached the door, I felt a kind of chill
not remarkable under the circumstances.

But the courage of the gentleman differs from that of the vulgar in
that he fears yet goes; and I lifted the latch, and entered boldly.
The scene which met my eyes inside was sufficiently commonplace to
reassure me.  At the farther end of a long bare room, draughty,
half-lighted, and having an earthen floor, yet possessing that air of
homeliness which a wood fire never fails to impart, sat a single
traveller; who had drawn his small table under the open chimney, and
there, with his feet almost in the fire, was partaking of a poor meal
of black bread and onions.  He was a tall, spare man, with sloping
shoulders and a long sour face, of which, as I entered, he gave me the
full benefit.

I looked round the room, but look as I might I could see no one else,
nor anything that explained what we had witnessed and I accosted the
man civilly, wishing him good evening.  He made an answer, but
indistinctly, and, this done, went on with his meal like one who viewed
our arrival with little pleasure; while I, puzzled and astonished by
the ordinary look of things and the stillness of the house, affected to
warm my feet at the logs.  At length, espying no signs of disturbance
anywhere, I asked him if he was alone.

"I was, sir," he answered gravely.

I was going on to tell him, though reluctantly, what we had seen
outside, and to question him upon it, when on a sudden, before I could
speak again, he leaned towards me and accosted me with startling
abruptness.  "Sir," he said, "I should like to have your opinion of
Louis Eleven."

I stared at him in the most perfect astonishment; and was for a moment
so completely taken aback that I mechanically repeated his words.  For
answer, he did so also.

"The Eleventh Louis?"  I said.

"Yes," he rejoined, turning his pale visage full upon me.  "What is
your opinion of him, sir?  He was a man?"

"Well," I said, shrugging my shoulders, "I take that for granted."  I
began to think that the traveller was demented.

"And a king?"

"Yes, I suppose so," I answered contemptuously.  "I never heard it
doubted."

He leaned towards me, and spoke with the most eager impressiveness.  "A
man--and a king!"  he said.  "Yet neither a manly king, nor a kingly
man!  You take me?"

"Yes," I said impatiently.  "I see what you mean.

"Neither a kingly man, nor a manly king!"  he repeated with solemn
gusto.  "You take me clearly, I think?"

I had no stomach for further fooleries, and I was about to answer him
with some sharpness--though I could not for the life of me tell whether
he was mad or an eccentric when a harsh voice shrieked in my ear,
"Bob!"  and in a twinkling a red figure appeared bounding and whirling
in the middle of the kitchen; now springing into the air until its head
touched the rafters, now eddying round and round the floor in the
giddiest gyrations.  At the first glance, startled by the voice in my
ear, I recoiled; but a second disclosing what it was, and the secret of
our alarm outside, I masked my movement; and when the man brought his
performance to a sudden stop, and falling on one knee in an attitude of
exaggerated respect held out his cap, I was ready for him.

"Why, you knave," I said, "you should be whipped, not rewarded. Who
gave you leave to play pranks on travellers?"

He looked at me with a droll smile on his round merry face, which at
its gravest was a thing to laugh at.  "Let him whip who is scared," he
said, with roguish impudence.  "Or if there is to be whipping, my lord,
whip Louis XI."

Thus reminded, I turned to the solemn traveller; but my eyes had no
sooner met his than he twisted his visage into so wry a smile--if smile
it could be called--that wherever there was a horse collar he must have
won the prize.  To hide my amusement, I asked them what they were.
"Mountebanks?"  I said curtly.

"Your lordship has pricked the garter offhand," the merry man answered
cheerfully.  "You see before you the renowned Pierre Paladin
VOILA!--and Philibert Le Grand!  of the Breton fairs, monsieur."

"But why this foolery--here?"  I said.

"We took you for another, monsieur," he answered.

"Whom you intended to frighten?"

"Precisely, your grace."

"Well, you are nice rogues," I said, looking at him.

"So is he," he answered, undaunted.

I left the matter there for a moment, while I summoned La Font and the
servants; whose rage, when, entering a-tiptoe and with some misgiving,
they discovered how they had been deceived, and by whom, was scarcely
to be restrained even by my presence. However, aided by Philibert's
comicalities, I presently secured a truce, and the two strollers
vacating in my honour the table by the fire--though they had not the
slightest notion who I was we were soon on terms.  I had taken the
precaution to bring a meal with me, and while La Trape and his
companion unpacked it, and I dried my riding boots, I asked the players
who it was they had meant to frighten.

They were not very willing to tell me, but at length confessed, to my
astonishment, that it was M. Grabot.

"Grabot--Grabot!"  I said, striving to recollect where I had heard the
name.  "The Mayor of Bottitort?"

The solemn man made an atrocious grimace.  Then, "Yes, monsieur, the
Mayor of Bottitort," he said frankly.  "A year ago he put Philibert in
the stocks for a riddle; that is his affair.  And the woman of this
house has more than once befriended me, and he is for turning her out
for a debt she does not owe; and that is my affair.  However, your
lordship's arrival has saved him for this time."

"You expected him here this evening, then?"

"He is coming," he answered, with more than his usual gloom.  "He
passed this way this morning, and announced that on his return he
should spend the night here.  We found the goodwife all of a tremble
when we arrived.  He is a hard man, monsieur," the mountebank continued
bitterly.  "She cried after him that she hoped that God would change
his heart, but he only answered that even if St. Brieuc changed his
body--you know the legend, monseigneur, doubtless--he should be here."

"And here he is," the other, who had been looking out of one of the
windows, cried.  "I see his lanthorn coming down the hill. And by St.
Brieuc, I have it!  I have it," the droll continued, suddenly spinning
round in a wild dance of triumph on the floor, and then as suddenly
stopping and falling into an attitude before us.  "Monsieur, if you
will help us, I have the richest jest ever played.  Pierre, listen.
You, gentlemen all, listen!  We will pretend that he is changed.  He is
a pompous man; he thinks the Mayor of Bottitort equal to the Saint
Pere.  Well, Pierre shall be M. Grabot, Mayor of Bottitort.  You,
monsieur, that we may give him enough of mayors, shall be the Mayor of
Gol, and I will be the Mayor of St. Just.  This gentleman shall swear
to us, so shall the servants.  For him, he does not exist.  Oh, we will
punish him finely."

"But," I said, astounded by the very audacity of the rogue's
proposition, "you do not flatter yourself that you will deceive him?"

"We shall, monsieur, if you will help," he answered confidently. "I
will be warrant for it we shall."

The thing had little of dignity in it, and I wonder now that I
complied; but I have always shared with the King, my master, a taste
for drolleries of the kind suggested; while nothing that I had as yet
heard of this Grabot was of a nature to induce me to spare him.  Seeing
that La Font was tickled with the idea, and that the servants were
a-grin, and the more eager to trick others as they had just been
tricked themselves, I was tempted to consent.

After this, the preparations took not a minute.  Philibert covered his
fool's clothes with a cloak, and their table was drawn nearer to the
fire, so as, with mine, to take up the whole hearth.  La Trape fell
into an attitude behind me; and the Breton, adopting a refinement
suggested at the last moment, was sent out to intercept Grabot before
he entered, and tell him that the inn was full, and that he had better
pass on.

The knave did his business so well that Grabot, being just such a man
as the stroller had described to us, the altercation on the threshold
was of itself the most amusing thing in the world. "Who?"  we heard a
loud, coarse voice exclaim.  "Who d'ye say are here, man?"

"The Mayor of Bottitort."

"MILLE DIABLES!"

"The Mayor of Bottitort and the Mayors of Gol and St. Just," the
servant repeated as if he noticed nothing amiss.

"That is a lie!"  the new comer replied, with a snort of triumph, "and
an impudent one.  But you have got the wrong sow by the ear this time."

"Why, man," a third voice, somewhat nasal and rustical, struck in,
"don't you know the Mayor of Bottitort?"

"I should," my Breton answered bluntly, and making, as we guessed, a
stand before them.  "For I am his servant, and he is this moment at his
meat."

"The Mayor of Bottitort?"

"Yes."

"M. Grabot?"

"Yes."

"And you are his servant?"

"I have thought so for some time," the Breton answered contemptuously.

The Mayor fairly roared in his indignation.  "You--his servant! The
Mayor of Bottitort's?"  he cried in a voice of thunder. "I'll tell you
what you are; you are a liar!--a liar, man, that is what you are!  Why,
you fool, I am the Mayor of Bottitort myself. Now, do you see how you
have wasted yourself?  Out of my way!  Jehan, follow me in.  I shall
look into this.  There is some knavery here, but if Simon Grabot cannot
get to the bottom of it the Mayor of Bottitort will.  Follow me, I say.
My servant indeed?  Come, come!"

And, still grumbling, he flung open the door, which the Breton had left
ajar, and stalked in upon us, fuming and blowing out his cheeks for all
the world like a bantam cock with its feathers erect.  He was a short,
pursy man; with a short nose, a wide face, and small eyes.  But had he
been Caesar and Alexander rolled into one, he could not have crossed
the threshold with a more tremendous assumption of dignity.  Once
inside, he stood and glared at us, somewhat taken aback, I think, for
the moment by our numbers; but recovering himself almost immediately,
he strutted towards us, and, without uncovering or saluting us, he
asked in a deep voice who was responsible for the man outside.

"I am," the graver mountebank answered, looking at the stranger with a
sober air of surprise.  "He is my servant."

"Ah!"  the Mayor exclaimed, with a withering glance.  "And who, may I
ask, are you?"

"You may ask, certainly," the player answered drily.  "But until you
take off your hat I shall not answer."

The Mayor gasped at this rebuff, and turned, if it were possible, a
shade redder; but he uncovered.

"Now I do not mind telling you," Pierre continued, with a mild dignity
admirably assumed, "that I am Simon Grabot, and have the honour to be
Mayor of Bottitort."

"You!"

"Yes, monsieur, I; though perhaps unworthy."

I looked to see an explosion, but the Mayor was too far gone. "Why, you
swindling impostor," he said, with something that was almost admiration
in his tone.  "You are the very prince of cheats!  The king of
cozeners!  But for all that, let me tell you, you have chosen the wrong
ROLE this time.  For I--I, sir, am the Mayor of Bottitort, the very man
whose name you have taken!"

Pierre stared at him in composed silence, which his comrade was the
first to break.  "Is he mad?"  he said in a low voice.

The grave man shook his head.

The Mayor heard and saw; and getting no other answer, began to tremble
between passion and a natural, though ill-defined, misgiving, which the
silent gaze of so large a party--for we all looked at him
compassionately--was well calculated to produce. "Mad?"  he cried.
"No, but some one is, Sir," he continued, turning to La Font with a
gesture in which appeal and impatience were curiously blended, "Do you
know this man?"

"M. Grabot?  Certainly," he answered, without blushing.  "And have
these ten years."

"And you say that he is M. Grabot?"  the poor Mayor retorted, his jaw
falling ludicrously.

"Certainly.  Who should he be?"

The Mayor looked round him, sudden beads of sweat on his brow. "MON
DIEU!" he cried.  "You are all in it.  Here, you, do you know this
person?"

La Trape, to whom he addressed himself, shrugged his shoulders. "I
should," he said.  "The Mayor is pretty well known about here."

"The Mayor?"

"Ay."

"But I am the Mayor--I," Grabot answered eagerly, tapping himself on
the breast in the most absurd manner.  "Don't you know me, my friend?"

"I never saw you before, to my knowledge," the rascal answered
contemptuously; "and I know this country pretty well.  I should think
that you have been crossing St. Brieuc's brook, and forgotten to say
your--"

"Hush!"  the stout player interposed with some sharpness.  "Let him
alone.  LE BON DIEU knows that such a thing may happen to the best of
us."

The Mayor clapped his hand to his head.  "Sir," he said almost humbly,
addressing the last speaker, "I seem to know your voice. Your name, if
you please?"

"Fracasse," he answered pleasantly.  "I am Mayor of Gol."

"You--Fracasse, Mayor of Gol?"  Grabot exclaimed between rage and
terror.  "But Fracasse is a tall man.  I know him as well as I know my
brother."

The pseudo-Fracasse smiled, but did not contradict him.

The Mayor wiped the moisture from his brow.  He had all the
characteristics of an obstinate man; but if there is one thing which I
have found in a long career more true than another, it is that no one
can resist the statements of his fellows.  So much, I verily believe,
is this the case, that if ten men maintain black to be white, the
eleventh will presently be brought into their opinion.  Besides, the
Mayor had a currish side.  He looked piteously from one to another of
us, his cheeks seemed to grow in a moment pale and flabby, and he was
on the point of whimpering, when at the last moment he bethought him of
his servant, and turned to him in a spurt of sudden thankfulness.
"Why, Jehan, man, I had forgotten you," he said.  "Are these men mad,
or am I?"

But Jehan, a simple rustic, was in a state of ludicrous bewilderment.
"Dol, master, I don't know," he stuttered, rubbing his head.

"But I am myself," the Mayor cried, in a most ridiculous tone of
remonstrance.

"Dol, and I don't know," the man whimpered.  "I do believe that there
is a change in you.  I never saw you look the like before. And I never
said any PATER either.  Holy saints!"  the poor fool continued
piteously, "I wish I were at home.  And there, for all I know, my wife
has got another man."

He began to blubber at this; which to us was the most ludicrous
thought, so that it was all we could do to restrain our laughter. But
the Mayor saw things in another light.  Shaken by our steady
persistence in our story, and astounded by our want of respect, the
defection of his follower utterly cowed him.  After staring wildly
about him for a moment, he fairly turned tail, and sat down on an old
box by the door, where with his hands on his knees, he looked out
before him with such an expression of chap-fallen bewilderment as
nearly discovered our plot by throwing us into fits of laughter.

Still he was not persuaded; for, from time to time, he roused himself,
and lifting his head cast suspicious glances at our party.  But the two
strollers, who were now in their element, played their parts with so
much craft and delicacy, and with such an infinity of humour besides,
that everything he overheard plunged him deeper in the slough.  They
knew something of local affairs, and called one another Mayor very
naturally; and mentioning their wives, let drop other scraps of
information that, catching his ear, made the wretched man every now and
then sit up as if a wasp had stung him.  One story in particular which
the false Mayor told--and which, it appeared, was to the knowledge of
all the country round the real Mayor's stock anecdote--had an absurd
effect upon him.  He straightened himself, listened as if his life
depended upon it, and when he heard the well-known ending, uttered,
doubtless, in something of his old tone, he collapsed into himself like
a man who had no longer faith in anything.

Presently, however, an effort of common-sense would again disperse the
fog.  He would raise his head, his eye grow bright, something of his
old pugnacity would come back to him.  He would appear--this more than
once--to be on the point of rising to challenge us.  But these
occasions were as skilfully met as they were easily detected; and as
the rogues had invariably some stroke in reserve that in a twinkling
flung him back into his old state of dazed bewilderment, while it
well-nigh killed us with stifled mirth, they only gave ever new point
to the jest.

This, to be brief, was carried on until I retired; and probably the two
strollers would have kept it up longer if the ludicrous doubt whether
he was himself, which they had lodged in the Mayor's mind, had not at
last spurred him to action.  An hour before midnight, feeling it rankle
intolerably, I suppose, he sprang up on a sudden, dragged the door
open, darted out with the air of a madman, and in a moment was lost in
the darkness of the moor.

When I rose in the morning, therefore, I found him gone, the strollers
looking glum, and the good-wife and her girl between tears and
reproaches.  I could not but feel, on my part, that I had somewhat
stooped in the night's diversion; but before I had time to reflect much
on that an unexpected trait in the strollers' conduct reconciled me to
this odd experience.  They proposed to leave when I did; but a little
before the start they came to me, and set before me very ingenuously
that the woman of the house might suffer through our jest; if I would
help her therefore, they would subscribe two crowns so that she might
have a substantial sum to offer on account of her debt.  As I took this
to be the greater part of their capital, and judged for other reasons
that the offer was genuine, I received it in the best part, and found
their good-nature no less pleasant than their foolery.  I handed over
three crowns for our share, and on that we parted; they set out with
their bundles strapped to their backs, and I waited somewhat
impatiently for La Trape and the Breton to bring round the horses.

Before these appeared, however, La Font, who was at the door, cried out
that the two players were coming hack; and going to the window I saw
with astonishment a whole troop, some mounted and some on foot,
hurrying down the hill after them.  For a moment I felt some alarm,
supposing it to be a scheme of Epernon's to seize my person; and I
cursed the imprudence which had led me to expose myself in this
solitary place.  But a second glance showing me that the Mayor of
Bottitort was among the foremost, I repented almost as seriously of the
unlucky trifling that had landed me in this foolish plight.

I even debated whether I should mount and, if it were possible, get
clear before they arrived; but the rueful faces of the two players as
they appeared breathless in the doorway, and the liking I had taken for
the rascals, decided me to stand my ground "What is it?"  I said.

"The Mayor, monsieur," Philibert answered, while Pierre pursed up his
lips with gloomy gravity.  "I fear it will not stop at the stocks this
time," the rogue continued with a grimace.

His comrade muttered something about a rod and a fool's back; but M.
Grabot's entrance cut his witticism short.  The Mayor, between shame
and rage, and the gratification of his revenge, was almost bursting,
and the moment he caught sight of us opened fire. "All, M. de Gol; we
have them all!"  he cried exultingly.  "Now they shall smart for it!
Depend upon it, it is some deep-laid scheme of that party.  I have said
so."

But the Mayor of Gol, a stout, big, placid man, looked at us
doubtfully.  "Well," he said, "I know these two; they are strolling
mountebanks, honest knaves enough but always in some mischief."

"What, strolling clowns?"  M. Grabot rejoined, his face falling.

"Ay, and you may depend upon it it is some joke of theirs," his friend
answered, his eyes twinkling.  "I begin to think that you would have
done better if you had waited a little before bringing M. le Comte into
the matter."

"Ah, but there are these two," M. Grabot cried, as he recovered from
the momentary panic into which the other's words had thrown him.
"Depend upon it they are the chief movers.  What else but treason could
they mean by asserting that one of them was Mayor of Bottitort?  By
denying my title?  By setting up other officers than those to whom his
Gracious Majesty has delegated his authority?"

"Umph!"  his brother Mayor said, "I don't know these gentlemen."

"No!"  his companion cried in triumph.  "But I intend to know them; and
to know a good deal about them.  Guard the window there," he continued
fussily.  "Where is my clerk?  Is M. de Laval coming?"

Two or three cried obsequiously that he had crossed the hill; and would
arrive immediately.

Hearing this, and thinking it more becoming not to enter into an
altercation, I kept my seat and the scornful silence I had hitherto
maintained.  The two Mayors had brought with them a posse of
busybodies--huissiers, constables, tip-staves, and the like; and these
all gaped upon us as if they saw before them the most notable traitors
of the age.  The women of the house wept in a corner, and the strollers
shrugged their shoulders and strove to appear at their ease.  But the
only person who felt the indifference which they assumed was La Font;
who, obnoxious to none of the annoyances which I foresaw, could hardly
restrain his mirth at the DENOUEMENT which he anticipated.

Meanwhile the Mayor, foreseeing a very different issue, stood blowing
out his cheeks and fixing us with his little eyes with an expression of
dignity that would have pleased me vastly if I had been free to enjoy
it.  But the reflection that Laval's presence, which would cut the knot
of our difficulties, would also place me at the mercy of his wit, did
not enable me to contemplate it with entire indifference.

By-and-by we heard him dismount, and a moment later he came in with a
gentleman and two or three armed servants.  He did not at once see me,
but as the crowd made way for him he addressed himself sharply to M.
Grabot.  "Well, have you got them?"  he said.

"Certainly, M. le Comte."

"Oh!  very well.  Now for the particulars, then.  You must state your
charge quickly, for I have to be in Vitre to-day."

"He alleged that he had been appointed Mayor of Bottitort," Grabot
answered pompously.

"Umph!  I don't know?"  M. de Laval muttered, looking round with a
frown of discontent.  "I hope that you have not brought me hither on a
fool's errand.  Which one?"

"That one," the Mayor said, pointing to the solemn man, whose gravity
and depression were now something preternatural.

"Oh!"  M. de Laval grumbled.  "But that is not all, I suppose. What of
the others?"

M. Grabot pointed to me.  "That one," he said--

He got no farther; for M. de Laval, springing forward, seized my hand
and saluted me warmly.  "Why, your excellency," he cried, in a tone of
boundless surprise, "what are you doing in this GALERE! All last
evening I waited for you, at my house, and now--"

"Here I am," I answered jocularly, "in charge it seems, M. le Comte!"

"MON DIEU!"  he cried.  "I don't understand it!"

I shrugged my shoulders.  "Don't ask me," I said.  "Perhaps your friend
the Mayor call tell you."

"But, Monsieur, I do not understand," the Mayor answered piteously, his
mouth agape with horror, his fat cheeks turning in a moment all
colours.  "This gentleman, whom you seem to know, Monsieur le Comte--"

"Is the Marquis de Rosny, President of the Council, blockhead!" Laval
cried irately.  "You madman!  you idiot!"  he continued, as light broke
in upon him, and he saw that it was indeed on a fool's errand that he
had been roused so early.  "Is this your conspiracy?  Have you dared to
bring me here--"

But I thought that it was time to interfere.  "The truth is," I said,
"that M. Grabot here is not so much to blame.  He was the victim of a
trick which these rascals played on him; and in an idle moment I let it
go on.  That is the whole secret.  However, I forgive him for his
officiousness since it brings us together, and I shall now have the
pleasure of your company to Vitre."

Laval assented heartily to this, and I did not think fit to tell him
more, nor did he inquire; the Mayor's stupidity passing current for
all.  For M. Grabot himself, I think that I never saw a man more
completely confounded.  He stood staring with his mouth open; and, as
much deserted as the statesman who has fallen from office, had not the
least credit even with his own sycophants, who to a man deserted him
and flocked about the Mayor of Gol.  Though I had no reason to pity
him, and, indeed, thought him well punished, I took the opportunity of
saying a word to him before I mounted; which, though it was only a hint
that he should deal gently with the woman of the house, was received
with servility equal to the arrogance he had before displayed; and I
doubt not it had all the effect I desired.  For the strollers, I did
not forget them, but bade them hasten to Vitre, where I would see a
performance.  They did so, and hitting the fancy of Zamet, who chanced
to be still there, and who thought that he saw profit in them, they
came on his invitation to Paris, where they took the Court by storm.
So that an episode trifling in itself, and such as on my part requires
some apology, had for them consequences of no little importance.




IV.

LA TOUSSAINT.


Towards the autumn of 1601, when the affair of M. de Biron, which was
so soon to fill the mouths of the vulgar, was already much in the minds
of those whom the King honoured with his confidence, I was one day
leaving the hall at the Arsenal, after giving audience to such as
wished to see me, when Maignan came after me and detained me; reporting
that a gentleman who had attended early, but had later gone into the
garden, was still in waiting. While Maignan was still speaking the
stranger himself came up, with some show of haste but none of
embarrassment; and, in answer to my salutation and inquiry what I could
do for him, handed me a letter.  He had the air of a man not twenty,
his dress was a trifle rustic; but his strong and handsome figure set
off a face that would have been pleasing but for a something fierce in
the aspect of his eyes.  Assured that I did not know him, I broke the
seal of his letter and found that it was from my old flame Madame de
Bray, who, as Mademoiselle de St. Mesmin, had come so near to being my
wife; as will be remembered by those who have read the early part of
these memoirs.

The young man proved to be her brother, whom she commended to my good
offices, the impoverishment of the family being so great that she could
compass no more regular method of introducing him to the world, though
the house of St. Mesmin is truly respectable and, like my own, allied
to several of the first consequence. Madame de Bray recalled our old
TENDRESSE to my mind, and conjured me so movingly by it--and by the
regard which her family had always entertained for me--that I could not
dismiss the application with the hundred others of like tenor that at
that time came to me with each year.  That I might do nothing in the
dark, however, I invited the young fellow to walk with me in the
garden, and divined, even before he spoke, from the absence of timidity
in his manner, that he was something out of the common. "So you have
come to Paris to make your fortune?"  I said.

"Yes, sir," he answered.

"And what are the tools with which you propose to do it?"  I continued,
between jest and earnest.

"That letter, sir," he answered simply; "and, failing that, two horses,
two suits of clothes, and two hundred crowns."

"You think that those will suffice?"  I said, laughing.

"With this, sir," he answered, touching his sword; "and a good courage."

I could not but stand amazed at his coolness; for he spoke to me as
simply as to a brother, and looked about him with as much or as little
curiosity as Guise or Montpensier.  It was evident that he thought a
St. Mesmin equal to any man under the King; and that of all the St.
Mesmins he did not value himself least.

"Well," I said, after considering him, "I do not think that I can help
you much immediately.  I should be glad to know, however, what plans
you have formed for yourself."

"Frankly, sir," he said, "I thought of this as I travelled; and I
decided that fortune can be won by three things--by gold, by steel, and
by love.  The first I have not, and for the last I have a better use.
Only the second is left.  I shall be Crillon."

I looked at him in astonishment; for the assurance of his manner
exceeded that of his words.  But I did not betray the feeling. "Crillon
was one in a million," I said drily.

"So am I," he answered.

I confess that the audacity of this reply silenced me.  I reflected
that the young man who--brought up in the depths of the country, and
without experience, training or fashion--could so speak in the face of
Paris was so far out of the common that I hesitated to dash his hopes
in the contemptuous way which seemed most natural.  I was content to
remind him that Crillon had lived in times of continual war, whereas
now we were at peace; and, bidding him come to me in a week, I hinted
that in Paris his crowns would find more frequent opportunities of
leaving his pockets than his sword its sheath.

He parted from me with this, seeming perfectly satisfied with his
reception; and marched away with the port of a man who expected
adventures at every corner, and was prepared to make the most of them.
Apparently he did not take my hint greatly to heart, however; for when
I next met him, within the week, he was fashionably dressed, his hair
in the mode, and his company as noble as himself.  I made him a sign to
stop, and he came to speak to me.

"How many crowns are left?"  I said jocularly.

"Fifty," he answered, with perfect readiness.

"What!"  I said, pointing to his equipment with something of the
indignation I felt, "has this cost the balance?

"No," he answered.  "On the contrary, I have paid three months' rent in
advance and a month's board at Zaton's; I have added two suits to my
wardrobe, and I have lost fifty crowns on the dice."

"You promise well!"  I said.

He shrugged his shoulders quite in the fashionable manner. "Always
courage!"  he said; and he went on, smiling.

I was walking at the time with M. de Saintonge, and he muttered, with a
sneer, that it was not difficult to see the end, or that within the
year the young braggart would sink to be a gaming-house bully.  I said
nothing, but I confess that I thought otherwise; the lad's disposition
of his money and his provision for the future seeming to me so
remarkable as to set him above ordinary rules.

From this time I began to watch his career with interest, and I was not
surprised when, in less than a month, something fell out that led the
whole court to regard him with a mixture of amusement and expectancy.

One evening, after leaving the King's closet, I happened to pass
through the east gallery at the Louvre, which served at that time as
the outer antechamber, and was the common resort as well of all those
idlers who, with some pretensions to fashion, lacked the ENTREE, as of
many who with greater claims preferred to be at their ease.  My passage
for a moment stilled the babel which prevailed.  But I had no sooner
reached the farther door than the noise broke out again; and this with
so sudden a fury, the tumult being augmented by the crashing fall of a
table, as caused me at the last moment to stand and turn.  A dozen
voices crying simultaneously, "Have a care!"  and "Not here!  not
here!"  and all looking the same way, I was able to detect the three
principals in the FRACAS.  They were no other than M. de St. Mesmin,
Barradas--a low fellow, still remembered, who was already what
Saintonge had prophesied that the former would become--and young St.
Germain, the eldest son of M. de Clan.

I rather guessed than heard the cause of the quarrel, and that St.
Mesmin, putting into words what many had known for years and some made
their advantage of, had accused Barradas of cheating. The latter's fury
was, of course, proportioned to his guilt; an instant challenge while I
looked was his natural answer.  This, as he was a consummate swordsman,
and had long earned his living as much by fear as by fraud, should have
been enough to stay the greediest stomach; but St. Mesmin was not
content.  Treating the knave, the word once passed, as so much dirt, he
transferred his attack to St. Germain, and called on him to return the
money he had won by betting on Barradas.

St. Germain, a young spark as proud and headstrong as St. Mesmin
himself, and possessed of friends equal to his expectations, flung back
a haughty refusal.  He had the advantage in station and popularity; and
by far the larger number of those present sided with him.  I lingered a
moment in curiosity, looking to see the accuser with all his boldness
give way before the almost unanimous expression of disapproval.  But my
former judgment of him had been correctly formed; so far from being
browbeaten or depressed by his position, he repeated the demand with a
stubborn persistence that marvellously reminded me of Crillon; and
continued to reiterate it until all, except St. Germain himself, were
silent.  "You must return my money!"  he kept on saying monotonously.
"You must return my money.  This man cheated, and you won my money.
You must pay or fight."

"With a dead man?"  St. Germain replied, gibing at him.

"No, with me."

"Barradas will spit you!"  The other scoffed.  "Go and order your
coffin, and do not trouble me."

"I shall trouble you.  If you did not know that he cheated, pay; and if
you did know, fight."

"I know?"  St. Germain retorted fiercely.  "You madman!  Do you mean to
say that I knew that he cheated?"

"I mean what I say!"  St. Mesmin returned stolidly.  "You have won my
money.  You must return it.  If you will not return it, you must fight."

I should have heard more, but at that moment the main door opened, and
two or three gentlemen who had been with the King came out.  Not
wishing to be seen watching the brawl, I moved away and descended the
stairs; and Varenne overtaking me a moment later, and entering on the
Biron affair--of which I had just been discussing the latest
developments with the King--I forgot St. Mesmin for the time, and only
recalled him next morning when Saintonge, being announced, came into my
room in a state of great excitement, and almost with his first sentence
brought out his name.

"Barradas has not killed him then?"  I said, reproaching myself in a
degree for my forgetfulness.

"No!  He, Barradas!"  Saintonge answered.

"No?"  I exclaimed.

"Yes!"  he said.  "I tell you, M. le Marquis, he is a devil of a
fellow--a devil of a fellow!  He fought, I am told, just like Crillon;
rushed in on that rascal and fairly beat down his guard, and had him
pinned to the ground before he knew that they had crossed swords!"

"Well," I said, "there is one scoundrel the less.  That is all."

"Ah, but that is not all!"  my visitor replied more seriously. "It
should be, but it is not; and it is for that reason I am come to you.
You know St. Germain?"

"I know that his father and you are--well, that you take opposite
sides," I said smiling.

"That is pretty well known," he answered coldly.  "Anyway, this lad is
to fight St. Germain to-morrow; and now I hear that M. de Clan, St.
Germain's father, is for shutting him up.  Getting a LETTRE DE CACHET
or anything else you please, and away with him."

"What!  St. Germain?"  I said.

"No!"  M. de Saintonge answered, prolonging the sound to the utmost.
"St. Mesmin!"

"Oh," I said, "I see."

"Yes," the Marquis retorted pettishly, "but I don't.  I don't see.  And
I beg to remind you, M. de Rosny, that this lad is my wife's second
cousin through her step-father, and that I shall resent any
interference with him.  I have spent enough and done enough in the
King's service to have my wishes respected in a small matter such as
this; and I shall regard any severity exercised towards my kinsman as a
direct offence to myself. Whereas M. de Clan, who will doubtless be
here in a few minutes, is--"

"But stop," I said, interrupting him, "I heard you speaking of this
young fellow the other day.  You did not tell me then that he was your
kinsman."

"Nevertheless he is; my wife's second cousin," he answered with heat.

"And you wish him to--"

"Be let alone!"  he replied interrupting me in his turn more harshly
than I approved.  "I wish him to be let alone.  If he will fight St.
Germain, and kill or be killed, is that the King's affair that he need
interfere?  I ask for no interference," M. de Saintonge continued
bitterly, "only for fair play and no favour. And for M. de Clan who is
a Republican at heart, and a Bironist, and has never done anything but
thwart the King, for him to come now, and--faugh!  it makes me sick."

"Yes," I said drily; "I see."

"You understand me?"

"Yes," I said, "I think so."

"Very well," he replied haughtily--he had gradually wrought himself
into a passion; "be good enough to bear my request in mind then; and my
services also.  I ask no more, M. de Rosny, than is due to me and to
the King's honour."

And with that, and scarcely an expression of civility, he left me.
Some may wonder, I know, that, having in the Edict of Blois, which
forbade duelling and made it a capital offence, an answer to convince
even his arrogance, I did not use this weapon; but, as a fact, the
edict was not published until the following June, when, partly in
consequence of this affair and at my instance, the King put it forth.

Saintonge could scarcely have cleared the gates before his prediction
was fulfilled.  His enemy arrived hot foot, and entered to me with a
mien so much lowered by anxiety and trouble that I hardly knew him for
the man who had a hundred times rebuffed me, and whom the King's offers
had found consistently obdurate.  All I had ever known of M. de Clan
heightened his present humility and strengthened his appeal; so that I
felt pity for him proportioned not only to his age and necessity, but
to the depth of his fall.  Saintonge had rightly anticipated his
request; the first, he said, with a trace of his old pride, that he had
made to the King in eleven years:  his son, his only son and only
child--the single heir of his name!  He stopped there and looked at me;
his eyes bright, his lips trembling and moving without sound, his hands
fumbling on his knees.

"But," I said, "your son wishes to fight, M. de Clan?"

He nodded.

"And you cannot hinder him?"

He shrugged his shoulders grimly.  "No," he said; "he is a St. Germain."

"Well, that is just my case," I answered.  "You see this young fellow
St. Mesmin was commended to me, and is, in a manner, of my household;
and that is a fatal objection.  I cannot possibly act against him in
the manner you propose.  You must see that; and for my wishes, he
respects them less than your son regards yours."

M. de Clan rose, trembling a little on his legs, and glaring at me out
of his fierce old eyes.  "Very well," he said, "it is as much as I
expected.  Times are changed--and faiths--since the King of Navarre
slept under the same bush with Antoine St. Germain on the night before
Cahors!  I wish you good-day, M. le Marquis."

I need not say that my sympathies were with him, and that I would have
helped him if I could; but in accordance with the maxim which I have
elsewhere explained, that he who places any consideration before the
King's service is not fit to conduct it, I did not see my way to thwart
M. de Saintonge in a matter so small.  And the end justified my
inaction; for the duel, taking place that evening, resulted in nothing
worse than a serious, but not dangerous, wound which St. Mesmin,
fighting with the same fury as in the morning, contrived to inflict on
his opponent.

For some weeks after this I saw little of the young firebrand, though
from time to time he attended my receptions and invariably behaved to
me with a modesty which proved that he placed some bounds to his
presumption.  I heard, moreover, that M. de Saintonge, in
acknowledgment of the triumph over the St. Germains which he had
afforded him, had taken him up; and that the connection between the
families being publicly avowed, the two were much together.

Judge of my surprise, therefore, when one day a little before
Christmas, M. de Saintonge sought me at the Arsenal during the
preparation of the plays and interludes--which were held there that
year--and, drawing me aside into the garden, broke into a furious
tirade against the young fellow.

"But," I said, in immense astonishment, "what is this?  I thought that
he was a young man quite to your mind; and--"

"He is mad!"  he answered.

"Mad?"  I said.

"Yes, mad!"  he repeated, striking the ground violently with his cane.
"Stark mad, M. de Rosny.  He does not know himself!  What do you
think--but it is inconceivable.  He proposes to marry my daughter!
This penniless adventurer honours Mademoiselle de Saintonge by
proposing for her!"

"Pheugh!"  I said.  "That is serious."

"He--he!  I don't think I shall ever get over it!"  he answered.

"He has, of course, seen Mademoiselle?"

M. de Saintonge nodded.

"At your house, doubtless?"

"Of course!"  he replied, with a snap of rage.

"Then I am afraid it is serious," I said.

He stared at me, and for an instant I thought that he was going to
quarrel with me.  Then he asked me why.

I was not sorry to have this opportunity of at once increasing his
uneasiness, and requiting his arrogance.  "Because," I said, "this
young man appears to me to be very much out of the common. Hitherto,
whatever he has said he would do, he has done.  You remember Crillon?
Well, I trace a likeness.  St. Mesmin has much of his headlong temper
and savage determination.  If you will take my advice, you will proceed
with caution."

M. de Saintonge, receiving an answer so little to his mind, was almost
bursting with rage.  "Proceed with caution!"  he cried. "You talk as if
the thing could be entertained, or as if I had cause to fear the
coxcomb!  On the contrary, I intend to teach him a lesson a little
confinement will cool his temper.  You must give me a letter, my
friend, and we will clap him in the Bastille for a month or two."

"Impossible," I said firmly.  "Quite impossible, M. le Marquis."

M. de Saintonge looked at me, frowning.  "How?"  he said arrogantly.
"Have my services earned no better answer than that?"

"You forget," I replied.  "Let me remind you that less than a month ago
you asked me not to interfere with St. Mesmin; and at your instance I
refused to accede to M. de Clan's request that I would confine him.
You were then all for non-interference, M. de Saintonge, and I cannot
blow hot and cold.  Besides, to be plain with you," I continued, "even
if that were not the case, this young fellow is in a manner under my
protection; which renders it impossible for me to move against him.  If
you like, however, I will speak to him."

"Speak to him!"  M. de Saintonge cried.  He was breathless with rage.
He could say no more.  It may be imagined how unpalatable my answer was
to him.

But I was not disposed to endure his presumption and ill-temper beyond
a certain point; and feeling no sympathy with him in a difficulty which
he had brought upon himself by his spitefulness, I answered him
roundly.  "Yes," I said, "I will speak to him, if you please.  But not
otherwise.  I can assure you, I should not do it for everyone."

But M. de Saintonge's chagrin and rage at finding himself thus
rebuffed, in a quarter where his haughty temper had led him to expect
an easy compliance, would not allow him to stoop to my offer.  He flung
away with expressions of the utmost resentment, and even in the hearing
of my servants uttered so many foolish and violent things against me,
that had my discretion been no greater than his I must have taken
notice of them.  As, however, I had other and more important affairs
upon my hands, and it has never been my practice to humour such
hot-heads by placing myself on a level with them, I was content to
leave his punishment to St. Mesmin; assured that in him M. Saintonge
would find an opponent more courageous and not less stubborn than
himself.

The event bore me out, for within a week M. de St. Mesmin's pretensions
to the hand of Mademoiselle de Saintonge shared with the Biron affair
the attention of all Paris.  The young lady, whose reputation and the
care which had been spent on her breeding, no less than her gifts of
person and character, deserved a better fate, attained in a moment a
notoriety far from enviable; rumour's hundred tongues alleging, and
probably with truth--for what father can vie with a gallant in a
maiden's eyes?--that her inclinations were all on the side of the
pretender.  At any rate, St. Mesmin had credit for them; there was talk
of stolen meetings and a bribed waiting-woman; and though such tales
were probably as false as those who gave them currency were fair, they
obtained credence with the thoughtless, and being repeated from one to
another, in time reached her father's ears, and contributed with St.
Mesmin's persecution to render him almost beside himself.

Doubtless with a man of less dogged character, or one more amenable to
reason, the Marquis would have known how to deal; but the success which
had hitherto rewarded St. Mesmin's course of action had confirmed the
young man in his belief that everything was to be won by courage; so
that the more the Marquis blustered and threatened the more persistent
the suitor showed himself. Wherever Mademoiselle's presence was to be
expected, St. Mesmin appeared, dressed in the extreme of the fashion
and wearing either a favour made of her colours or a glove which he
asserted that she had given him.  Throwing himself in her road on every
occasion, he expressed his passion by the most extravagant looks and
gestures; and protected from the shafts of ridicule alike by his
self-esteem and his prowess, did a hundred things that rendered her
conspicuous and must have covered another than himself with
inextinguishable laughter.

In these circumstances M. de Saintonge began to find that the darts
which glanced off his opponent's armour were making him their butt; and
that he, who had valued himself all his life on a stately dignity and a
pride:  almost Spanish, was rapidly becoming the laughing-stock of the
Court.  His rage may be better imagined than described, and doubtless
his daughter did not go unscathed. But the ordinary contemptuous
refusal which would have sent another suitor about his business was of
no avail here; he had no son, while St. Mesmin's recklessness rendered
the boldest unwilling to engage him.  Saintonge found himself therefore
at his wits' end, and in this emergency bethought him again of a LETTRE
DE CACHET.  But the King proved as obdurate as his minister; partly in
accordance with a promise he had made me about a year before that he
would not commonly grant what I had denied, and partly because Biron's
affair had now reached a stage in which Saintonge's aid was no longer
of importance.

Thus repulsed, the Marquis made up his mind to carry his daughter into
the country; but St. Mesmin meeting this with the confident assertion
that he would abduct her within a week, wherever she was confined,
Saintonge, desperate as a baited bull, and trembling with rage--for the
threat was uttered at Zamet's and was repeated everywhere--avowed
equally publicly that since the King would give him no satisfaction he
would take the law into his own hands, and serve this impudent braggart
as Guise served St. Megrin.  As M. le Marquis maintained a considerable
household, including some who would not stick at a trifle, it was
thought likely enough that he would carry out his threat; especially as
the provocation seemed to many to justify it.  St. Mesmin was warned,
therefore; but his reckless character was so well known that odds were
freely given that he would be caught tripping some night--and for the
last time.

At this juncture, however, an unexpected ally, and one whose appearance
increased Saintonge's rage to an intolerable extent, took up St.
Mesmin's quarrel.  This was young St. Germain, who, quitting his
chamber, was to be seen everywhere on his antagonist's arm.  The old
feud between the Saint Germains and Saintonges aggravated the new; and
more than one brawl took place in the streets between the two parties.
St. Germain never moved without four armed servants; he placed others
at his friend's disposal; and wherever he went he loudly proclaimed
what he would do if a hair of St. Mesmin's head were injured.

This seemed to place an effectual check on M. de Saintonge's purpose;
and my surprise was great when, about a week later, the younger St.
Germain burst in upon me one morning, with his face inflamed with anger
and his dress in disorder; and proclaimed, before I could rise or
speak, that St. Mesmin had been murdered.

"How?"  I said, somewhat startled.  "And when?"

"By M. de Saintonge!  Last night!"  he answered furiously.  "But I will
have justice; I will have justice, M. de Rosny, or the King--"

I checked him as sternly as my surprise would let me; and when I had a
little abashed him--which was not easy, for his temper vied in
stubbornness with St. Mesmin's--I learned the particulars. About ten
o'clock on the previous night St. Mesmin had received a note, and, in
spite of the remonstrances of his servants, had gone out alone.  He had
not returned nor been seen since, and his friends feared the worst.

"But on what grounds?"  I said, astonished to find that that was all.

"What!"  St. Germain cried, flaring up again.  "Do you ask on what
grounds?  When M. de Saintonge has told a hundred what he would do to
him!  What he would do--do, I say?  What he has done!"

"Pooh!"  I said.  "It is some assignation, and the rogue is late in
returning."

"An assignation, yes," St. Germain retorted; "but one from which he
will not return."

"Well, if he does not, go to the Chevalier du Guet," I answered, waving
him off.  "Go!  do you hear?  I am busy," I continued. "Do you think
that I am keeper of all the young sparks that bay the moon under the
citizens' windows?  Be off, sir!"

He went reluctantly, muttering vengeance; and I, after rating Maignan
soundly for admitting him, returned to my work, supposing that before
night I should hear of St. Mesmin's safety.  But the matter took
another turn, for while I was at dinner the Captain of the Watch came
to speak to me.  St. Mesmin's cap had been found in a bye-street near
the river, in a place where there were marks of a struggle; and his
friends were furious.  High words had already passed between the two
factions, St. Germain openly accusing Saintonge of the murder; plainly,
unless something were done at once, a bloody fray was imminent.

"What do you think yourself, M. le Marchand?"  I said, when I had heard
him out.

He shrugged his shoulders.  "What can I think, your Excellency?" he
said.  "What else was to be expected?"

"You take it for granted that M. de Saintonge is guilty?"

"The young man is gone," he answered pithily.

In spite of this, I thought the conclusion hasty, and contented myself
with bidding him see St. Germain and charge him to be quiet; promising
that, if necessary, the matter should be investigated and justice done.
I still had good hopes that St. Mesmin's return would clear up the
affair, and the whole turn out to be a freak on his part; but within a
few hours tidings that Saintonge had taken steps to strengthen his
house and was lying at home, refusing to show himself, placed a
different and more serious aspect on the mystery.  Before noon next day
M. de Clan, whose interference surprised me not a little, was with me
to support his son's petition; and at the King's LEVEE next day St.
Germain accused his enemy to the King's face, and caused an angry and
indecent scene in the chamber.

When a man is in trouble foes spring up, as the moisture rises through
the stones before a thaw.  I doubt if M. de Saintonge was not more
completely surprised than any by the stir which ensued, and which was
not confined to the St. Germains' friends, though they headed the
accusers.  All whom he had ever offended, and all who had ever offended
him, clamoured for justice; while St. Mesmin's faults being forgotten
and only his merits remembered, there were few who did not bow to the
general indignation, which the young and gallant, who saw that at any
moment his fate might be theirs, did all in their power to foment.
Finally, the arrival of St. Mesmin the father, who came up almost
broken-hearted, and would have flung himself at the King's feet on the
first opportunity, roused the storm to the wildest pitch; so that, in
the fear lest M. de Biron's friends should attempt something under
cover of it, I saw the King and gave him my advice.  This was to summon
Saintonge, the St. Germains, and old St. Mesmin to his presence and
effect a reconciliation; or, failing that, to refer the matter to the
Parliament.

He agreed with me and chose to receive them next day at the Arsenal.  I
communicated his commands, and at the hour named we met, the King
attended by Roquelaure and myself.  But if I had flattered myself that
the King's presence would secure a degree of moderation and
reasonableness I was soon undeceived; for though M. de St. Mesmin had
only his trembling head and his tears to urge, Clan and his son fell
upon Saintonge with so much violence--to which he responded by a fierce
and resentful sullenness equally dangerous--that I feared that blows
would be struck even before the King's face.  Lest this should happen
and the worst traditions of old days of disorder be renewed, I
interposed and managed at length to procure silence.

"For shame, gentlemen, for shame!"  the King said, gnawing his
moustachios after a fashion he had when in doubt.  "I take Heaven to
witness that I cannot say who is right!  But this brawling does no
good.  The one fact we have is that St. Mesmin has disappeared."

"Yes, sire; and that M. de Saintonge predicted his disappearance," St.
Germain cried, impulsively.  "To the day and almost to the hour."

"I gather, de Saintonge," the King said, turning to him, mildly, "that
you did use some expressions of that kind."

"Yes, sire, and did nothing upon them," he answered resentfully. But he
trembled as he spoke.  He was an older man than his antagonist, and the
latter's violence shook him.

"But does M. de Saintonge deny," St. Germain broke out afresh before
the King could speak, "that my friend had made him a proposal for his
daughter?  and that he rejected it?"

"I deny nothing!"  Saintonge cried, fierce and trembling as a baited
animal.  "For that matter, I would to Heaven he had had her!"  he
continued bitterly.

"Ay, so you say now," the irrepressible St. Germain retorted, "when you
know that he is dead!"

"I do not know that he is dead," Saintonge answered.  "And, for that
matter, if he were alive and here now he should have her.  I am tired;
I have suffered enough."

"What!  Do you tell the King," the young fellow replied incredulously,
"that if St. Mesmin were here you would give him your daughter?"

"I do--I do!"  the other exclaimed passionately.  "To be rid of him,
and you, and all your crew!"

"Tut, tut!"  the King said.  "Whatever betides, I will answer for it,
you shall have protection and justice, M. de Saintonge.  And do you,
young sir, be silent.  Be silent, do you hear!  We have had too much
noise introduced into this already."

He proceeded then to ask certain details, and particularly the hour at
which St. Mesmin had been last seen.  Notwithstanding that these facts
were in the main matters of common agreement, some wrangling took place
over them; which was only brought to an end at last in a manner
sufficiently startling.  The King with his usual thoughtfulness had
bidden St. Mesmin be seated.  On a sudden the old man rose; I heard him
utter a cry of amazement, and following the direction of his eyes I
looked towards the door.  There stood his son!

At an appearance so unexpected a dozen exclamations filled the air; but
to describe the scene which ensued or the various emotions that were
evinced by this or that person, as surprise or interest or affection
moved them, were a task on which I am not inclined to enter.  Suffice
it that the foremost and the loudest in these expressions of admiration
was young St. Germain; and that the King, after glancing from face to
face in puzzled perplexity, began to make a shrewd guess at the truth.

"This is a very timely return, M. de St. Mesmin," he said drily.

"Yes, sire," the young impertinent answered, not a whit abashed.

"Very timely, indeed."

"Yes, sire.  And the more as St. Germain tells me that M. de Saintonge
in his clemency has reconsidered my claims; and has undertaken to use
that influence with Mademoiselle which--"

But on that word M. de Saintonge, comprehending the RUSE by which he
had been overcome, cut him short; crying out in a rage that he would
see him in perdition first.  However, we all immediately took the
Marquis in hand, and made it our business to reconcile him to the
notion; the King even making a special appeal to him, and promising
that St. Mesmin should never want his good offices. Under this
pressure, and confronted by his solemn undertaking, Saintonge at last
and with reluctance gave way.  At the King's instance, he formally gave
his consent to a match which effectually secured St. Mesmin's fortunes,
and was as much above anything the young fellow could reasonably expect
as his audacity and coolness exceeded the common conceit of courtiers.

Many must still remember St. Mesmin; though an attack of the small-pox,
which disfigured him beyond the ordinary, led him to leave Paris soon
after his marriage.  He was concerned, I believe, in the late
ill-advised rising in the Vivarais; and at that time his wife still
lived.  But for some years past I have not heard his name, and only now
recall it as that of one whose adventures, thrust on my attention,
formed an amusing interlude in the more serious cares which now demand
our notice.




V.

THE LOST CIPHER.


I might spend many hours in describing the impression which this great
Sovereign made upon my mind; but if the part which she took in the
conversation I have detailed does not sufficiently exhibit those
qualities of will and intellect which made her the worthy compeer of
the King my master, I should labour in vain. Moreover, my stay in her
neighbourhood, though Raleigh and Griffin showed me every civility, was
short.  An hour after taking leave of her, on the 15th of August, 1601,
I sailed from Dover, and crossing to Calais without mishap anticipated
with pleasure the King's satisfaction when he should hear the result of
my mission, and learn from my mouth the just and friendly sentiments
which Queen Elizabeth entertained towards him.

Unfortunately I was not able to impart these on the instant. During my
absence a trifling matter had carried the King to Dieppe, whence his
anxiety on the queen's account, who was shortly to be brought to bed,
led him to take the road to Paris. He sent word to me to follow him,
but necessarily some days elapsed before we met; an opportunity of
which his enemies and mine were quick to take advantage, and that so
insidiously and with so much success as to imperil not my reputation
only but his happiness.

The time at their disposal was increased by the fact; that when I
reached the Arsenal I found the Louvre vacant, the queen, who lay at
Fontainebleau, having summoned the King thither.  Ferret, his
secretary, however, awaited me with a letter, in which Henry, after
expressing his desire to see we, bade me nevertheless stay in Paris a
day to transact some business.  "Then," he continued, "come to me, my
friend, and we will discuss the matter of which you know.  In the
meantime send me your papers by Ferret, who will give you a receipt for
them."

Suspecting no danger in a course which was usual enough, I hastened to
comply.  Summoning Maignan, who, whenever I travelled, carried my
portfolio, I unlocked it, and emptying the papers in a mass on the
table, handed them in detail to Ferret. Presently, to my astonishment,
I found that one, and this the most important, was missing.  I went
over the papers again, and again, and yet again.  Still it was not to
be found.

It will be remembered that whenever I travelled on a mission of
importance I wrote my despatches in one of three modes, according as
they were of little, great, or the first importance; in ordinary
characters that is, in a cipher to which the council possessed the key,
or in a cipher to which only the King and I held keys.  This last, as
it was seldom used, was rarely changed; but it was my duty, on my
return from each mission, immediately to remit my key to the King, who
deposited it in a safe place until another occasion for its use arose.

It was this key which was missing.  I had been accustomed to carry it
in the portfolio with the other papers; but in a sealed envelope which
I broke and again sealed with my own signet whenever I had occasion to
use the cipher.  I had last seen the envelope at Calais, when I handed
the portfolio to Maignan before beginning my journey to Paris; the
portfolio had not since been opened, yet the sealed packet was missing.

More than a little uneasy, I recalled Maignan, who had withdrawn after
delivering up his charge, "You rascal!"  I said with some heat.  "Has
this been out of your custody?"

"The bag?"  he answered, looking at it.  Then his face changed. "You
have cut your finger, my lord," he said.

I had cut it slightly in unbuckling the portfolio, and a drop or two of
blood had fallen on the papers.  But his reference to it at this
moment, when my mind was full of my loss, angered me, and even awoke my
suspicions.  "Silence!"  I said, "and answer me. Have you let this bag
out of your possession?"  This time he replied straightforwardly that
he had not.

"Nor unlocked it?"

"I have no key, your excellency."

That was true; and as I had at bottom the utmost confidence in his
fidelity, I pursued the inquiry no farther in that direction, but made
a third search among the papers.  This also failing to bring the packet
to light, and Ferret being in haste to be gone, I was obliged for the
moment to put up with the loss, and draw what comfort I could from the
reflection that, no despatch in the missing cipher was extant.  Whoever
had stolen it, therefore, another could be substituted for it and no
one the worse.  Still I was unwilling that the King should hear of the
mischance from a stranger, and be led to think me careless; and I bade
Ferret be silent about it unless Henry missed the packet, which might
not happen before my arrival.

When the secretary, who readily assented, had given me his receipt and
was gone, I questioned Maignan afresh and more closely, but with no
result.  He had not seen me place the packet in the portfolio at
Calais, and that I had done so I could vouch only my own memory, which
I knew to be fallible.  In the meantime, though the mischance annoyed
me, I attached no great importance to it; but anticipating that a word
of explanation would satisfy the King, and a new cipher dispose of
other difficulties, I dismissed the matter from my mind.

Twenty-four hours later, however, I was rudely awakened.  A courier
arrived from Henry, and surprising me in the midst of my last
preparations at the Arsenal, handed me an order to attend his Majesty;
an order couched in the most absolute and peremptory terms, and lacking
all those friendly expressions which the King never failed to use when
he wrote to me.  A missive so brief and so formal--and so needless, for
I was on the point of starting--had not reached me for years; and
coming at this moment when I had no reason to expect a reverse of
fortune, it had all the effect of a thunder-bolt in a clear sky.  I
stood stunned, the words which I was dictating to my secretary dying on
my lips. For I knew the King too well, and had experienced his kindness
too lately to attribute the harshness of the order to chance or
forgetfulness; and assured in a moment that I stood face to face with a
grave crisis, I found myself hard put to it to hide my feelings from
those about me.

Nevertheless, I did so with all effort; and, sending for the courier
asked him with an assumption of carelessness what was the latest news
at Court.  His answer, in a measure, calmed my fears, though it could
not remove them.  He reported that the queen had been taken ill or so
the rumour went.

"Suddenly?"  I said.

"This morning," he answered.

"The King was with her?"

"Yes, your excellency."

"Had he left her long when he sent this letter?"

"It came from her chamber, your excellency."

"But--did you understand that her Majesty was in danger?"  I urged.

As to that, however, the man could not say anything; and I was left to
nurse my conjectures during the long ride to Fontainebleau, where we
arrived in the cool of the evening, the last stage through the forest
awakening memories of past pleasure that combated in vain the disorder
and apprehension which held my spirits.  Dismounting in the dusk at the
door of my apartments, I found a fresh surprise awaiting me in the
shape of M. de Concini, the Italian; who advancing to meet me before my
foot was out of the stirrup, announced that he came from the King, who
desired my instant attendance in the queen's closet.

Knowing Concini to be one of those whose influence with her Majesty had
more than once tempted the King to the most violent measures against
her--from which I had with difficulty dissuaded him--I augured the
worst from the choice of such a messenger; and wounded alike in my
pride and the affection in which I held the King, could scarcely find
words in which to ask him if the queen was ill.

"Indisposed, my lord," he replied carelessly.  And he began to whistle.

I told him that I would remove my boots and brush off the dust, and in
five minutes be at his service.

"Pardon me," he said, "my orders are strict; and they are to request
you to attend his Majesty immediately.  He expected you an hour ago."

I was thunderstruck at this--at the message, and at the man's manner;
and for a moment I could scarcely restrain my indignation.  Fortunately
the habit of self-control came to my aid in time, and I reflected that
an altercation with such a person could only lower my dignity.  I
contented myself, therefore, with signifying my assent by a nod, and
without more ado followed him towards the queen's apartments.

In the ante-chamber were several persons, who as I passed saluted me
with an air of shyness and incertitude which was enough of itself to
put me on my guard.  Concini attended me to the door of the chamber;
there he fell back, and Mademoiselle Galigai, who was in waiting,
announced me.  I entered, assuming a serene countenance, and found the
King and queen together, no other person being present.  The queen was
lying at length on a couch, while Henry, seated on a stool at her feet,
seemed to be engaged in soothing and reassuring her.  On my entrance,
he broke off and rose to his feet.

"Here he is at last," he said, barely looking at me.  "Now, if you
will, dear heart ask him your questions.  I have had no communication
with him, as you know, for I have been with you since morning."

The queen, whose face was flushed with fever, made a fretful movement
but did not answer.

"Do you wish me to ask him?"  Henry said with admirable patience.

"If you think it is worth while," she muttered, turning sullenly and
eyeing me from the middle of her pillows with disdain and ill-temper.

"I will, then," he answered, and he turned to me.  "M. de Rosny," he
said in a formal tone, which even without the unaccustomed monsieur cut
me to the heart, "be good enough to tell the queen how the key to my
secret cipher, which I entrusted to you, has come to be in Madame de
Verneuil's possession."

I looked at him in the profoundest astonishment, and for a moment
remained silent, trying to collect my thoughts under this unexpected
blow.  The queen saw my hesitation and laughed spitefully.  "I am
afraid, sire," she said, "that you have overrated this gentleman's
ingenuity, though doubtless it has been much exercised in your service."

Henry's face grew red with vexation.  "Speak, man!"  he cried. "How
came she by it?"

"Madame de Verneuil?"  I said.

The queen laughed again.  "Had you not better take him out first, sir,"
she said scornfully, "and tell him what to say?"

"'Fore God, madame," the King cried passionately, "you try me too far!
Have I not told you a hundred times, and sworn to you, that I did not
give Madame de Verneuil this key?"

"If you did not give her that," the queen muttered sullenly, picking at
the silken coverlet which lay on her feet, "you have given her all
else.  You cannot deny it."

Henry let a gesture of despair escape him.  "Are we to go back to
that?"  he said.  Then turning to me, "Tell her," he said between his
teeth; "and tell me.  VENTRE SAINT GRIS--are you dumb, man?"

Discerning nothing for it at the moment save to bow before this storm,
which had arisen so suddenly, and from a quarter the least expected, I
hastened to comply.  I had not proceeded far with my story,
however--which fell short, of course, of explaining how the key came to
be in Madame de Verneuil's hands--before I saw that it won no credence
with the queen, but rather confirmed her in her belief that the King
had given to another what he had denied to her.  And more; I saw that
in proportion as the tale failed to convince her, it excited the King's
wrath and disappointment.  He several times cut me short with
expressions of the utmost impatience, and at last, when I came to a
lame conclusion--since I could explain nothing except that the key was
gone--he could restrain himself no longer.  In a tone in which he had
never addressed me before, he asked me why I had not, on the instant,
communicated the loss to him; and when I would have defended myself by
adducing the reason I have given above, overwhelmed me with abuse and
reproaches, which, as they were uttered in the queen's presence, and
would be repeated, I knew, to the Concinis and Galigais of her suite,
who had no occasion to love me, carried a double sting.

Nevertheless, for a time, and until he had somewhat worn himself out, I
let Henry proceed.  Then, taking advantage of the first pause, I
interposed.  Reminding him that he had never had cause to accuse me of
carelessness before, I recalled the twenty-two years during which I had
served him faithfully, and the enmities I had incurred for his sake;
and having by these means placed the discussion on a more equal
footing, I descended again to particulars, and asked respectfully if I
might know on whose authority Madame de Verneuil was said to have the
cipher.

"On her own!"  the queen cried hysterically.  "Don't try to deceive
me,--for it will be in vain.  I know she has it; and if the King did
not give it to her, who did?"

"That is the question, madam," I said.

"It is one easily answered," she retorted.  "If you do not know, ask
her."

"But, perhaps, madam, she will not answer," I ventured.

"Then command her to answer in the King's name!"  the queen replied,
her cheeks burning with fever.  "And if she will not, then has the King
no prisons--no fetters smooth enough for those dainty ankles?"

This was a home question, and Henry, who never showed to less advantage
than when he stood between two women, cast a sheepish glance at me.
Unfortunately the queen caught the look, which was not intended for
her; and on the instant it awoke all her former suspicions.  Supposing
that she had discovered our collusion, she flung herself back with a
cry of rage, and bursting into a passion of tears, gave way to frantic
reproaches, wailing and throwing herself about with a violence which
could not but injure one in her condition.

The King stared at her for a moment in sheer dismay.  Then his chagrin
turned to anger; which, as he dared not vent it on her, took my
direction.  He pointed impetuously to the door.  "Begone, sir!"  he
said in a passion, and with the utmost harshness.  "You have done
mischief enough here.  God grant that we see the end of it!  Go--go!"
he continued, quite beside himself with fury. "Send Galigai here, and
do you go to your lodging until you hear from me!"

Overwhelmed and almost stupefied by the catastrophe, I found my way out
I hardly knew how, and sending in the woman, made my escape from the
ante-chamber.  But hasten as I might, my disorder, patent to a hundred
curious eyes, betrayed me; and, if it did not disclose as much as I
feared or the inquisitive desired, told more than any had looked to
learn.  Within an hour it was known at Nemours that his Majesty had
dismissed me with high words--some said with a blow; and half a dozen
couriers were on the road to Paris with the news.

In my place some might have given up all for lost; but in addition to a
sense of rectitude, and the consciousness of desert, I had to support
me an intimate knowledge of the King's temper; which, though I had
never suffered from it to this extent before, I knew to be on occasion
as hot as his anger was short lived, and his disposition generous.  I
had hopes, therefore--although I saw dull faces enough among my suite,
and some pale ones--that the King's repentance would overtake his
anger, and its consequences outstrip any that might flow from his
wrath. But though I was not altogether at fault in this, I failed to
take in to account one thing--I mean Henry's anxiety on the queen's
account, her condition, and his desire to have an heir; which so
affected the issue, that instead of fulfilling my expectations the
event left me more despondent than before.  The King wrote, indeed, and
within the hour, and his letter was in form an apology.  But it was so
lacking in graciousness; so stiff, though it began "My good friend
Rosny," and so insincere, though it referred to my past services, that
when I had read it I stood awhile gazing at it, afraid to turn lest De
Vic and Varennes, who had brought it, should read my disappointment in
my face.

For I could not hide from myself that the gist of the letter lay, not
in the expressions of regret which opened it, but in the complaint
which closed it; wherein the King sullenly excused his outbreak on the
ground of the magnitude of the interests which my carelessness had
endangered and the opening to harass the queen which I had heedlessly
given.  "This cipher," he said, "has long been a whim with my wife,
from whom, for good reasons well known to you and connected with the
Grand Duke's Court, I have thought fit to withhold it.  Now nothing
will persuade her that I have not granted to another what I refused
her.  I tremble, my friend, lest you be found to have done more ill to
France in a moment of carelessness than all your services have done
good."

It was not difficult to find a threat underlying these words, nor to
discern that if the queen's fancy remained unshaken, and ill came of
it, the King would hardly forgive me.  Recognising this, and that I was
face to face with a crisis from which I could not escape but by the use
of my utmost powers, I assumed a serious and thoughtful air; and
without affecting to disguise the fact that the King was displeased
with me, dismissed the envoys with a few civil speeches, in which I did
not fail to speak of his Majesty in terms that even malevolence could
not twist to my disadvantage.

When they were gone, doubtless to tell Henry how I had taken it, I sat
down to supper with La Font, Boisrueil, and two or three gentlemen of
my suite; and, without appearing too cheerful, contrived to eat with my
usual appetite.  Afterwards I withdrew in the ordinary course to my
chamber, and being now at liberty to look the situation in the face,
found it as serious as I had feared.  The falling man has few friends;
he must act quickly if he would retain any.  I was not slow in deciding
that my sole chance of an honourable escape lay in discovering--and
that within a few hours--who stole the cipher and conveyed it to Madame
de Verneuil; and in placing before the queen such evidence of this as
must convince her.

By way of beginning, I summoned Maignan and put him through a severe
examination.  Later, I sent for the rest of my household--such, I mean,
as had accompanied me--and ranging them against the walls of my
chamber, took a flambeau in my hand and went the round of them,
questioning each, and marking his air and aspect as he answered.  But
with no result; so that after following some clues to no purpose, and
suspecting several persons who cleared themselves on the spot, I became
assured that the chain must be taken up at the other end, and the first
link found among Madame de Verneuil's following.

By this time it was nearly midnight, and my people were dropping with
fatigue.  Nevertheless, a sense of the desperate nature of the case
animating them, they formed themselves voluntarily into a kind of
council, all feeling their probity attacked; in which various modes of
forcing the secret from those who held it were proposed--Maignan's
suggestions being especially violent. Doubting, however, whether Madame
had more than one confidante, I secretly made up my mind to a course
which none dared to suggest; and then dismissing all to bed, kept only
Maignan to lie in my chamber, that if any points occurred to me in the
night I might question him on them.

At four o'clock I called him, and bade him go out quietly and saddle
two horses.  This done, I slipped out myself without arousing anyone,
and mounting at the stables, took the Orleans road through the forest.
My plan was to strike at the head, and surprising Madame de Verneuil
while the event; still hung uncertain, to wrest the secret from her by
trick or threat.  The enterprise was desperate, for I knew the
stubbornness and arrogance of the woman, and the inveterate enmity
which she entertained towards me, more particularly since the King's
marriage.  But in a dangerous case any remedy is welcome.

I reached Malesherbes, where Madame was residing with her parents, a
little before seven o'clock, and riding without disguise to the chateau
demanded to see her.  She was not yet risen, and the servants, whom my
appearance threw into the utmost confusion, objected this to me; but I
knew that the excuse was no real one, and answered roughly that I came
from the King, and must see her.  This opened all doors, and in a
moment I found myself in her chamber.  She was sitting up in bed,
clothed in an elegant nightrail, and seemed in no wise surprised to see
me.  On the contrary, she greeted me with a smile and a taunting word;
and omitted nothing that might evince her disdain or hurt my dignity.
She let me advance without offering me a chair; and when, after
saluting her, I looked about for one, I found that all the seats except
one very low stool had been removed from the room.

This was so like her that it did not astonish me, and I baffled her
malice by leaning against the wall.  "This is no ordinary honour--from
M. de Rosny!"  she said, flouting me with her eyes.

"I come on no ordinary mission, madame," I said as gravely as I could.

"Mercy!"  she exclaimed in a mocking tone.  "I should have put on new
ribbons, I suppose!"

"From the King, madame," I continued, not allowing myself to be moved,
"to inquire how you obtained possession of his cipher."

She laughed loudly.  "Good, simple King," she said, "to ask what he
knows already!"

"He does not know, madame," I answered severely.

"What?"  she cried, in affected surprise.  "When he gave it to me
himself!"

"He did not, madame."

"He did, sir!"  she retorted, firing up.  "Or if he did not, prove
it--prove it!  And, by the way," she continued, lowering her voice
again, and reverting to her former tone of spiteful badinage, "how is
the dear queen?  I heard that she was indisposed yesterday, and kept
the King in attendance all day. So unfortunate, you know, just at this
time."  And her eyes twinkled with malicious amusement.

"Madame," I said, "may I speak plainly to you?"

"I never heard that you could speak otherwise," she answered quickly.
"Even his friends never called M. de Rosny a wit; but only a plain,
rough man who served our royal turn well enough in rough times; but is
now growing--"

"Madame!"

"A trifle exigeant and superfluous."

After that, I saw that it was war to the knife between us; and I asked
her in very plain terms If she were not afraid of the queen's enmity,
that she dared thus to flaunt the King's favours before her.

"No more than I am afraid of yours," she answered hardily.

"But if the King is disappointed in his hopes?"

"You may suffer; very probably will," she answered, slowly and smiling,
"not I.  Besides, sir--my child was born dead.  He bore that very well."

"Yet, believe me, madame, you run some risk."

"In keeping what the King has given me?"  she answered, raising her
eyebrows.

"No!  In keeping what the King has not given you!"  I answered sternly.
"Whereas, what do you gain?"

"Well," she replied, raising herself in the bed, while her eyes
sparkled and her colour rose, "if you like, I will tell you. This
pleasure, for one thing--the pleasure of seeing you there, awkward,
booted, stained, and standing, waiting my will.  That--which perhaps
you call a petty thing--I gain first of all.  Then I gain your ruin, M.
de Rosny; I plant a sting in that woman's breast; and for his Majesty,
he has made his bed and may lie on it."

"Have a care, madame!"  I cried, bursting with indignation at a speech
so shameless and disloyal.  "You are playing a dangerous game, I warn
you!"

"And what game have you played?"  she replied, transported on a sudden
with equal passion.  "Who was it tore up the promise of marriage which
the King gave me?  Who was it prevented me being Queen of France?  Who
was it hurried on the match with this tradeswoman, so that the King
found himself wedded, before he knew it?  Who was it--but enough;
enough!"  she cried, interrupting herself with a gesture full of rage.
"You have ruined me, you and your queen between you, and I will ruin
you!"

"On the contrary, madame," I answered, collecting myself for a last
effort, and speaking with all the severity which a just indignation
inspired, "I have not ruined you.  But if you do not tell me that which
I am here to learn--I will!"

She laughed out loud.  "Oh, you simpleton!"  she said.  "And you call
yourself a statesman!  Do you not see that if I do not tell it, you are
disgraced yourself and powerless, and can do me no harm?  Tell it you?
When I have you all on the hip--you, the King, the queen!  Not for a
million crowns, M. de Rosny!"

"And that is your answer, madame?"  I said, choking with rage. It had
been long since any had dared so to beard me.

"Yes," she replied stoutly; "it is!  Or, stay; you shall not go
empty-handed."  And thrusting her arm under the pillow she drew out,
after a moment's search, a small packet, which she held out towards me.
"Take it!"  she said, with a taunting laugh.  "It has served my turn.
What the King gave me, I give you."

Seeing that it was the missing key to the cipher, I swallowed my rage
and took it; and being assured by this time that I could effect nothing
by staying longer, but should only expose myself to fresh insults, I
turned on my heel, with rudeness equal to her own, and, without taking
leave of her, flung the door open and went out.  I heard her throw
herself back with a shrill laugh of triumph.  But as, the moment the
door fell to behind me, my thoughts began to cast about for another way
of escape--this failing--I took little heed of her, and less of the
derisive looks to which the household, quickly taking the cue, treated
me as I passed.  I flung myself into the saddle and galloped off,
followed by Maignan, who presently, to my surprise, blurted out a
clumsy word of congratulation.

I turned on him in amazement, and, swearing at him, asked him what he
meant.

"You have got it," he said timidly, pointing to the packet which I
mechanically held in my hand.

"And to what purpose?"  I cried, glad of this opportunity of unloading
some of my wrath.  "I want, not the paper, but the secret, fool!  You
may have the paper for yourself if you will tell me how Madame got it."

Nevertheless, his words led me to look at the packet.  I opened it,
and, having satisfied myself that it contained the original and not a
copy, was putting it up again when my eyes fell on a small spot of
blood which marked one corner of the cover.  It was not larger than a
grain of corn, but it awoke, first, a vague association and then a
memory, which as I rode grew stronger and more definite, until, on a
sudden, discovery flashed upon me--and the truth.  I remembered where I
had seen spots of blood before--on the papers I had handed to Ferret
and remembered, too, where that blood had come from.  I looked at the
cut now, and, finding it nearly healed, sprang in my saddle.  Of a
certainty this paper had gone through my hands that day!  It had been
among the others; therefore it must have been passed to Ferret inside
another when I first opened the bag!  The rogue, getting it and seeing
his opportunity, and that I did not suspect, had doubtless secreted it,
probably while I was attending to my hand.

I had not suspected him before, because I had ticked off the earlier
papers as I handed them to him; and had searched only among the rest
and in the bag for the missing one.  Now I wondered that I had not done
so, and seen the truth from the beginning; and in my impatience I found
the leagues through the forest, though the sun was not yet high and the
trees sheltered us, the longest I had ridden in my life.  When the
roofs of the chateau at length appeared before us, I could scarcely
keep my pace within bounds.  Reflecting how Madame de Verneuil had
over-reached herself, and how, by indulging in that last stroke of
arrogance, she had placed the secret in my hands, I had much ado to
refrain from going to the King booted and unwashed as I was; and though
I had not eaten since the previous evening.  However, the habit of
propriety, which no man may lightly neglect, came to my aid.  I made my
toilet, and, having broken my fast standing, hastened to the Court.  On
the way I learned that the King was in the queen's garden, and,
directing my steps thither, found him walking with my colleagues,
Villeroy and Sillery, in the little avenue which leads to the garden of
the Conciergerie.  A number of the courtiers were standing on the low
terrace watching them, while a second group lounged about the queen's
staircase.  Full of the news which I had for the King, I crossed the
terrace; taking no particular heed of anyone, but greeting such as came
in my way in my usual fashion.  At the edge of the terrace I paused a
moment before descending the three steps; and at the same moment, as it
happened, Henry looked up, and our eyes met.  On the instant he averted
his gaze, and, turning on his heel in a marked way, retired slowly to
the farther end of the walk.

The action was so deliberate that I could not doubt he meant to slight
me; and I paused where I was, divided between grief and indignation, a
mark for all those glances and whispered gibes in which courtiers
indulge on such occasions.  The slight was not rendered less serious by
the fact that the King was walking with my two colleagues; so that I
alone seemed to be out of his confidence, as one soon to be out of his
councils also.

I perceived all this, and was not blind to the sneering smiles which
were exchanged behind my back; but I affected to see nothing, and to be
absorbed in sudden thought.  In a minute or two the King turned and
came back towards me; and again, as if he could not restrain his
curiosity, looked up so that our eyes met. This time I thought that he
would beckon me to him, satisfied with the lengths to which he had
already carried his displeasure. But he turned again, with a light
laugh.

At this a courtier, one of Sillery's creatures, who had presumed on the
occasion so far as to come to my elbow, thought that he might safely
amuse himself with me.  "I am afraid that the King grows older, M. de
Rosny," he said, smirking at his companions. "His sight seems to be
failing."

"It should not be neglected then," I said grimly.  "I will tell him
presently what you say."

He fell back, looking foolish at that, at the very moment that Henry,
having taken another turn, dismissed Villeroy, who, wiser than the
puppy at my elbow, greeted me with particular civility as he passed.
Freed from him, Henry stood a moment hesitating. He told me afterwards
that he had not turned from me a yard before his heart smote him; and
that but for a mischievous curiosity to see how I should take it, he
would not have carried the matter so far.  Be that as it may--and I do
not doubt this, any more than I ever doubted the reality of the
affection in which he held me--on a sudden he raised his hand and
beckoned to me.

I went down to him gravely, and not hurriedly.  He looked at me with
some signs of confusion in his face.  "You are late this morning," he
said.

"I have been on your Majesty's business," I answered.

"I do not doubt that," he replied querulously, his eyes wandering.  "I
am not--I am troubled this morning."  And after a fashion he had when
he was not at his ease, he ground his heel into the soil and looked
down at the mark.  "The queen is not well.  Sillery has seen her, and
will tell you so."

M. de Sillery, whose constant opposition to me at the council-board I
have elsewhere described, began to affirm it.  I let him go on for a
little time, and then interrupted him brusquely.  "I think it was you,"
I said, "who nominated Ferret to be one of the King's clerks."

"Ferret?"  he exclaimed, reddening at my tone, while the King, who knew
me well, pricked up his ears.

"Yes," I said; "Ferret."

"And if so?"  Sillery asked, haughtily.  "What do you mean?"

"Only this," I said.  "That if his Majesty will summon him to the
queen's closet, without warning or delay, and ask him in her presence
how much Madame de Verneuil gave him for the King's cipher, her
Majesty, I think, will learn something which she wishes to know."

"What?"  the King cried.  "You have discovered it?  But he gave you a
receipt for the papers he took."

"For the papers he took with my knowledge--yes, sire."

"The rogue!"  Sillery exclaimed viciously.  "I will go and fetch him."

"Not so--with your Majesty's leave," I said, interposing quickly. "M.
de Sillery may say too much or too little.  Let a lackey take a
message, bidding him go to the queen's closet, and he will suspect
nothing."

The King assented, and bade me go and give the order.  When I returned,
he asked me anxiously if I felt sure that the man would confess.

"Yes, if you pretend to know all, sire," I answered.  "He will think
that Madame has betrayed him."

"Very well," Henry said.  "Then let us go."

But I declined to be present; partly on the ground that if I were there
the queen might suspect me of inspiring the man, and partly because I
thought that the rogue would entertain a more confident hope of pardon,
and be more likely to confess, if he saw the King alone.  I contrived
to keep Sillery also; and Henry giving the word, as he mounted the
steps, that he should be back presently, the whole Court remained in a
state of suspense, aware that something was in progress but in doubt
what, and unable to decide whether I were again in favour or now on my
trial.

Sillery remained talking to me, principally on English matters, until
the dinner hour; which came and went, neglected by all.  At length,
when the curiosity of the mass of courtiers, who did not dare to
interrupt us, had been raised by delay to an almost intolerable pitch,
the King returned, with signs of disorder in his bearing; and, crossing
the terrace in half a dozen strides, drew me hastily, along with
Sillery, into the grove of white mulberry trees.  There we were no
sooner hidden in part, though not completely, than he threw his arms
about me and embraced me with the warmest expressions.  "Ah, my
friend," he said, putting me from him at last, "what shall I say to
you?"

"The queen is satisfied, sire?"

"Perfectly; and desires to be commended to you."

"He confessed, then?"

Henry nodded, with a look in his face that I did not understand. "Yes,"
he said, "fully.  It was as you thought, my friend.  God have mercy
upon him!"

I started.  "What?"  I said.  "Has he--"

The King nodded, and could not repress a shudder.  "Yes," he said; "but
not, thank Heaven, until he had left the closet.  He had something
about him."

Sillery began anxiously to clear himself; but the King, with his usual
good nature, stopped him, and bade us all go and dine, saying that we
must be famished.  He ended by directing me to be back in an hour,
since his own appetite was spoiled.  "And bring with you all your
patience," he added, "for I have a hundred questions to ask you.  We
will walk towards Avon, and I will show you the surprise which I am
preparing for the queen."

Alas, I would I could say that all ended there.  But the rancour of
which Madame de Verneuil had given token in her interview with me was
rather aggravated than lessened by the failure of her plot and the
death of her tool.  It proved to be impenetrable by all the kindnesses
which the King lavished upon her; neither the legitimation of the child
which she soon afterwards bore, nor the clemency which the
King--against the advice of his wisest ministers extended to her
brother Auvergne, availing to expel it from her breast.  How far she or
that ill-omened family were privy to the accursed crime which, nine
years later, palsied France on the threshold of undreamed-of glories, I
will not take on myself to say; for suspicion is not proof.  But
history, of which my beloved master must ever form so great a part,
will lay the blame where it should rest.




VI.

THE MAN OF MONCEAUX.


In the month of August of this year the King found some alleviation of
the growing uneasiness which his passion for Madame de Conde occasioned
him in a visit to Monceaux, where he spent two weeks in such diversions
as the place afforded.  He invited me to accompany him, but on my
representing that I could not there--so easily as in my own closet,
where I had all the materials within reach--prepare the report which he
had commanded me to draw up, he directed me to remain in Paris until it
was ready, and then to join him.

This report which he was having written, not only for his own
satisfaction but for the information of his heir, took the form of a
recital of all the causes and events, spread over many years, which had
induced him to take in hand the Great Design; together with a succinct
account of the munitions and treasures which he had prepared to carry
it out.  As it included many things which were unknown beyond the
council, and some which he shared only with me--and as, in particular,
it enumerated the various secret alliances and agreements which he had
made with the princes of North Germany, whom a premature discovery must
place at the Emperor's mercy--it was necessary that I should draw up
the whole with my own hand, and with the utmost care and precaution.
This I did; and that nothing might be wanting to a memorial which I
regarded with justice as the most important of the many State papers
which it had fallen to my lot; to prepare, I spent seven days in
incessant labour upon it.  It was not, therefore, until the third week
in August:  that I was free to travel to Monceaux.

I found my quarters assigned to me in a pavilion called the Garden
House; and, arriving at supper time, sat down with my household with
more haste and less ceremony than was my wont. The same state of things
prevailed, I suppose, in the kitchen; for we had not been seated half
an hour when a great hubbub arose in the house, and the servants
rushing in cried out that a fire had broken out below, and that the
house was in danger of burning.

In such emergencies I take it to be the duty of a man of standing to
bear himself with as much dignity as is consistent with vigour; and
neither to allow himself to be carried away by the outcry and disorder
of the crowd, nor to omit any direction that may avail.  On this
occasion, however, my first thought was given to the memorial I had
prepared for the King; which I remembered had been taken with other
books and papers to a room over the kitchen.  I lost not a moment,
therefore, in sending Maignan for it; nor until I held it safely in my
hand did I feel myself at liberty to think of the house.  When I did, I
found that the alarm exceeded the danger; a few buckets of water
extinguished a beam in the chimney which had caught fire, and in a few
moments we were able to resume the meal with the added vivacity which
such an event gave to the conversation.  It has never been my custom to
encourage too great freedom at my table; but as the company consisted,
with a single exception, of my household, and as this person--a
Monsieur de Vilain, a young gentleman, the cousin of one of my wife's
maids-of-honour--showed himself possessed of modesty as well as wit, I
thought that the time excused a little relaxation.

This was the cause of the misfortune which followed, and bade fair to
place me in a position of as great difficulty as I have ever known;
for, having in my good humour dismissed the servants, I continued to
talk for an hour or more with Vilain and some of my gentlemen; the
result being that I so far forgot myself, when I rose, as to leave the
report where I had laid it on the table. In the passage I met a man
whom the King had sent to inquire about the fire; and thus reminded of
the papers I turned back to the room; greatly vexed with myself for
negligence which in a subordinate I should have severely rebuked, but
never doubting that I should find the packet where I had left it.

To my chagrin the paper was gone.  Still I could not believe that it
had been stolen, and supposing that Maignan or one of my household had
seen it and taken it to my closet, I repaired thither in haste.  I
found Maignan already there, with M. Boisrueil, one of my gentlemen,
who was waiting to ask a favour; but they knew nothing of the report,
and though I sent them down forthwith, with directions to make strict
but quiet inquiry, they returned at the end of half an hour with long
faces and no news.

Then I grew seriously alarmed; and reflecting on the many important
secrets which the memorial contained, whereof a disclosure must spoil
plans so long and sedulously prepared, I found myself brought on a
sudden face to face with disaster.  I could not imagine how the King,
who had again and again urged on me the utmost precaution, would take
such a catastrophe; nor how I should make it known to him.  For a
moment, therefore, while I listened to the tale, I felt the hair rise
on my head and a shiver descend my back; nor was it without an uncommon
effort that I retained my coolness and composure.

Plainly no steps in such a position could be too stringent.  I sent
Maignan with an order to close all the doors and let no one pass out.
Then I made sure that none of the servants had entered the room,
between the time of my rising and return; and this narrowed the tale of
those who could have taken the packet to eleven, that being the number
of persons who had sat down with me.  But having followed the matter so
far, I came face to face with this difficulty:  that all the eleven
were, with one exception, in my service and in various ways pledged to
my interests, so that I could not conceive even the possibility of a
betrayal by them in a matter so important.

I confess, at this, the perspiration rose upon my brow; for the paper
was gone.  Still, there remained one stranger; and though it seemed
scarcely less difficult to suspect him, since he could have no
knowledge of the importance of the document, and could not have
anticipated that I should leave it in his power, I found in that the
only likely solution.  He was one of the Vilains of Pareil by Monceaux,
his father living on the edge of the park, little more than a thousand
yards from the chateau; and I knew no harm of him.  Still, I knew
little; and for that reason was forward to believe that there, rather
than in my own household, lay the key to the enigma.

My suspicions were not lessened when I discovered that he alone of the
party at table had left the house before the doors were closed; and for
a moment I was inclined to have him followed and seized.  But I could
scarcely take a step so decisive without provoking inquiry; and I dared
not at this stage let the King know of my negligence.  I found myself,
therefore, brought up short, in a state of exasperation and doubt
difficult to describe; and the most minute search within the house and
the closest examination of all concerned failing to provide the
slightest clue, I had no alternative but to pass the night in that
condition.

On the morrow a third search seeming still the only resource, and
proving as futile as the others, I ordered La Trape and two or three in
whom I placed the greatest confidence to watch their fellows, and
report anything in their bearing or manner that seemed to be out of the
ordinary course; while I myself went to wait; on the King, and parry
his demand for the memorial as well as I could.  This it was necessary
to do without provoking curiosity; and as the lapse of each minute made
the pursuit of the paper less hopeful and its recovery a thing to pray
for rather than expect, it will be believed that I soon found the
aspect of civility which I was obliged to wear so great a trial of my
patience, that I made an excuse and retired early to my lodging.

Here my wife, who shared my anxiety, met me with a face full of
meaning.  I cried out to know if they had found the paper.

"No," she answered; "but if you will come into your closet I will tell
you what I have learned."

I went in with her, and she told me briefly that the manner of
Mademoiselle de Mars, one of her maids, had struck her as suspicious.
The girl had begun to cry while reading to her; and when questioned had
been able to give no explanation of her trouble.

"She is Vilain's cousin?"  I said.

"Yes, monsieur."

"Bring her to me," I said.  "Bring her to me without the delay of an
instant."

My wife hastened to comply; and whatever had been the girl's state
earlier, before the fright of this hasty summons had upset her, her
agitation when thus confronted with me gave me, before a word was
spoken, the highest hopes that I had here the key to the mystery.  I
judged that it might be necessary to frighten her still more, and I
started by taking a harsh tone with her; but before I had said many
words she obviated the necessity of this by falling at my wife's feet
and protesting that she would tell all.

"Then speak quickly, wench!"  I said.  "You know where the paper is."

"I know who has it!"  she answered, in a voice choked with sobs.

"Who?"

"My cousin, M. de Vilain."

"Ha!  and has taken it to his house?"

But she seemed for a moment unable to answer this; her distress being
such that my wife had to fetch a vial of pungent salts to restore her
before she could say more.  At length she found voice to tell us that
M. de Vilain had taken the paper, and was this evening to hand it to an
agent of the Spanish ambassador.

"But, girl," I said sternly, "how do you know this?"

Then she confessed that the cousin was also the lover, and had before
employed her to disclose what went on in my household, and anything of
value that could be discovered there.  Doubtless the girl, for whom my
wife, in spite of her occasional fits of reserve and temper,
entertained no little liking, enjoyed many opportunities of prying; and
would have continued still to serve him had not this last piece of
villainy, with the stir which it caused in the house and the rigorous
punishment to be expected in the event of discovery, proved too much
for her nerves.  Hence this burst of confession; which once allowed to
flow, ran on almost against her will.  Nor did I let her pause to
consider the full meaning of what she was saying until I had learned
that Vilain was to meet the ambassador's agent an hour after sunset at
the east end of a clump of trees which stood in the park; and being
situate between his, Vilain's, residence and the chateau, formed a
convenient place for such a transaction.

"He will have it about him?"  I said.

She sobbed a moment, but presently confessed.  "Yes; or it will be in
the hollow of the most easterly tree.  He was to leave it there, if the
agent could not keep the appointment."

"Good!"  I said; and then, having assured myself by one or two
questions of that, of which her state of distress and agitation left me
in little doubt--namely, that she was telling the truth--I committed
her to my wife's care; bidding the Duchess lock her up in a safe place
upstairs, and treat her to bread and water until I had taken the steps
necessary to prove the fact, and secure the paper.

After this--but I should be tedious were I to describe the alternations
of hope and fear in which I passed the period of suspense.  Suffice it
that I informed no one, not even Maignan, of what I had discovered, but
allowed those in the secret of the loss still to pursue their efforts;
while I, by again attending the Court, endeavoured at once to mitigate
the King's impatience and persuade the world that all was well.  A
little before the appointed time, however I made a pretext to rise from
supper, and quietly calling out Boisrueil, bade him bring four of the
men, armed, and Maignan and La Trape.  With this small body I made my
way out by a private door, and crossed the park to the place
Mademoiselle had, indicated.

Happily, night had already begun to close in, and the rendezvous was at
the farther side of the clump of trees.  Favoured by these
circumstances, we were able to pass round the thicket--some on one side
and some on the other---without noise or disturbance; and fortunate
enough, having arrived at the place, to discover a man walking uneasily
up and down on the very spot where we expected to find him.  The
evening was so far advanced that it was not possible to be sure that
the man was Vilain; but as all depended on seizing him before he had
any communication with the Spanish agent, I gave the signal, and two of
my men, springing on him from either side, in a moment bore him to the
ground and secured him.

He proved to be Vilain, so that, when he was brought face to face with
me, I was much less surprised than he affected to be.  He played the
part of an ignorant so well, indeed, that, for a moment, I was
staggered by his show of astonishment, and by the earnestness with
which he denounced the outrage; nor could Maignan find anything on him.
But, a moment later, remembering the girl's words, I strode to the
nearest tree, and, groping about it, in a twinkling unearthed the paper
from a little hollow in the trunk that seemed to have been made to
receive it.  I need not say with what relief I found the seals
unbroken; nor with what indignation I turned on the villain thus
convicted of an act of treachery towards the King only less black than
the sin against hospitality of which he had been guilty in my house.
But the discovery I had made seemed enough of itself to overwhelm him;
for, after standing apparently stunned while I spoke, he jerked himself
suddenly out of his captors' hands, and made a desperate attempt to
escape.  Finding this hopeless, and being seized again before he had
gone four paces, he shouted, at the top of his voice:  "Back!  back!
Go back!"

We looked about, somewhat startled, and Boisrueil, with presence of
mind, ran into the darkness to see if he could detect the person
addressed; but though he thought that he saw the skirt of a flying
cloak disappear in the gloom, he was not sure; and I, having no mind to
be mixed up with the ambassador, called him back.  I asked Vilain to
whom he had called, but the young man, turning sullen, would answer
nothing except that he knew naught of the paper.  I thought it best,
therefore, to conduct him at once to my lodgings, whither it will be
believed that I returned with a lighter heart than I had gone out.  It
was, indeed, a providential escape.

How to punish the traitor was another matter, for I could scarcely do
so adequately without betraying my negligence.  I determined to sleep
on this, however, and, for the night, directed him to be locked into a
chamber in the south-west turret, with a Swiss to guard the door; my
intention being to interrogate him farther on the morrow.  However,
Henry sent for me so early that I was forced to postpone my
examination; and, being detained by him until evening, I thought it
best to tell him, before I left, what had happened.

He heard the story with a look of incredulity, which, little by little,
gave way to a broad smile.  "Well," he said, "Grand Master, never chide
me again!  I have heard that Homer sometimes nods; but if I were to
tell this to Sillery or Villeroy, they would not believe me."

"They would believe anything that your Majesty told them," I said.
"But you will not tell them this?"

"No," he said kindly, "I will not; and there is my hand on it. For the
matter of that, if it had happened to them, they would not have told
me."

"And perhaps been the wiser for that," I said.

"Don't believe it," he answered.  "But now, what of this young Vilain?
You have him safe?"

"Yes, sire."

"The girl is one degree worse; she betrays both sides to save her skin."

"Still, I promised--"

"Oh, she must go," Henry said.  "I quite understand.  But for him--we
had better have no scandal.  Keep him until to-morrow, and I will see
his father, and have him sent out of the country."

"And he will go scot free," I said, bluntly, "when a rope and the
nearest tree--"

"Yes, my friend," Henry answered with a dry smile; "but that should
have been done last night.  As it is, he is your guest and we must give
an account of him.  But first drain him dry. Frighten him, as you
please, and get all out of him; then I wish them joy of him.  Faugh!
and he a young man!  I would not be his father for two such crowns as
mine!"

As I returned to my lodgings I thought over these words; and I fell to
wondering by what stages Vilain had sunk so low. Occasionally admitted
to my table, he had always borne himself with a modesty and discretion
that had not failed to prepossess me; indeed, the longer I considered
the King's saying, the greater was the surprise I felt at this
DENOUEMENT; which left me in doubt whether my dullness exceeded my
negligence or the young man's parts surpassed his wickedness.

A few questions, I thought, might resolve this; but having been
detained by the King until supper-time, I postponed the interview until
I rose.  Then bidding them bring in the prisoner, I assumed my harshest
aspect and prepared to blast him by discovering all his vileness to his
face.

But when I had waited a little, only Maignan came in, with an air of
consternation that brought me to my feet.  "Why, man, what is it?"  I
cried.

"The prisoner," he faltered.  "If your excellency pleases--"

"I do not please!"  I said sternly, believing that I knew what had
happened.  "Is he dead?"

"No, your excellency; but, he has escaped."

"Escaped?  From that room?"

Maignan nodded.

"Then, PAR DIEU!"  I replied, "the man who was on guard shall suffer in
his place!  Escaped?  How could he escape except by treachery?  Where
was the guard?"

"He was there, excellency.  And he says that no one passed him."

"Yet the man is gone?"

"The room is empty."

"But the window--the window, fool, is fifty feet from the ground!"  I
said.  "And not so much footing outside as would hold a crow!"

Maignan shrugged his shoulders, and in a rage I bade him follow me, and
went myself to view the place; to which a number of my people had
already flocked with lights, so that I found some difficulty in
mounting the staircase.  A very brief inspection, however, sufficed to
confirm my first impression that Vilain could have escaped by the door
only; for the window, though it lacked bars and boasted a tiny balcony,
hung over fifty feet of sheer depth, so that evasion that way seemed in
the absence of ladder or rope purely impossible.  This being clear, I
ordered the Swiss to be seized; and as he could give no explanation of
the escape, and still persisted that he was as much in the dark as
anyone, I declared that I would make an example of him, and hang him
unless the prisoner was recaptured within three days.

I did not really propose to do this, but in my irritation I spoke so
roundly that my people believed me; even Boisrueil, who presently came
to intercede for the culprit, who, it seemed, was a favourite.  "As for
Vilain," he continued; "you can catch him whenever you please."

"Then catch him before the end of three days," I answered obstinately,
"and the man lives."

The truth was that Vilain's escape placed me in a position of some
discomfort; for though, on the one hand, I had no particular desire to
get him again into my hands, seeing that the King could effect as much
by a word to his father as I had proposed to do while I held him safe;
on the other hand, the evasion placed me very peculiarly in regard to
the King himself, who was inclined to think me ill or suddenly grown
careless.  Some of the facts, too, were leaking out, and provoking
smiles among the more knowing, and a hint here and there; the result of
all being that, unable to pursue the matter farther in Vilain's case, I
hardened my heart and persisted that the Swiss should pay the penalty.

This obstinacy on my part had an unforeseen issue.  On the evening of
the second day, a little before supper-time, my wife came to me, and
announced that a young lady had waited on her with a tale so remarkable
that she craved leave to bring her to me that I might hear it.

"What is it?"  I said impatiently.

"It is about M. Vilain," my wife answered, her face still wearing all
the marks of lively astonishment.

"Ha!"  I exclaimed.  "I will see her then.  But it is not that baggage
who--"

"No," my wife answered.  "It is another."

"One of your maids?"

"No, a stranger."

"Well, bring her," I said shortly.

She went, and quickly returned with a young lady, whose face and modest
bearing were known to me, though I could not, at the moment, recall her
name.  This was the less remarkable as I am not prone to look much in
maids' faces, leaving that to younger men; and Mademoiselle de
Figeac's, though beautiful, was disfigured on this occasion by the
marked distress under which she was labouring.  Accustomed as I was to
the visits of persons of all classes and characters who came to me
daily with petitions, I should have been disposed to cut her short, but
for my wife's intimation that her errand had to do with the matter
which annoyed me.  This, as well as a trifle of curiosity--from which
none are quite free--inclined me to be patient; and I asked her what
she would have with me.

"Justice, M. le Duc," she answered simply.  "I have heard that you are
seeking M. de Vilain, and that one of your people is lying under
sentence for complicity in his escape."

"That is true, mademoiselle," I said.  "If you can tell me--"

"I can tell you how he escaped, and by whose aid," she answered.

It is my custom to betray no astonishment, even when I am astonished.
"Do so," I said.

"He escaped through the window," she answered firmly, "by my brother's
aid."

"Your brother's?"  I exclaimed, amazed at her audacity.  "I do not
remember him."

"He is only thirteen years old."

I could hide my astonishment no longer.  "You must be mad, girl!" I
said, "mad!  You do not know what you are saying!  The window of the
room in which Vilain was confined is fifty feet from the ground, and
you say that your brother, a boy of thirteen, contrived his escape?"

"Yes, M. de Sully," she answered.  "And the man who is about to suffer
is innocent."

"How was it done, then?"  I asked, not knowing what to think of her
persistence.

"My brother was flying a kite that day," she answered.  "He had been
doing so for a week or more, and everyone was accustomed to seeing him
here.  After sunset, the wind being favourable, he came under M. de
Vilain's window, and, when it was nearly dark, and the servants and
household were at supper, he guided the kite against the balcony
outside the window."

"But a man cannot descend by a kite-string!"

"My brother had a knotted rope, which M. de Vilain drew up," she
answered simply; "and afterwards, when he had descended, disengaged."

I looked at her in profound amazement.

"Your brother acted on instructions?"  I said at last.

"On mine," she answered.

"You avow that?"

"I am here to do so," she replied, her face white and red by turns, but
her eyes continuing to meet mine.

"This is a very serious matter," I said.  "Are you aware, mademoiselle,
why M. Vilain was arrested, and of what he is accused?"

"Perfectly," she answered; "and that he is innocent.  More!"  she
continued, clasping her hands, and looking at me bravely, "I am willing
both to tell you where he is, and to bring him, if you please, into
your presence."

I stared at her.  "You will bring him here?"  I said.

"Within five minutes," she answered, "if you will first hear me."

"What are you to him?"  I said.

She blushed vividly.  "I shall be his wife or no one's," she said; and
she looked a moment at my wife.

"Well, say what you have to say!"  I cried roughly.

"This paper, which it is alleged that he stole--it was not found on
him; but in the hollow of a tree."

"Within three paces of him!  And what was he doing there?"

"He came to meet me," she answered, her voice trembling slightly. "He
could have told you so, but he would not shame me."

"This is true?"  I said, eyeing her closely.

"I swear it!"  she answered, clasping her hands.  And then, with a
sudden flash of rage, "Will the other woman swear to her tale?" she
cried.

"Ha!"  I said, "what other woman?"

"The woman who sent you to that place," she answered.  "He would not
tell me her name, or I would go to her now and wring the truth from
her.  But he confessed to me that he had let a woman into the secret of
our meeting; and this is her work."

I stood a moment pondering, with my eyes on the girl's excited face,
and my thoughts, following this new clue through the maze of recent
events; wherein I could not fail to see that it led to a very different
conclusion from that at which I had arrived.  If Vilain had been
foolish enough to wind up his love-passages with Mademoiselle de Mars
by confiding to her his passion for the Figeac, and even the place and
time at which the latter was so imprudent as to meet him, I could fancy
the deserted mistress laying this plot; and first placing the packet
where we found it, and then punishing her lover by laying the theft at
his door. True, he might be guilty; and it might be only confession and
betrayal on which jealousy had thrust her.  But the longer I considered
the whole of the circumstances, as well as the young man's character,
and the lengths to which I knew a woman's passion would carry her, the
more probable seemed the explanation I had just received.

Nevertheless, I did not at once express my opinion; but veiling the
chagrin I naturally felt at the simple part I had been led to play--in
the event I now thought probable--I sharply ordered Mademoiselle de
Figeac to retire into the next room; and then I requested my wife to
fetch her maid.

Mademoiselle de Mars had been three days in solitary confinement, and
might be taken to have repented of her rash accusation were it
baseless.  I counted somewhat on this; and more on the effect of so
sudden a summons to my presence.  But at first sight it seemed that I
did so without cause.  Instead of the agitation which she had displayed
when brought before me to confess, she now showed herself quiet and
even sullen; nor did the gleam of passion, which I thought that I
discerned smouldering in her dark eyes, seem to promise either weakness
or repentance.  However, I had too often observed the power of the
unknown over a guilty conscience to despair of eliciting the truth.

"I want to ask you two or three questions," I said civilly. "First, was
M. de Vilain with you when you placed the paper in the hollow of the
tree?  Or were you alone?"

I saw her eyelids quiver as with sudden fear, and her voice shook as
she stammered, "When I placed the paper?"

"Yes," I said, "when you placed the paper.  I have reason to know that
you did it.  I wish to learn whether he was present, or you did it
merely under his orders?"

She looked at me, her face a shade paler, and I do not doubt that her
mind was on the rack to divine how much I knew, and how far she might
deny and how far confess.  My tone seemed to encourage frankness,
however, and in a moment she said, "I placed it under his directions."

"Yes," I said drily, my last doubt resolved by the admission; "but that
being so, why did Vilain go to the spot?"

She grew still a shade paler, but in a moment she answered, "To meet
the agent."

"Then why did you place the paper in the tree?"

She saw the difficulty in which she had placed herself, and for an
instant she stared at me with the look of a wild animal caught in a
trap.  Then, "In case the agent was late," she muttered.

"But since Vilain had to go to the spot, why did he not deposit the
paper in the tree himself?  Why did he send you to the place
beforehand?  Why did--" and then I broke off and cried harshly, "Shall
I tell you why?  Shall I tell you why, you false jade?"

She cowered away from me at the words, and stood terror-stricken,
gazing at me like one fascinated.  But she did not answer.

"Because," I cried, "your story is a tissue of lies!  Because it was
you, and you only, who stole this paper!  Because--Down on your knees!
down on your knees!"  I thundered, "and confess! Confess, or I will
have you whipped at the cart's tail, like the false witness you are!"

She threw herself down shrieking, and caught my wife by the skirts, and
in a breath had said all I wanted; and more than enough to show me that
I had suspected Vilain without cause, and both played the simpleton
myself and harried my household to distraction.

So far good.  I could arrange matters with Vilain, and probably avoid
publicity.  But what was now to be done with her?

In the case of a man I should have thought no punishment too severe,
and the utmost rigour of the law too tender for such perfidy; but as
she was a woman, and young, and under my wife's protection, I
hesitated.  Finally, the Duchess interceding, I leaned to the side of
that mercy which the girl had not shown to her lover; and thought her
sufficiently punished, at the moment by the presence of Mademoiselle de
Figeac whom I called into the room to witness her humiliation, and in
the future by dismissal from my household.  As this imported banishment
to her father's country-house, where her mother, a shrewd old
Bearnaise, saved pence and counted lentils into the soup, and saw
company once a quarter, I had perhaps reason to be content with her
chastisement.

For the rest I sent for M. de Vilain, and by finding him employment in
the finances, and interceding for him with the old Vicomte de Figeac,
confirmed him in the attachment he had begun to feel for me before this
unlucky event; nor do I doubt that I should have been able in time to
advance him to a post worthy of the talents I discerned in him.  But,
alas, the deplorable crime, which so soon deprived me at one blow of my
master and of power, put an end to this, among other and greater
schemes.




VII.

THE GOVERNOR OF GUERET.


Without attaching to dreams greater importance than a prudent man will
always be willing to assign to the unknown and unintelligible, I have
been in the habit of reflecting on them; and have observed with some
curiosity that in these later years of my life, during which France has
enjoyed peace and comparative prosperity, my dreams have most often
reproduced the stormy rides and bivouacs of my youth, with all the
rough and bloody accompaniments which our day knows only by repute.
Considering these visions, and comparing my sleeping apathy with my
daylight reflections, I have been led to wonder at the power of habit;
which alone makes it possible for a man who has seen a dozen stricken
fields, and viewed, scarcely with emotion, the slaughter of a hundred
prisoners, to turn pale at the sight of a coach accident, and walk a
mile rather than see a rogue hang.

I am impelled to this train of thought by an adventure that befell me
in the summer of this year 1605; and which, as it seemed to me in the
happening to be rather an evil dream of old times than a waking episode
of these, may afford the reader some diversion, besides relieving the
necessary tedium of the thousand particulars of finance that render the
five farms a study of the utmost intricacy.

My appointment to represent the King at the Assembly of Chatelherault
had carried me in the month of July into Poitou. Being there, and
desirous of learning for myself whether the arrest of Auvergne had
pacified his country to the extent described by the King's agents, I
determined to take advantage of a vacation of the assembly and venture
as far in that direction as Gueret; though Henry, fearing lest the
malcontents should make an attempt on my person in revenge for the
death of Biron, had strictly charged me not to approach within twenty
leagues of the Limousin.

I had with me for escort at Chatelherault a hundred horse; but, these
seeming to be either too many or too few for the purpose, I took with
me only ten picked men with Colet their captain, five servants heavily
armed, and of my gentlemen Boisrueil and La Font.  Parabere, to whom I
opened my mind, consented to be my companion.  I gave out that I was
going to spend three days at Preuilly, to examine an estate there which
I thought of buying, that I might have a residence in my government;
and, having amused the curious with this statement, I got away at
daybreak, and by an hour before noon was at Touron, where I stayed for
dinner.  That night we lay at a village, and the next day dined at St.
Marcel.  The second afternoon we reached Crozant.

Here I began to observe those signs of neglect and disorder which, at
the close of the war, had been common in all parts of France, but in
the more favoured districts had been erased by a decade of peace.
Briars and thorns choked the roads, which ran through morasses, between
fields which the husbandman had resigned to tares and undergrowth.
Ruined hamlets were common, and everywhere wolves and foxes and all
kinds of game abounded. But that which roused my ire to the hottest was
the state of the bridges, which in this country, where the fords are in
winter impassable, had been allowed to fall into utter decay.  On all
sides I found the peasants oppressed, disheartened, and primed with
tales of the King's severity, which those who had just cause to dread
him had instilled into them.  Bands of robbers committed daily
excesses, and, in a word, no one thing was wanting to give the lie to
the rose-coloured reports with which Bareilles, the Governor of Gueret,
had amused the Council.

I confess that, at sight and thought of these things--of this country
so devoured, the King's authority so contemned, all evils laid at his
door, all his profits diverted--my anger burned within me, and I said
more to Parabere than was perhaps prudent, telling him, in particular,
what I designed against Bareilles, of whose double-dealing I needed no
further proof; by what means I proposed to lull his suspicions for the
moment, since we must lie at Gueret, and how I would afterwards, on the
first occasion, have him seized and punished.

I forgot, while I avowed these things, that one weakness of Parabere's
character which rendered him unable to believe evil of anyone.  Even of
Bareilles, though the two were the merest acquaintances, he could only
think indulgently, because, forsooth, he too was a Protestant.  He
began to defend him therefore, and, seeing how the ground lay, after a
time I let the matter drop.

Still I did not think that he had been serious in his plea, and that
which happened on the following morning took me completely by surprise.
We had left Crozant an hour, and I was considering whether, the road
being bad, we should even now reach Gueret before night, when Parabere,
who had made some excuse to ride forward, returned, to me with signs of
embarrassment in his manner.

"My friend," he said, "here is a message from Bareilles."

"How?"  I exclaimed.  "A message?  For whom?"

"For you," he said; "the man is here."

"But how did Bareilles know that I was coming?"  I asked.

Parabere's confusion furnished me with the answer before he spoke.  "Do
not be angry, my friend," he said.  "I wanted to do Bareilles a good
turn.  I saw that you were enraged with him, and I thought that I could
not help him better than by suggesting to him to come and meet you in a
proper spirit, and make the explanations which I am sure that he has it
in his power to make. Yesterday morning, therefore, I sent to him."

"And he is here?"  I said drily.

Parabere admitted with a blush that he was not.  His messenger had
found Bareilles on the point of starting against a band of plunderers
who had ravaged the country for a twelvemonth.  He had sent me the
most; civil messages therefore--but he had not come. "However, he will
be at Gueret to-morrow," Parabere added cheerfully.

"Will he?"  I said.

"I will answer for it," he answered.  "In the meantime, he has done
what he can for our comfort."

"How?"  I said,

"He bids us not to attempt the last three leagues to Gueret to-night;
the road is too bad.  But to stay at Saury, where there is a good inn,
and to-morrow morning he will meet us there."

"If the brigands have not proved too much for him," I said.

"Yes," Parabere answered, with a simplicity almost supernatural. "To be
sure."

After this, it was no use to say anything to him, though his
officiousness would have justified the keenest reproaches.  I swallowed
my resentment, therefore, and we went on amicably enough, though the
valley of the Creuse, in its upper and wilder part, through which our
road now wound, offered no objects of a kind to soften my anger against
the governor.  I saw enough of ruins, of blocked defiles, and overgrown
roads; but of returning prosperity and growing crops, and the King's
peace, I saw no sign--not so much as one dead robber.

About noon we alighted to eat a little at a wretched tavern by one of
the innumerable fords.  A solitary traveller who was here before us,
and for a time kept aloof, wearing a grand and mysterious manner with a
shabby coat, presently moved; edging himself up to me where I sat a
little apart, eating with Parabere and my gentlemen.

"Sir," he said, on a sudden and without preface, "I see that you are
the leader of this party."

As I was more plainly dressed than Parabere, and had been giving no
orders, I wondered how he knew; but I answered, without any remark,
"Well, sir; and what of that?"

"You are in great danger," he replied.

"I?"  I said.

"Yes, sir; you!"  he answered.

"You know me?"

He shrugged his shoulders.  "Not I," he said, "but those who speak by
me.  Enough that you are in danger."

"From what?"  I asked sceptically; while my companions stared, and the
troopers and servants, who were just within hearing, listened
open-mouthed.

"A one-eyed woman and a one-eyed house," he answered darkly. Then,
before I could frame a question, he turned from me as abruptly as he
had come, and, mounting a sorry mare that stood near, stumbled away
through the ford.

It required little wit to see that the man was an astrologer, and one
whose predictions, if they had not profited his clients more than
himself, had been ominous indeed.  I was inclined, therefore, to make
sport of him, knowing that the pretenders to that art are to the true
men as ten to one.  But his words, and particularly the fact that he
had asked for nothing, had impressed my followers differently; so that
they talked of nothing else while we ate, and could still be heard
discussing him in the saddle.  The wildness of the road and the gloomy
aspect of the valley had doubtless some effect on their minds; which a
thunderstorm that shortly afterwards overtook us and drenched us to the
skin did not tend to lighten.  I was glad to see the roofs of Saury
before us; though, on a nearer approach, we found all the houses except
the inn ruined and tenantless; and even, that scorched and scarred,
with the great gate that had once closed its courtyard prostrate in the
road before it.

However, in view of the country we had come through, and the general
desolation, we were thankful to find things no worse. The village stood
at the entrance to a gorge, with the Creuse--here a fast-rushing
stream--running at the back of the inn.  The latter was of good size,
stone-built and tiled, and, at first, seemed to be empty; but the
servants presently unearthed a man and then a boy.  Fires were lit, and
the horses stabled; and a second room with a chimney being found,
Parabere and I, with Colet and my gentlemen, took possession of it,
leaving the kitchen to my following.

I had had my boots removed, and was drying my clothes and expecting
supper, when Boisrueil, who was beside me, uttered an exclamation of
amazement.

"What is it?"  I said.

He did not answer, and I followed his eyes.  A woman had just entered
the room with a bundle of sticks.  She had one eye!

I confess that, for an instant, this staggered me; but a moment's
thought reminded me that the astrologer had come from this inn to us,
and I smiled at the credulity which would have built on a coincidence
that was no coincidence.  When the woman had retired again, therefore,
I rallied Boisrueil on his timidity; but, though he admitted the
correctness of my reasoning, I saw that he was not entirely convinced.
He started whenever a shutter flapped, or the draughts, which searched
the grim old building through and through, threatened to extinguish our
lights.  He hung cloaks over the windows to obviate the latter
inconvenience he said--and was continually going out and coming back
with gloomy looks.  Parabere joined me in rallying him, which we did
without mercy; but when I had occasion, after a while, to pass through
the outer room I found that he was not alone in his fears.  The
troopers sat moodily listening, or muttered together; while the cup
passed round in silence.  When I bade a man go on an errand to the
stable, four went; and when I dropped a word to the woman who was
attending to her pot, a dozen heads were stretched out to catch the
answer.

Such a feeling--to which, in this instance, the murmur of the stream
and the steady downpour of rain doubtless added something--is so
contagious that I was not surprised to find Colet and La Font sinking
under it.  Only Parabere, in fact, rose quite superior to the notion,
laughed at their fears, and drank to their better spirits; and, making
the best of the situation, as became an old soldier, presently engaged
me in tales of the war--fought again the siege of Laon, and buried men
whose bodies bad lain for ten years under the oaks at Fontaine
Francoise.

Talk of this kind, which we still maintained after we had despatched
our supper, was sufficiently engrossing to erase Boisrueil's fancies
entirely from my mind.  They were recalled by his sudden entrance, with
Colet at his elbow, the faces of both full of importance.  I saw that
they had something to say, and asked what it was.

"We have been examining the back gate, M. le Marquis," Colet said.

"Well, man?"

"It is barricaded, and cannot be opened," he answered.

"Well," I said again, "there is nothing wonderful in that. Anyone can
see that there has been rough work here.  The front gate was stormed, I
suppose, and the back one left standing."

"But if is so barricaded that it is not possible to open it," he
objected.  "And the men have an idea--"

"Well?"  I said, seeing that he hesitated.

"That this is a one-eyed house."

Parabere laughed loudly.  "Of course it is!"  he said.  "That strolling
rogue saw the gate as well as the woman, and made his profit of them."

"Pardon, sir!"  Boisrueil answered bluntly, "That is just what he did
not do!"

"Well," I said, silencing him by a gesture, "is that all?"

"No," he replied; "I have tasted the men's wine."

"And it is drugged?"

"No," he said.  "On the contrary, it is a great deal too good for the
price--or the house.  And you ordered a litre apiece.  Some have had
two, and not asked twice for it!"

"Ho, ho!"  I said, staring at him.  "Are you sure of that?"

"Quite!"  he said.

I was genuinely startled at last; but Parabere still made light of it.
"What!"  he said.  "Are we a pack of nervous women, or one poor
traveller in a solitary inn, that we see shadows and shake at them?"

"The inn is solitary enough," Boisrueil grumbled.

"But we are twenty swords!"  Parabere retorted, opening his eyes wide.
"Why, I have ridden all day in an enemy's country with less!"

"And been beaten with more at Craon."

"But, man alive, that was in a battle, and by an army!"

"Well, and there may be a battle and an army here," Boisrueil answered
sulkily.

I was inclined to laugh at this as extravagance; but seeing that La
Font and Colet sided with Boisrueil, I remembered that the latter was
no coward though a great gossip; and I thought better of it.
Accordingly, resolving to look into the thing myself, I bade La Font
fetch a couple of lanthorns, and, when he had done so, went out with
him and Boisrueil as if I had a mind to go round the horses before I
retired.  Parabere declined to accompany me on the ground that he would
not be at the pains of it; and Colet I left in the kitchen to keep an
eye on the man and woman.

There was no moon, rain was still falling, and the yard, crowded with
steaming, shivering horses, was dreary enough where the lanthorns
displayed it; but, accustomed to such a sight, I made, without
regarding it, for the gate, which a moment's examination showed to be
barricaded, as they had described, with great beams and stones.  In
this there was nothing beyond the ordinary, one entrance to a house
being in troublous times better than two; but Boisrueil, bidding me
kneel and look lower, I found, when I did so, that the soil under the
beams--which did not touch the ground by some inches--was wet, and I
began to understand.  When he asked me at what hour rain had begun to
fall, I answered two in the afternoon, and drew at once the inference
at which he aimed--that the beams had been put there, and the gate
barricaded, at some later hour.

"We reached here at six," he said; "it was done some time between two
and six, my lord; therefore to-day.  To-day," he repeated in a low
voice; "and by a dozen men at least, Fewer could not move those beams."

"And the object?"

"To prevent our escape."

"But who are they?"  I said, looking at him.

"The woman knows," he answered.  "We must ask her, my lord."

I assented; and we went back into the house, where it would not have
surprised me if we had found the wretches flown and the nest empty.
But Colet had done his work too well.  They were both there, and, in a
moment, at a signal from Boisrueil, were secured and pinioned.
Parabere, hearing the scuffle, came out and would have remonstrated,
but I silenced him with a sharp word; and, despatching La Font with a
couple of discreet men to keep watch in the court that we might not be
surprised, I bade one of the servants throw some fir-cones on the fire.
These, blazing up, filled the squalid room in a moment with a glare of
light, which revealed alike the livid faces of the two prisoners and
the excited looks and dark countenances of my escort.

I bade them put the woman forward first, and addressed her sternly,
telling her that I knew all, and that she would do well to confess;
inasmuch as if she made a clean breast of the matter, I would grant her
her life, and if she did not, she would be the first to die, since I
would hang her were a single shot fired against the house.

The promise found her unmoved, but the threat, uttered in a tone which
showed that I was in earnest, proved more effectual.  With an ugly
look, under which my men shrank as if her eye had power to scorch them,
the hag said that she would confess, and, with impotent rage, admitted
the truth of Boisrueil's surmises.  The rearward gate had been
barricaded that afternoon by the Great Band, who had had notice of our
coming, and intended to attack us at midnight.  I asked her how many
they mustered.

"A hundred," she answered sullenly.

"Very well," I said.  "And, supposing that we do not wait for them, how
shall we escape?  By the road to Gueret?"

"Fifty lie in ambush on it."

"By the road by which we came?"

"The other fifty lie there."

"Across the river?"

"There is no ford."

"Then in the village?  If we seize some other building?"

"The village is watched, and this house," she answered, with a sparkle
of joy in her eye.

At that the position began to assume so serious an aspect that I turned
to Parabere to take his advice.  We numbered twenty in all, and were
well armed; but five to one are large odds, and we had little
ammunition, while, for all we knew, the house might be fired with ease
from the outside.  The roads north and south being occupied, and the
river enclosing us on the west, there remained only one direction in
which escape seemed possible; but, as we knew nothing of the country,
and the brigands everything, the desperate idea of plunging into it
blindly, at night, and with pursuers at our heels, was dismissed as
soon as formed.

Parabere interrupted these calculations by drawing me aside into the
room in which we had supped, where, after rallying me on the whimsical
notion of the Grand Master of the Ordnance and Governor of the Bastile
being besieged in a paltry inn, he confessed that he had been wrong,
and that the adventure was likely to prove serious.  "Ten to one this
is the very band that Bareilles is pursuing," he said.

"Very likely," I answered bluntly; "but the question is how are we to
evade them.  Are we to fight or fly?"

"Well, for lighting," he replied coolly; "the front gate lies in the
road, there are no shutters to half the windows, the door is crazy, and
there is a thatched pent-house against one wall."

"And no help-nearer than Gueret."

"Three leagues," he assented.  "And from that we are cut off. Fifty men
in the gorge might hold it against five hundred. Better man the
courtyard here than that, tether the horses in the gateway, and fight
it out."

"Perhaps so," I said; and we looked at one another, hearing through the
open door the men muttering and whispering in the kitchen, and above
their voices the dull murmur of the stream, which seemed of a piece
with the bleak night outside, the ruined hamlet, and the danger that
lurked round us.  Bitterly repenting the hardihood that had led me to
expose myself to such risks in breach of the King's commandment, I
found it difficult to direct my mind to the immediate question. So many
reflections connected with my mission at Chatelherault and other
affairs of state would intrude that I seemed to be occupied rather with
the results of my death at this juncture, and particularly the injury
which it must inflict on the King's service, than with the question how
I could escape.

However, Parabere soon recalled me to the point.  "It is now ten
o'clock," he said in a placid tone; "we have two hours."

"Yes," I answered; then, as if my mind had all the time been running in
an under-current to the desired goal, I continued, "And we must make
the most of them.  We must remove the barricade, in the dark and
quietly, from the rear to the front gate.  Do you see?  Then the moment
they sound the attack in front we must slip out at the back, make a
dash for the road, and through the gorge to Gueret."

"Good," Parabere assented, with the utmost coolness.  "Why not? Let us
do it."

We went in, and in a moment the orders were given, and, the men being
charged to be silent and to make as little noise as possible over the
work, we had every hope of accomplishing it undetected.  To go out into
the road and raise and replace the shattered gate would have been too
bold a step.  We contented ourselves, therefore, with removing four
great baulks of timber from the one gate to the other, and placing them
across the gap in such a manner that, being supported by large stones,
they formed a pretty high barrier.  To these, at Boisrueil's
suggestion, were added three doors which we forced from their hinges in
the house, and behind the whole, to cover our retreat the better, we
tethered six sumpter horses in two lines.

It remained only to unbar the rear gate and see that it opened easily.
This being done, as we had done all the rest, stealthily and in
darkness, and by men who dared not speak above a whisper, I gave the
word to hang the male prisoner and gag and bind the woman.  Colet
undertook these duties, and with a grim humour of his own hung the
rascally host on the threshold where the brigands must run against him
when they entered.  Then I directed every man to saddle and bridle his
nag and stand by it, and so we waited with what patience we might for
the DENOUEMENT.

It seemed very long in coming, yet when it did, what with the restless
movements of the horses and the melancholy murmur of the stream, it
well-nigh took us by surprise.  It was Boisrueil who touched my sleeve
and made me aware of a low trampling on the road outside, a sound that
had scarcely become clearly audible before it ceased.  I judged that
the moment was come, and passed the word in a whisper to open the
gates.  Unfortunately, they creaked, and I feared for a moment that I
had been premature; but before they were more than ajar a harsh whistle
startled the silence, a flare blazed up on the road, and a voice cried
to charge.

On the instant the ground shook under the assailants' rush, but the
barricade, which doubtless took the rogues by surprise, brought them to
a sudden stop, and gave us time to file out.  The heavy rain which was
failing served to cover our movements almost as well as the baggage
horses which we had posted for the purpose; while we ran the less risk,
inasmuch as the flare they had kindled lit up the upper part of the
house but left the courtyard in perfect darkness.

Naturally, once outside, we did not linger to see what happened, but,
filing in a line and like ghosts up the bank of the stream, were glad
to hit on the road a hundred and fifty paces away, where it entered the
gorge.  Here, where it was as dark as pitch, we whipped our horses into
a canter and made a good pace for half a league, then, drawing rein,
let our horses trot until the league was out.  By that time we were
through the gorge, and I gave the word to pull up, that we might listen
and learn whether we were pursued.  Before the order had quite brought
us to a standstill, however, two figures on a sudden rose out of the
darkness before us and barred the way.  I was riding in the front rank,
abreast of Parabere and La Font, and I had just time to lay my hand on
a pistol when one of the figures spoke.

"Well, M. le Capitaine, what luck?"  he cried, advancing, and drawing
rein to turn with us.

I saw his mistake, and, raising my hand to check those behind, muttered
in my beard that all had gone well.

"You got the man?"

"Yes," I said, peering at him through the darkness.

"Good!"  he answered.  "Then now for Bareilles, supper, and a full
purse; and afterwards, for me, the quietest corner of France!  The King
will make a fine outcry, and I do not trust one gov--"

In a flash Parabere had him by the throat, and dragged him in a grip of
iron on to the withers of his horse.  Still he managed to utter a cry,
and the other rascal, taking the alarm, whipped his horse round, and in
a second got a start of twenty paces.  Colet, a light man and well
mounted, was after him in a trice, and we heard them go ding-dong,
ding-dong, through the darkness for a mile or more as it seemed to us.
Then a sharp scream came faintly down the wind.

"Good!"  Parabere said cheerfully.  "Let us be jogging."  He had tied
his prisoner neck and knees over the saddle before him.

"You heard what he said?"  I muttered, as we moved on.

"Perfectly," he answered in the same tone.

"And you think?"

"I think, Grand Master," he replied drily, "that the sooner you are out
of La Marche and Bareilles' government the longer you are likely to
live."

I was quite of that opinion myself, having drawn the same inferences
from the words the prisoner had uttered.  But for the moment I had no
alternative save to go on, and put a bold face on the matter; and
accordingly I led the way forward at as fast a pace as the darkness and
the jaded state of our horses permitted. Colet presently joined us, and
half an hour later a bunch of lights which appeared on the side of a
hill in front proclaimed that we were nearing Gueret.  From this point
half a league across a rushy bottom and through a ford brought us to
the gate, which opened before we summoned it.  I had taken care to call
to the van one of my men who knew the town; and he guided us quickly,
no one challenging us, through a number of foul, narrow streets and
under dark archways, among which a stranger must have gone astray.  We
reached at last a good-sized square, on one side of which--though the
rest of the town lay buried in darkness--a large building, which I
judged to be Bareilles' residence, exposed a dozen lighted windows to
the street.  Two or three figures lounged half-seen on the wide stone
steps which led up to the entrance, and the rattle of dice, with a
murmur of voices, came from the windows.  Without a moment's hesitation
I dismounted at the foot of the steps, and, bidding La Font and
Boisrueil attend me, with three of the servants, I directed Colet to
withdraw with the rest and the horses to the farther end of the square.

Dreading nothing so much as that I might lose the advantage of
surprise, I put aside two of the men on the steps who would have
questioned me, and strode boldly across the stone landing at the head
of the flight.  Here I found two doors facing me, and foresaw the
possibility of error; but I was relieved from the burden of choosing by
the sudden appearance at one of them of Bareilles himself.  The place
was lit only by an oil lamp, and, for a reason best known to himself,
he did not look directly at me, but stood with his head half-turned as
he said, "Well, Martin, is it done?"

I heard the dicers hold their hands to catch the answer, and in the
silence a bottle in some unsteady hand clinked against a glass.
Through the half-open door behind him it was possible to see a long
table, laid and glittering with steel and plate; and all seemed to wait.

Parabere broke the spell.  "We are late!"  he said in a ringing voice,
which startled the governor as if it had been the voice of doom.  "But
we could not have found you better prepared, it seems.  Do you always
sup as late as this?"

For a moment the villain could not speak, but leaned against the
doorpost, with his cheeks gone white and his jaw fallen, the most
pitiable spectacle to be conceived.  I affected to see nothing,
however, but went by him easily, and into the room, drawing off my
gauntlets as entered.  The dicers, from their seats beside a table on
the hearth, gazed at me, turned to stone.  I took up a glass, filled
it, and drank it off.  "Now I am better!"  I said. "But this is not the
warmest of welcomes, M. de Bareilles."

He muttered something, looking fearfully from one to another of us;
and, his hand shaking, filled a glass and pledged me.  The wine gave
him courage and impudence:  he began to speak; and though his hurried
sentences and excited manner must have betrayed him to the least
suspicious, we pretended to see nothing, but rather to congratulate
ourselves on his late hours and timely preparations.  And certainly
nothing could have seemed more cheerful in comparison with the squalid
inn and miry road from which we came than this smiling feast; if death
had not seemed to my eyes to lurk behind it.

"I thought it likely that you would lie at Saury," he said, with a
ghastly smile.

"And yet made this preparation for us?"  I answered politely, yet
letting a little of my real mind be seen.  "Well, as a fact, M.
Bareilles, save for one thing we should have lain there."

"And that thing?"  he asked, his tongue almost failing him as he put
the question.

"The fact that you have a villain in your company," I answered.

"What?"  he stammered.

"A villain, M. le Capitaine Martin," I continued sternly.  "You sent
him out this morning against the Great Band; instead, he took it upon
him to lay a plot for me, from which I have only narrowly escaped."

"Martin?"

"Yes, M. de Bareilles, Martin!"  I answered roundly, fixing him with my
eyes; while Parabere went quietly to the door, and stood by it.  "If I
am not mistaken, I hear him at this moment dismounting below.  Let us
understand one another therefore, I propose to sup with you, but I
shall not sit down until he hangs."

It would be useless for me to attempt to paint the mixture of horror,
perplexity, and shame which distorted Bareilles' countenance as I spoke
these words.  While Parabere's attitude and my demeanour gave him
clearly to understand that we suspected the truth, if we did not know
it, our coolness and the very nature of my demand imposed upon his
fears and led him to believe that we had a regiment at our call.  He
knew, too, that that which might be done in a ruined hamlet might not
be done in the square at Gueret; and his knees trembled under him.  He
muttered that he did not understand; that we must be mistaken.  What
evidence had we?

"The best!"  I answered grimly.  "If you wish to hear it, I will send
for it; but witnesses have sometimes loose tongues, Bareilles, and he
may not stop at the Capitaine Martin."

He started and glared at me.  From me his eyes passed to Parabere; then
he shuddered, and looked down at the table.  As he leaned against it, I
heard the glasses tinkling softly.  At last he muttered that the man
must have a trial.

I shrugged my shoulders, and would have answered that that was his
business; but at the moment a heavy step rang on the stone steps, the
door was flung hastily open, and a dark-complexioned man came in with
his hat on.  The stranger was splashed to the chin, and his face wore
an expression of savage annoyance; but this gave place the instant he
saw us to one of intense surprise, while the words he had had on his
lips died away, and he stood nonplussed.  I turned to M. de Bareilles.

"Who is this?"  I said harshly.

"One of my lieutenants," he answered in a stifled tone.

"M. le Capitaine Martin?"

"The same," he answered.

"Very well," I replied.  "You have heard my terms."

He stood clutching the table, and in the bright light of the candles
that burned on it his face was horrible.  Still he managed to speak.
"M. le Capitaine, call four men," he muttered.

"Monsieur?"  the Captain answered.

"Call four men--four of your men," Bareilles repeated with an effort.

The Captain turned and went downstairs in amazement, returning
immediately after with four troopers at his heels.

Bareilles' face was ghastly.  "Take M. le Capitaine's sword," he said
to them.

The Captain's jaw fell, and, stepping back a pace, he looked from one
to another.  But all were silent; he found every eye upon him, and,
doubtful and taken by surprise, he unbuckled his sword and flung it
with an oath upon the floor.

"To the garden with him!"  Bareilles continued, hoarsely. "Quick! Take
him!  I will send you your orders."

They laid hands on the man mechanically, and, unnerved by the
suddenness of the affair, the silence, and the presence of so many
strangers,--ignorant, too, what was doing or what was meant, he went
unresisting.  They marched him out heavily; the door closed behind
them; we stood waiting.  The glittering table, the lights, the arrested
dicers, all the trivial preparations for a carouse that at another time
must have given a cheerful aspect to the room, produced instead the
most sombre impression.  I waited, but, seeing that Bareilles did not
move, I struck the table with my gauntlet.  "The order!"  I said,
sharply; "the order!"

He slunk to a table in a corner where there was ink, and scrawled it.
I took it from his hand, and, giving it to Boisrueil, "Take it," I
said, "and the three men on the landing, and see the order carried out.
When it is over, come and tell me."

He took the order and disappeared, La Font after him.  I remained in
the room with Parabere, Bareilles, and the dicers.  The minutes passed
slowly, no one speaking; Bareilles standing with his head sunk on his
breast, and a look of utter despair on his countenance.  At length
Boisrueil and La Font returned.  The former nodded.

"Very well," I said.  "Then let us sup, gentlemen.  Come, M. de
Bareilles, your place is at the head of the table.  Parabere, sit here.
Gentlemen, I have not the honour of knowing you, but here are places."

And we supped; but not all with the same appetite.  Bareilles, silent,
despairing, a prey to the bitterest remorse, sat low in his chair, and,
if I read his face aright, had no thought but of vengeance.  But,
assured that by forcing him to that which must for ever render him
odious--and particularly among his inferiors--I had sapped his
authority at the root, I took care only that he should not leave us.  I
directed Colet to unsaddle and bivouac in the garden, and myself lay
all night with Parabere and Bareilles in the room in which we had
supped, Boisrueil and La Font taking turns to keep the door.

To have betrayed too much haste to be gone might have proved as
dangerous as a long delay; and our horses needed rest.  But an hour
before noon next day I gave the order and we mounted in the square, in
the presence of a mixed mob of soldiers and townsfolk, whom it needed
but a spark to kindle.  I took care that that spark should be wanting,
however; and to that end I compelled Bareilles to mount and ride with
us as far as Saury.  Here, where I found the inn burned and the woman
murdered, I should have done no more than justice had I hung him as
well; and I think that he half expected it.  But reflecting that he had
a score of relations in Poitou who might give trouble, and, besides
that, his position called for some degree of consideration, I parted
with him gravely, and hastened to put as many leagues between us as
possible.  That night we slept at Crozant, and the next at St. Gaultier.

It was chiefly in consequence of the observations I made during this
journey that Henry, in the following October, marched into the Limousin
with a considerable force and received the submission of the governors.
The details of that expedition, in the course of which he put to death
ten or twelve of the more disorderly, will be found in another place.
It remains for me only to add here that Bareilles was not of them.  He
escaped a fate he richly deserved by flying betimes with Bassignac to
Sedan.  Of his ultimate fate I know nothing; but a week after my return
to the Arsenal, a man called on me who turned out to be the astrologer.
I gave him fifty crowns.




VIII.

THE OPEN SHUTTER.


Few are ignorant of that weakness of the vulgar which leads them to
admire in the great not so much the qualities which deserve admiration
as those which, in the eyes of the better-informed, are defects; so
that the amours of Caesar, the clock-making of Charles, and the jests
of Coligny are more in the mouths of men than their statesmanship or
valour.  For one thing commendable, two that are diverting are told;
and for one man who in these days recalls the thousand great and wise
deeds of the late King a thousand remember his occasional freaks, the
duel he would have fought, or his habit of visiting the streets of
Paris by night and in disguise.  That this last has been much
exaggerated, I can myself bear witness; for though Varenne or Coquet,
the Master of the Household, were his usual companions on these
occasions, he seldom failed to confess to me after the event, and more
than once I accompanied him.

If I remember rightly, it was in April or May of this year, 1606, and
consequently a few days after his return from Sedan, that he surprised
me one night as I sat at supper, and, requesting me to dismiss my
servants, let me know that he was in a flighty mood; and that nothing
would content him but to play the Caliph in my company. I was not too
willing, for I did not fail to recognise the risk to which these
expeditions exposed his person; but, in the end, I consented, making
only the condition that Maignan should follow us at a distance.  This
he conceded, and I sent for two plain suits, and we dressed in my
closet.  The King, delighted with the frolic, was in his wildest mood.
He uttered an infinity of jests, and cut a thousand absurd antics; and,
rallying me on my gravity, soon came near to making me repent of the
easiness which had led me to fall in with his humour.

However, it was too late to retreat, and in a moment we were standing
in the street.  It would not have surprised me if he had celebrated his
freedom by some noisy extravagance there; but he refrained, and
contented himself--while Maignan locked the postern behind us--with
cocking his hat and lugging forward his sword, and assuming an air of
whimsical recklessness, as if an adventure were to be instantly
expected.

But the moon had not yet risen, the night was dark, and for some time
we met with nothing more diverting than a stumble over a dead dog, a
word with a forward wench, or a narrow escape from one of those liquid
douches that render the streets perilous for common folk and do not
spare the greatest.  Naturally, I began to tire, and wished myself with
all my heart back at the Arsenal; but Henry, whose spirits a spice of
danger never failed to raise, found a hundred things to be merry over,
and some of which he made a great tale of afterwards.  He would go on;
and presently, in the Rue de la Pourpointerie, which we entered as the
clocks struck the hour before midnight, his persistence was rewarded.

By that time the moon had risen; but, naturally, few were abroad so
late, and such as were to be seen belonged to a class among whom even
Henry did not care to seek adventures.  Our astonishment was great
therefore when, half-way down the street--a street of tall, mean houses
neither better nor much worse than others in that quarter--we saw,
standing in the moonlight at an open door, a boy about seven years old.

The King saw him first, and, pressing my arm, stood still.  On the
instant the child, who had probably seen us before we saw him, advanced
into the road to us.  "Messieurs," he said, standing up boldly before
us and looking at us without fear, "my father is ill, and I cannot
close the shutter."

The boy's manner, full of self-possession, and his tone, remarkable at
his age, took us so completely by surprise--to say nothing of the late
hour and the deserted street, which gave these things their full
effect--that for a moment neither of us answered.  Then the King spoke.
"Indeed, M. l'Empereur," he said gravely; "and where is the shutter?"

The boy pointed to an open shutter at the top of the house behind him.

"Ah!"  Henry said.  "And you wish us to close it?"

"If you please, messieurs."

"We do please," Henry replied, saluting him with mock reverence. "You
may consider the shutter closed.  Lead on, Monsieur; we follow."

For the first time the boy looked doubtful; but he turned without
saying anything, and passing through the doorway, was in an instant
lost in the pitchy darkness of the entry.  I laid my hand on the King's
arm, and tried to induce him not to follow; fearing much that this
might be some new thieves' trap, leading nowhither save to the POIRE
D'ANGOISSE and the poniard.  But the attempt was hopeless from the
first; he broke from me and entered, and I followed him.

We groped for the balustrade and found it, and began to ascend, guided
by the boy's voice; who kept a little before us, saying continually,
"This way, messieurs; this way!"  His words had so much the sound of a
signal, and the staircase was so dark and ill-smelling, that, expecting
every moment to be seized or to have a knife in my back, I found it
almost interminable.  At last, however, a gleam of light appeared above
us, the boy opened a door, and we found ourselves standing on a mean,
narrow landing, the walls of which had once been whitewashed.  The
child signed to us to enter, and we followed him into a bare attic,
where our heads nearly touched the ceiling.

"Messieurs, the air is keen," he said in a curiously formal tone. "Will
you please to close the shutter?"

The King, amused and full of wonder, looked round.  The room contained
little besides a table, a stool, and a lamp standing in a basin on the
floor; but an alcove, curtained with black, dingy hangings, broke one
wall.  "Your father lies there?"  Henry said, pointing to it.

"Yes, monsieur."

"He feels the cold?"

"Yes, monsieur.  Will you please to close the shutter?"

I went to it, and, leaning out, managed, with a little difficulty, to
comply.  Meanwhile, the King, gazing curiously at the curtains,
gradually approached the alcove.  He hesitated long, he told me
afterwards, before he touched the hangings; but at length, feeling sure
that there was something more in the business than appeared, he did so.
Drawing one gently aside, as I turned from the window, he peered in;
and saw just what he had been led to expect--a huddled form covered
with dingy bed-clothes and a grey head lying on a ragged, yellow
pillow.  The man's face was turned to the wall; but, as the light fell
on him, he sighed and, with a shiver, began to move.  The King dropped
the curtain.

The adventure had not turned out as well as he had hoped; and, with a
whimsical look at me, he laid a crown on the table, said a kind word to
the boy, and we went out.  In a moment we were in the street.

It was my turn now to rally him, and I did so without mercy; asking if
he knew of any other beauteous damsel who wanted her shutter closed,
and whether this was the usual end of his adventures.  He took the jest
in good part, laughing fully as loudly at himself as I laughed; and in
this way we had gone a hundred paces or so very merrily, when, on a
sudden, he stopped.

"What is it, sire?"  I asked.

"Hola!"  he said, "The boy was clean."

"Clean?"

"Yes; hands, face, clothes.  All clean."

"Well, sire?"

"How could he be?  His father in bed, no one even to close the shutter.
How could he be clean?"

"But, if he was, sire?"

For answer Henry seized me by the arm, turned me round without a word,
and in a moment was hurrying me back to the house.  I thought that he
was going thither again, and followed reluctantly; but twenty paces
short of the door he crossed the street, and drew me into a doorway.
"Can you see the shutter?" he said.  "Yes?  Then watch it, my friend."

I had no option but to resign myself, and I nodded.  A moist and chilly
wind, which blew through the street and penetrating our cloaks made us
shiver, did not tend to increase my enthusiasm; but the King was proof
even against this, as well as against the kennel smells and the tedium
of waiting, and presently his persistence was rewarded.  The shutter
swung slowly open, the noise made by its collision with the wall coming
clearly to our ears.  A minute later the boy appeared in the doorway,
and stood looking up and down.

"Well," the King whispered in my ear, "what do you make of that, my
friend?"

I muttered that it must be a beggar's trick.

"They would not earn a crown in a month," he answered.  "There must be
something more than that at the bottom of it."

Beginning to share his curiosity, I was about to propose that we should
sally out and see if the boy would repeat his overture to us, when I
caught the sound of footsteps coming along the street. "Is it Maignan?"
the King whispered, looking out cautiously.

"No, sire," I said.  "He is in yonder doorway."

Before Henry could answer, the appearance of two strangers coming along
the roadway confirmed my statement.  They paused opposite the boy, and
he advanced to them.  Too far off to hear precisely what passed, we
were near enough to be sure that the dialogue was in the main the same
as that in which we had taken part.  The men were cloaked, too, as were
we, and presently they went in, as we had gone in.  All, in fact,
happened as it had happened to us, and after the necessary interval we
saw and heard the shutter closed.

"Well," the King said, "what do you make of that?"

"The shutter is the catch-word, sire."

"Ay, but what is going on up there?"  he asked.  And he rubbed his
hands.

I had no explanation to give, however, and shook my head; and we stood
awhile, watching silently.  At the end of five minutes the two men came
out again and walked off the way they had come, but more briskly.
Henry moreover, whose observation was all his life most acute, remarked
that whatever they had been doing they carried away lighter hearts than
they had brought.  And I thought the same.

Indeed, I was beginning to take my full share of interest in the
adventure; and in place of wondering, as before, at Henry's
persistence, found it more natural to admire the keenness which he had
displayed in scenting a mystery.  I was not surprised, therefore, when
he gripped my arm to gain my attention, and, a the window fell slowly
open again, drew me quickly into the street, and hurried me across it
and through the doorway of the house.

"Up!"  he muttered in my ear.  "Quickly and quietly, man!  If there are
to be other visitors, we will play the spy.  But softly, softly; here
is the boy!"

We stood aside against the wall, scarcely daring to breathe; and the
child, guiding himself by the handrail, passed us in the dark without
suspicion, and pattered on down the staircase.  We remained as we were
until we heard him cross the threshold, and then we crept up; not to
the uppermost landing, where the light, when the door was opened, must
betray us, but to that immediately below it.  There we took our stand
in the angle of the stairs and waited, the King, between amusement at
the absurdity of our position and anxiety lest we should betray
ourselves, going off now and again into stifled laughter, from which he
vainly strove to restrain himself by pinching me.

I was not in so gay a mood myself, however, the responsibility of his
safety lying heavy upon me; while the possibility that the adventure
might prove no less tragical in the sequel than it now appeared
comical, did not fail to present itself to my eyes in the darkest
colours.  When we had watched, therefore, five minutes more--which
seemed to me an hour--I began to lose faith; and I was on the point of
undertaking to persuade Henry to withdraw, when the voices of men
speaking at the door below reached us, and told me that it was too
late.  The next moment their steps crossed the threshold, and they
began to ascend, the boy saying continually, "This way, messieurs, this
way!"  and preceding them as he had preceded us.  We heard them
approach, breathing heavily, and but for the balustrade, by which I
felt sure that they would guide themselves, and which stood some feet
from our corner, I should have been in a panic lest they should blunder
against us.  But they passed safely, and a moment later the boy opened
the door of the room above.  We heard them go in, and without a
second's hesitation we crept up after them, following them so closely
that the door was scarcely shut before we were at it.  We heard,
therefore, what passed from the first: the child's request that they
would close the shutter, their hasty compliance, and the silence,
strange and pregnant, which followed, and which was broken at last by a
solemn voice.  "We have closed one shutter," it said, "but the shutter
of God's mercy Is never closed."

"Amen," a second person answered in a tone so distant and muffled that
it needed no great wit to guess whence it came, or that the speaker was
behind the curtains of the alcove.  "Who are you?"

"The cure of St. Marceau," the first speaker replied.

"And whom do you bring to me?"

"A sinner."

"What has he done?"

"He will tell you."

"I am listening."

There was a pause on this, a long pause; which was broken at length by
a third speaker, in a tone half sullen, half miserable. "I have robbed
my master," he said.

"Of how much?"

"Fifty livres."

"Why?"

"I lost it at play."

"And you are sorry."

"I must be sorry," the man panted with sudden fierceness, "or hang!"
Hidden though he was from us, there was a tremor in his voice that told
a tale of pallid cheeks and shaking knees, and a terror fast rising to
madness.

"He makes up his accounts to-morrow?"

"Yes."

Someone in the room groaned; it should have been the culprit, but
unless I was mistaken the sound came through the curtains.  A long
pause followed.  Then, "And if I help you," the muffled voice resumed,
"will you swear to lead an honest life?"

But the answer may be guessed.  I need not repeat the assurances, the
protestations and vows of repentance, the cries and tears of gratitude
which ensue; and to which the poor wretch, stripped of his sullen
indifference, completely abandoned himself.  Suffice it that we
presently heard the clinking of coins, a word or two of solemn advice
from the cure, and a man's painful sobbing; then the King touched my
arm, and we crept down the stairs.  I was for stopping on the landing
where we had hidden ourselves before; but Henry drew me on to the foot
of the stairs and into the street.

He turned towards home, and for some time did not speak.  At length he
asked me what I thought of it.

"In what way, sire?"

"Do you not think," he said in a voice of much emotion, "that if we
could do what he does, and save a man instead of hanging him, it would
be better?"

"For the man, sire, doubtless," I answered drily; "but for the State it
might not be so well.  If mercy became the rule and justice the
exception--there would be fewer bodies at Montfaucon and more in the
streets at daylight.  I feel much greater doubt on another point."

Shaking off the moodiness that had for a moment overcome him, Henry
asked with vivacity what that was.

"Who he is, and what is his motive?"

"Why?"  the King replied in some surprise--he was ever of so kind a
nature that an appeal to his feelings displaced his judgment. "What
should he be but what he seems?"

"Benevolence itself?"

"Yes."

"Well, sire, I grant that he may be M. de Joyeuse, who has spent his
life in passing in and out of monasteries, and has performed so many
tricks of the kind that I could believe anything of him. But if it be
not he--"

"It was not his voice," Henry said, positively.

"Then there is something here," I answered, "still unexplained.
Consider the oddity of the conception, sire, the secrecy of the
performance, the hour, the mode, all the surrounding circumstances!  I
can imagine a man currying favour with the basest and most dangerous
class by such means.  I can imagine a conspiracy recruited by such
means.  I can imagine this shibboleth of the shutter grown to a
watchword as deadly as the 'TUEZ!' of '72.  I can imagine all that, but
I cannot imagine a man acting thus out of pure benevolence."

"No?"  Henry said, thoughtfully.  "Well, I think that I agree with
you."  and far from being displeased with my warmth (as is the manner
of some sovereigns when their best friends differ from them), he came
over to my opinion so completely as to halt and express his intention
of returning and probing the matter to the bottom.  Midnight had gone,
however; it would take some little time to retrace our steps; and with
some difficulty I succeeded in dissuading him, promising instead to
make inquiries on the morrow, and having learned who lived in the
house, to turn the whole affair into a report, which should be
submitted to him.

This amused and satisfied him, and, expressing himself well content
with the evening's diversion--though we had done nothing unworthy
either of a King or a Minister--he parted from me at the Arsenal, and
went home with his suite.

It did not occur to me at the time that I had promised to do anything
difficult; but the news which my agents brought me next day--that the
uppermost floor of the house in the Rue Pourpointerie was empty--put
another face upon the matter.  The landlord declared that he knew
nothing of the tenant, who had rented the rooms, ready furnished, by
the week; and as I had not seen the man's face, there remained only two
sources whence I could get the information I needed--the child, and the
cure of St. Marceau.

I did not know where to look for the former, however; and I had to
depend on the cure.  But here I carne to an obstacle I might easily
have foreseen.  I found him, though an honest man, obdurate in
upholding his priest's privileges; to all my inquiries he replied that
the matter touched the confessional, and was within his vows; and that
he neither could, nor dared--to please anyone, or for any cause,
however plausible--divulge the slightest detail of the affair.  I had
him summoned to the arsenal, and questioned him myself, and closely;
but of all armour that of the Roman priesthood is the most difficult to
penetrate, and I quickly gave up the attempt.

Baffled in the only direction in which I could hope for success, I had
to confess my defeat to the King, whose curiosity was only piqued the
more by the rebuff.  He adjured me not to let the matter drop, and,
suggesting a number of persons among whom I might possibly find the
unknown, proposed also some theories.  Of these, one that the
benevolent was a disguised lady, who contrived in this way to give the
rein at once to gallantry and charity, pleased him most; while I
favoured that which had first occurred to me on the night of our sally,
and held the unknown to be a clever rascal, who, to serve his ends,
political or criminal, was corrupting the commonalty, and drawing
people into his power.

Things remained in this state some weeks, and, growing no wiser, I was
beginning to think less of the affair--which, of itself, and apart from
a whimsical interest which the King took in it, was unimportant--when
one day, stopping in the Quartier du Marais to view the works at the
new Place Royale, I saw the boy.  He was in charge of a decent-looking
servant, whose hand he was holding, and the two were gazing at a horse
that, alarmed by the heaps of stone and mortar, was rearing and trying
to unseat its rider. The child did not see me, and I bade Maignan
follow him home, and learn where he lived and who he was.

In an hour my equerry returned with the information I desired. The
child was the only son of Fauchet, one of the Receivers-General of the
Revenue; a man who kept great state in the largest of the old-fashioned
houses in the Rue de Bethisy, where he, had lately entertained the
King.  I could not imagine anyone less likely to be concerned in
treasonable practices; and, certain that I had made no mistake in the
boy, I was driven for a while to believe that some servant had,
perverted the child to this use.  Presently, however, second thoughts,
and the position of the father, taken, perhaps, with suspicions that I
had for a long time entertained of Fauchet--in common with most of his
kind--suggested an explanation, hitherto unconsidered.  It was not an
explanation very probable at first sight, nor one that would have
commended itself to those who divide all men by hard and fast rules and
assort them like sheep.  But I had seen too much of the world to fall
into this mistake, and it satisfied me.  I began by weighing it
carefully; I procured evidence, I had Fauchet watched; and, at length,
one evening in August, I went to the Louvre.

The King was dicing with Fernandez, the Portuguese banker; but I
ventured to interrupt the game and draw him aside.  He might not have
taken this well, but that my first word caught his attention.

"Sire," I said, "the shutter is open."

He understood in a moment.  "St. Gris!"  He exclaimed with animation.
"Where?  At the same house?"

"No, sire; in the Rue Cloitre Notre Dame."

"You have got him, then?"

"I know who he is, and why he is doing this."

"Why?"  the King cried eagerly.

"Well, I was going to ask for your Majesty's company to the place," I
answered smiling.  "I will undertake that you shall be amused at least
as well as here, and at a cheaper rate."

He shrugged his shoulders.  "That may very well be," he said with a
grimace.  "That rogue Pimentel has stripped me of two thousand crowns
since supper.  He is plucking Bassompierre now."

Remembering that only that morning I had had to stop some necessary
works through lack of means, I could scarcely restrain my indignation.
But it was not the time to speak, and I contented myself with repeating
my request.  Ashamed of himself, he consented with a good grace, and
bidding me go to his: closet, followed a few minutes later.  He found
me cloaked to the eyes, and with a soutane and priest's hat; on my arm.
"Are those for me?"  he said.

"Yes, sire."

"Who am I, then?"

"The cure of St. Germain."

He made a wry face.  "Come, Grand Master," he said; "he died yesterday.
Is not the jest rather grim?"

"In a good cause," I said equably.

He flashed a roguish look at me.  "Ah!"  he said, "I thought that that
was a wicked rule which only we Romanists avowed.  But, there; don't be
angry.  I am ready."

Coquet, the Master of the Household, let us out by one of the river
gates, and we went by the new bridge and the Pont St. Michel.  By the
way I taught the King the role I wished him to play, but without
explaining the mystery; the opportune appearance of one of my agents
who was watching the end of the street bringing Henry's remonstrances
to a close.

"It is still open?"  I said.

"Yes, your excellency."

"Then come, sire," I said, "I see the boy yonder.  Let us ascend, and I
will undertake that before you reach the street again you shall be not
only a wiser but a richer sovereign."

"St. Gris!"  he answered with alacrity.  "Why did you not say that
before, and I should have asked no questions.  On, on, in God's name,
and the devil take Pimentel!"

I restrained the caustic jest that rose to my lips, and we proceeded in
silence down the street.  The boy, whom I had espied loitering in a
doorway a little way ahead, as if the great bell above us which had
just tolled eleven had drawn him out, peered at us a moment askance;
and then, coming forward, accosted us. But I need not detail the
particulars of a conversation which was almost word for word the same
as that which had passed in the Rue de la Pourpointerie; suffice it
that he made the same request with the same frank audacity, and that,
granting it, we were in a moment following hint up a similar staircase.

"This way, messieurs, this way!"  he said; as he had on that other
night, while we groped our way upwards in the dark.  He opened a door,
and a light shone out; and we entered a room that seemed, with its bare
walls and rafters, its scanty stool and table and lamp, the very
counterpart of that other room.  In one wall appeared the dingy
curtains of an alcove, closely drawn; and the shutter stood open,
until, at the child's request, expressed in the same words, I went to
it and closed it.

We were both so well muffled up and disguised, and the light of the
lamp shining upwards so completely distorted the features, that I had
no fear of recognition, unless the King's voice betrayed him.  But when
he spoke, breaking the oppressive silence of the room, his tone was as
strange and hollow as I could wish.

"The shutter is closed," he said; "but the shutter of God's mercy is
never closed!"

Still, knowing that this was the crucial moment, and that we should be
detected now if at all, I found it; an age before the voice behind the
curtains answered "Amen!"  and yet another age before the hidden
speaker continued "Who are you?"

"The cure of St. Germain," Henry responded.

The man behind the curtains gasped, and they were for a moment
violently agitated, as if a hand seized them and let them go again.
But I had reckoned that the unknown, after a pause of horror, would
suppose that he had heard amiss and continue his usual catechism.  And
so it proved.  In a voice that shook a little, he asked, "Whom do you
bring to me?"

"A sinner," the King answered.

"What has he done?"

"He will tell you."

"I am listening," the unknown said.

The light in the basin flared up a little, casting dark shadows on the
ceiling, and at the same moment the shutter, which I had failed to
fasten securely, fell open with a grinding sound.  One of the curtains
swayed a little in the breeze, "I have robbed my master," I said,
slowly.

"Of how much?"

"A hundred and twenty thousand crowns."

The bed shook until the boards creaked under it; but this time no hand
grasped the curtains.  Instead, a strained voice--thick and coarse, yet
differing from that muffled tone which we had heard before--asked, "Who
are you?"

"Jules Fauchet."

I waited.  The King, who understood nothing but had listened to my
answers with eager attention, and marked no less closely the agitation
which they caused in the unknown, leant forward to listen.  But the bed
creaked no more; the curtain hung still; even the voice, which at last
issued from the curtains, was no more like the ordinary accents of a
man than are those which he utters in the paroxysms of epilepsy.  "Are
you--sorry?"  the unknown muttered--involuntarily, I think; hoping
against hope; not daring to depart from a formula which had become
second nature.  But I could fancy him clawing, as he spoke, at his
choking throat.

France, however, had suffered too long at the hands of that race of
men, and I had been too lately vilified by them to feel much pity; and
for answer I lifted a voice that to the quailing wretch must have been
the voice of doom.  "Sorry?"  I said grimly.  "I must be--or hang!  For
to-morrow the King examines his books, and the next day I--hang!"

The King's hand was on mine, to stop me before the last word was out;
but his touch came too late.  As it rang through the room one of the
curtains before us was twitched aside, and a face glared out, so
ghastly and drawn and horror-stricken, that few would have known it for
that of the wealthy fermier, who had grown sleek and fat on the King's
revenues.  I do not know whether he knew us, or whether, on the
contrary, he found this accusation, so precise, so accurate, coming
from an unknown source, still more terrible than if he had known us;
but on the instant he fell forward in a swoon.

"St. Gris!"  Henry cried, looking on the body with a shudder, "you have
killed him, Grand Master!  It was true, was it?"

"Yes, sire," I answered.  "But he is not dead, I think."  And going to
the window I whistled for Maignan, who in a minute came to us.  He was
not very willing to touch the man, but I bade him lay him on the bed
and loosen his clothes and throw water on his face; and presently M.
Fauchet began to recover.

I stepped a little aside that he might not see me, and accordingly the
first person on whom his eyes lighted was the King, who had laid aside
his hat and cloak, and taken the terrified and weeping child on his
lap.  M. Fauchet stared at him awhile before he recognised him; but at
last the trembling man knew him, and tottering to his feet, threw
himself on his knees, looking years older than when I had last seen him
in the street.

"Sire," he said faintly, "I will make restitution."

Henry looked at him gravely, and nodded.  "It is well," he said. "You
are fortunate, M. Fauchet; for had this come to my ears in any other
way I could not have spared you.  You will render your accounts and
papers to M. de Sully to-morrow, and according as you are frank with
him you will be treated."

Fauchet thanked him with abject tears, and the King rose and prepared
to leave.  But at the door a thought struck him, and he turned.  "How
long have you done this?"  he said, indicating the room by a gesture,
and speaking in a gentler tone.

"Three years, sire," the wretched man answered.

"And how much have you distributed?"

"Fifteen hundred crowns, sire."

The King cast an indescribable look at me, wherein amusement, scorn,
and astonishment were all blended.  "St. Gris!  man!"  he said,
shrugging his shoulders and drawing in his breath sharply, "you think
God is as easily duped as the King!  I wish I could think so."

He did not speak again until we were half-way back to the Louvre; when
he opened his mouth to announce his intention of rewarding me with a
tithe of the money recovered.  It was duly paid to me, and I bought
with it part of the outlying lands of Villebon--those, I mean, which
extend towards Chartres.  The rest of the money, notwithstanding all my
efforts, was wasted here and there, Pimentel winning thirty crowns of
the King that year.  But the discovery led to others of a similar
character, and eventually set me on the track of a greater offender, M.
l'Argentier, whom I brought to justice a few months later.




IX.

THE MAID OF HONOUR.


In accordance with my custom I gave an entertainment on the last day of
this year to the King and Queen; who came to the Arsenal with a
numerous train, and found the diversions I had provided so much to
their taste that they did not leave until I was half dead with fatigue,
and like to be killed with complaisance.  Though this was not the most
splendid entertainment I gave that year, it had the good fortune to
please; and in a different and less agreeable fashion is recalled to my
memory by a peculiar chain of events, whereof the first link came under
my eyes during its progress.

I have mentioned in an earlier part of these memoirs, a Portuguese
adventurer who, about this time, gained large sums from the Court at
play, and more than once compelled the King to have recourse to me.  I
had the worst opinion of this man, and did not scruple to express it on
several occasions; and this the more, as his presumption fell little
short of his knavery, while he treated those whom he robbed with as
much arrogance as if to play with him were an honour.  Holding this
view of him, I was far from pleased when I discovered that the King had
brought him to my house; but the feeling, though sufficiently strong,
sank to nothing beside the indignation and disgust which I experienced
when, the company having fallen to cards after supper, I found that the
Queen had sat down with him to primero.

It did not lessen my annoyance, that I had, after my usual fashion,
furnished the Queen with a purse for her sport; and in this way found
myself reduced to stand by and see my good money pass into the clutches
of this knave.  Under the circumstances, and in my own house, I could
do nothing; nevertheless, the table at which they sat possessed so
strong a fascination for me that I several times caught myself staring
at it more closely than was polite; and as to disgust at the
unseemliness of such companionship was added vexation at my own loss, I
might have gone farther towards betraying my feelings if a casual
glance aside had not disclosed to me the fact that I did not stand
alone in my dissatisfaction; but that, frivolous as the majority of the
courtiers were, there was one at least among those present who viewed
this particular game with distaste.

This person stood near the door, and fancying himself secured from
observation, either by his position or his insignificance, was
glowering on the pair in a manner that at another time must have cost
him a rebuke.  As it was, I found something friendly, as well as
curious, in his fixed frown; and ignorant of his name, though I knew
him by sight, wondered both who he was and what was the cause of his
preoccupation.

On the one point I had no difficulty in satisfying myself. Boisrueil,
who presently passed, told me that his name was Vallon; that he
belonged to a poor but old family in the Cotentin, and that he had been
only three months at court.

"Making his fortune, I suppose?"  I said grimly.  "He games?"

"No, your excellency."

"Is in debt?"

"Not to my knowledge."

"To whom does he pay his court, then?"

"To the King."

"And the Queen?"

"Not particularly--as far as I know, at least.  But if you wish to know
more, M. le Duc," Boisrueil continued, "I will--"

"No, no," I said peevishly.  The Queen had just handed her last rouleau
across the table, and was still playing.  "Go, man, about your
business; I don't want to spend the evening gossiping with you."

He went, and I dismissed the young fellow from my mind; only to find
him five minutes later at my elbow.  To youth and good looks he added a
modest bearing that did not fail to enhance them and commend him to me;
the majority of the young sparks of the day being wiser than their
fathers.  But I confess that I was not prepared for the stammering
embarrassment with which he addressed me--nor, indeed, to be addressed
by him at all.

"M. de Sully," he said, in a tone of emotion, "I beg you to pardon me.
I am in great trouble, and I think that perhaps, stranger as I am, you
may condescend to do me a service."

So many men appeal to a minister with some such formula on their lips,
and at times with a calculated timidity, that at the first blush of his
request I was inclined to bid him come to me at the proper time; and to
remove to another part of the room.  But curiosity, playing the part of
his advocate, found so much that was candid in his manner that I
hesitated.  "What is it?"  I said stiffly.

"A very slight, if a very unusual, one," he muttered.  "M. le Duc, I
only want you to--"

"To?"  for he stopped and seemed unable to go on.

"To supplement the present you have given to the Queen with this," he
blurted out, his face pale with emotion; and he stealthily held out to
me a green silk purse, through the meshes of which I saw the glint of
gold.  "M. de Sully," he continued, observing my hasty movement, "do
not be offended!  I know that you have done all that hospitality
required.  But I see that the Queen has already lost your gift, and
that--"

"She is playing on credit?"

"Yes, Monsieur."

He said it simply, and as he spoke, he again pressed on me the purse.
I took and weighed it, and calculated at a guess that it held fifty
crowns.  The sum astonished me.  "Why, man," I said, "you are not mad
enough to be in love with her Majesty?"

"No!"  he cried, vehemently, yet with a gleam of humour in his eye.  "I
swear that it is not so.  If you will do me this favour--"

It was a mad impulse that took me, but I nodded, and resolving to make
good the money out of my own pocket should the case, when all was
clear, seem to demand it, I went straight from him, and, crossing the
floor, laid the purse near her Majesty's hand, with a polite word of
regret that fortune had used her so ill, and a hope that this might be
the means of recruiting her forces.

It would not have surprised me had she shown some signs of
consciousness, and perhaps betrayed that she recognised the purse.  But
she contented herself with thanking me prettily, and almost before I
had done speaking had her slender fingers among the coins.  Turning, I
found that Vallon had disappeared; so that all came to a sudden stop;
and with the one and the other, I retired completely puzzled, and less
able than before to make even a guess at the secret of the young man's
generosity.

However, the King summoning me to him, there, for the time, was an end
of the matter:  and between fatigue and the duties of my position, I
did not give a second thought to it that evening. Next morning, too, I
was taken up with the gifts which it was my privilege as Master of the
Mint to present to the King on New Year's Day, and which consisted this
year of medals of gold, silver, and copper, bearing inscriptions of my
own composition, together with small bags of new coins for the King,
the Queen, and their attendants.

These I always made it a point to offer before the King rose; nor was
this year an exception, for I found his Majesty still in bed, the Queen
occupying a couch in the same chamber.  But whereas it generally fell
to me to arouse them from sleep, and be the first to offer those
compliments which befitted the day, I found them on this occasion fully
roused, the King lazily toying with his watch, the Queen talking fast
and angrily, and at the edge of the carpet beside her bed Mademoiselle
D'Oyley in deep disgrace.  The Queen, indeed, was so taken up with
scolding her that she had forgotten what day it was; and even after my
entrance, continued to rate the poor girl so fiercely that I thought
her present violence little less unseemly than her condescension of the
night before.

Perhaps some trace of this feeling appeared in my countenance; for,
presently, the King, who seldom failed to read my thoughts, tried to
check her in a good-natured fashion.  "Come, my dear," he said; "let
that trembling mouse go.  And do you hear what our good friend Sully
has brought you?  I'll be bound--"

"How your Majesty talks!"  the Queen answered, pettishly.  "As if a few
paltry coins could make up for my jar!  I'll be bound, for my part,
that this idle wench was romping and playing with--"

"Come, come; you have made her cry enough!"  the King interrupted--and,
indeed, the girl was sobbing so passionately that a man could not
listen without pain.  "Let her go, I say, and do you attend to Sully.
You have forgotten that it is New Year's Day--"

"A jar of majolica," the Queen cried, Utterly disregarding him, "worth
your body and soul, you little slut!"

"Pooh!  pooh!"  the King said.

"Do you think that I brought it from Florence, all the way in my own--"

"Nightcap," the King muttered.  "There, there, sweetheart," he
continued, aloud, "let the girl go!"

"Of course!  She is a girl," the Queen cried, with a sneer. "That is
enough for you!"

"Well, madam, she is not the only one in the room," I ventured.

"Oh, of course, you are the King's echo!"

"Run away, little one," Henry said, winking to me to be silent.

"And consider yourself lucky," the Queen cried, venomously.  "You ought
to be whipped; and if I had you in my country, I would have you whipped
for all your airs!  San Giacomo, if you cross me, I will see to it!"

This was a parting thrust; for the girl, catching at the King's
permission, had turned and was hurrying in a passion of tears to the
door.  Still, the Queen had not done.  Mademoiselle had broken a jar;
and there were other misdemeanours which her Majesty continued to
expound.  But in the end I had my say, and presented the medals, which
were accepted by the King with his usual kindness, and by the Queen,
when her feelings had found expression, with sufficient complaisance.
Both were good enough to compliment me on my entertainment; but
observing that the Queen quickly buried herself again in her pillows
and was inclined to be peevish, I cut short my attendance on the plea
of fatigue, and left them at liberty to receive the very numerous
company who on this day pay their court.

Of these, the greater number came on afterwards, to wait on me; so that
for some hours the large hall at the Arsenal was thronged with my
friends, or those who called themselves by that name. But towards noon
the stream began to fail; and when I sat down to dinner at that hour, I
had reason to suppose that I should be left at peace.  I had not more
than begun my meal, however, when I was called from table by a
messenger from the Queen.

"What is it?"  I said, when I had gone to him.  Had he come from the
King, I could have understood it more easily.

"Her Majesty desires to know, your excellency, whether you have seen
anything of Mademoiselle D'Oyley."

"I?"

"Yes, M. le Duc."

"No, certainly not.  How should I?"  I replied.

"And she is not here?"  the man persisted.

"No!"  I answered, angrily.  "God bless the Queen, I know nothing of
her.  I am sitting at meat, and--"

The man interrupted me with protestations of regret, and, hastening to
express himself thoroughly satisfied, retired with a crestfallen air.
I wondered what the message meant, and what had come over the Queen,
and whither the girl had gone.  But as I made it a rule throughout my
term of office to avoid, as far as possible, all participation in
bed-chamber intrigues, I wasted little time on the matter, but
returning to my dinner, took up the conversation where I had left it.
Before I rose, however, La Trape came to me and again interrupted me.
He announced that a messenger from his Majesty was waiting in the hall.

I went out, thinking it very probable that Henry had sent me a present;
though it was his more usual custom on this day to honour me with a
visit, and declare his generous intentions by word of mouth, when we
had both retired to my library and the door was closed.  Still, on one
or two occasions he had sent me a horse from his stables, a brace of
Indian fowl, a melon or the like, as a foretaste; and this I supposed
to be the errand on which the man had come.

His first words disabused me.  "May it please your excellency," he
said, very civilly, "the King desires to be remembered to you as usual,
and would learn whether you know anything of Mademoiselle D'Oyley."

"Of whom?"  I cried, astonished.

"Of Mademoiselle D'Oyley, her Majesty's maid of honour."

"Not I, i'faith!"  I said, drily.  "I am no squire of dames, to say
nothing of maids!"

"But his Majesty--"

"If he has sent that message," I replied, "has yet something to
learn--that I do not interest myself in maids of honour or such
frailties."

The man smiled.  "I do not think," he began, "that it was his Majesty--"

"Sent the message?"  I said.  "No, but the Queen, I suppose."

On this he gave me to understand, in the sly, secretive manner such men
affect, that it was so.  I asked him then what all this ferment was
about.  "Has Mademoiselle D'Oyley disappeared?"  I said, peevishly.

"Yes, your excellency.  She was with the Queen at eight o'clock. At
noon her Majesty desired her services, and she was not to be found."

"What?"  I exclaimed.  "A maid of honour is missing for three hours in
the morning, and there is all this travelling!  Why, in my young days,
three nights might have--"

But discerning that he was little more than a youth, and could not;
restrain a smile, I broke off discreetly, and contented myself with
asking if there was reason to suppose that there was more than appeared
in the girl's absence.

"Her Majesty thinks so," he answered.

"Well, in any case, I know nothing about it," I replied.  "I am not
hiding her.  You may tell his Majesty that, with my service. Or I will
write it."

He answered me, eagerly, that that was not necessary, and that the King
had desired merely a word from me; and with that and many other
expressions of regret, he went away and left me at leisure to go to the
riding-school, where at this time of the year it was my wont to see the
young men practise those manly arts, which, so far as I can judge, are
at a lower ebb in these modern days of quips and quodlibets than in the
stirring times of my youth.  Then, thank God, it was held more
necessary for a page to know his seven points of horsemanship than how
to tie a ribbon, or prank a gown, or read a primer.

But the first day of this year was destined to be a day of vexation.  I
had scarcely entered the school, when M. de Varennes was announced.
Instead of going to meet him I bade them bring him to me, and, on
seeing him, bade him welcome to the sports. "Though," I said, politely
overlooking his past history and his origin, "we did better in our
times; yet the young fellows should be encouraged."

"Very true," he answered, suavely.  "And I wish I could stay with you.
But it was not for pleasure I came.  The King sent me.  He desires to
know--"

"What?"  I said.

"If you know anything of Mademoiselle D'Oyley.  Between ourselves, M.
le Duc--"

I looked at him in amazement.  "Why," I said, "what on earth has the
girl done now?"

"Disappeared," he answered.

"But she had done that before."

"Yes," he said, "and the King had your message. But--"

"But what?"  I said sternly.

"He thought that you might wish to supplement it for his private use."

"To supplement it?"

"Yes.  The truth is," Varennes continued, looking at me doubtfully,
"the King has information which leads him to suppose that she may be
here."

"She may be anywhere," I answered in a tone that closed his mouth, "but
she is not here.  And you may tell the King so from me!"

Though he had begun life as a cook, few could be more arrogant than
Varennes on occasion; but he possessed the valuable knack of knowing
with whom he could presume, and never attempted to impose on me.
Apologising with the easy grace of a man who had risen in life by
pleasing, he sat with me awhile, recalling old days and feats, and then
left, giving me to understand that I might depend on him to disabuse
the King's mind.

As a fact, Henry visited me that evening without raising the subject;
nor had I any reason to complain of his generosity, albeit he took care
to exact from the Superintendent of the Finances more than he gave his
servant, and for one gift to Peter got two Pauls satisfied.  To obtain
the money he needed in the most commodious manner, I spent the greater
part of two days in accounts, and had not yet settled the warrants to
my liking, when La Trape coming in with candles on the second evening
disturbed my secretaries.  The men yawned discreetly; and reflecting
that we had had a long day I dismissed them, and stayed myself only for
the purpose of securing one or two papers of a private nature.  Then I
bade La Trape light me to my closet.

Instead, he stood and craved leave to speak to me.  "About what,
sirrah?"  I said.

"I have received an offer, your excellency," he answered with a crafty
look.

"What!  To leave my service?"  I exclaimed, in surprise.

"No, your excellency," he answered.  "To do a service for another--M.
Pimentel.  The Portuguese gentleman stopped me in the street to-day,
and offered me fifty crowns."

"To do what?"  I asked.

"To tell him where the young lady with Madame lies; and lend him the
key of the garden gate to-night."

I stared at the fellow.  "The young lady with Madame?"  I said.

He returned my look with a stupidity which I knew was assumed. "Yes,
your excellency.  The young lady who came this morning," he said.

Then I knew that I had been betrayed, and had given my enemies such a
handle as they would not be slow to seize; and I stood in the middle of
the room in the utmost grief and consternation.  At last, "Stay here,"
I said to the man, as soon as I could speak. "Do not move from the spot
where you stand until I come back!"

It was my almost invariable custom to be announced when I visited my
wife's closet; but I had no mind now for such formalities, and swiftly
passing two or three scared servants on the stairs, I made straight for
her room, tapped and entered.  Abrupt as were my movements, however,
someone had contrived to warn her; for though two of her women sat
working on stools near her, I heard a hasty foot flying, and caught the
last flutter of a skirt as it disappeared through a second door.  My
wife rose from her seat, and looked at me guiltily.

"Madame," I said, "send these women away.  Now," I continued when they
had gone, "who was that with you?"  She looked away dumbly.

"You do well not to try to deceive me, Madame," I continued severely.
"It was Mademoiselle D'Oyley."

She muttered, not daring to meet my eye, that it was.

"Who has absented herself from the Queen's service," I answered
bitterly, "and chosen to hide herself here of all places! Madame," I
continued, with a severity which the sense of my false position amply
justified, "are you aware that you have made me dishonour myself?  That
you have made me lie; not once, but three times?  That you have made me
deceive my master?"

She cried out at that, being frightened, that "she had meant no harm;
that the girl coming to her in great grief and trouble--"

"Because the Queen had scolded her for breaking a china jar!"  I said,
contemptuously.

"No, Monsieur; her trouble was of quite another kind," my wife answered
with more spirit than I had expected.

"Pshaw!" I exclaimed.

"It is plain that you do not yet understand the case," Madame
persisted, facing me with trembling hardihood.  "Mademoiselle D'Oyley
has been persecuted for some time by the suit of a man for whom I know
you, Monsieur, have no respect:  a man whom no Frenchwoman of family
should be forced to marry."

"Who is it?"  I said curtly.

"M. Pimentel."

"Ah!  And the Queen?"

"Has made his suit her own.  Doubtless her Majesty," Madame de Sully
continued with grimness, "who plays with him so much, is under
obligations to him, and has her reasons.  The King, too, is on his
side, so that Mademoiselle--"

"Who has another lover, I suppose?"  I said harshly.

My wife looked at me in trepidation.  "It may be so, Monsieur," she
said hesitating.

"It is so, Madame; and you know it," I answered in the same tone. "M.
Vallon is the man."

"Oh!"  she exclaimed with a gesture of alarm.  "You know!"

"I know, Madame," I replied, with vigour, "that to please this
love-sick girl you have placed me in a position of the utmost
difficulty; that you have jeopardised the confidence which my master,
whom I have never willingly deceived, places in me; and that out of all
this I see only one way of escape, and that is by a full and frank
confession, which you must make to the Queen."

"Oh, Monsieur," she said faintly.

"The girl, of course, must be immediately given up."

My wife began to sob at that, as women will; but I had too keen a sense
of the difficulties into which she had plunged me by her deceit, to
pity her over much.  And, doubtless, I should have continued in the
resolution I had formed, and which appeared to hold out the only hope
of avoiding the malice of those enemies whom every man in power
possesses--and none can afford to despise--if La Trape's words, when he
betrayed the secret to me, had not recurred to my mind and suggested
other reflections.

Doubtless, Mademoiselle had been watched into my house, and my
ill-wishers would take the earliest opportunity of bringing the lie
home to me.  My wife's confession, under such circumstances, would have
but a simple air, and believed by some would be ridiculed by more.  It
might, and probably would, save my credit with the King; but it would
not exalt me in others' eyes, or increase my reputation as a manager.
If there were any other way--and so reflecting, I thought of La Trape
and his story.

Still I was half way to the door when I paused, and turned.  My wife
was still weeping.  "It is no good crying over spilled milk, Madame," I
said severely.  "If the girl were not a fool, she would have gone to
the Ursulines.  The abbess has a stiff neck, and is as big a simpleton
to boot as you are.  It is only a step, too, from here to the
Ursulines, if she had had the sense to go on."

My wife lifted her head, and looked at me eagerly; but I avoided her
gaze and went out without more, and downstairs to my study, where I
found La Trape awaiting me.  "Go to Madame la Duchesse," I said to him.
"When you have done what she needs, come to me in my closet."

He obeyed, and after an interval of about half an hour, during which I
had time to mature my plan, presented himself again before me.
"Pimentel had a notion that the young lady was here then?"  I said
carelessly.

"Yes, your excellency."

"Some of his people fancied that they saw her enter, perhaps?"

"Yes, your excellency."

"They were mistaken, of course?"

"Of course," he answered, dutifully.

"Or she may have come to the door and gone again?"  I suggested.

"Possibly, your excellency."

"Gone on without being seen, I mean?"

"If she went in the direction of the Rue St. Marcel," he answered
stolidly, "she would not be seen."

The convent of the Ursulines is in the Rue St. Marcel.  I knew,
therefore, that Madame had had the sense to act on my hint; and after
reflecting a moment I continued, "So Pimentel wished to know where she
was lodged?"

"That, and to have the key, your excellency."

"To-night?"

"Yes, your excellency."

"Well, you are at liberty to accept the offer," I answered carelessly.
"It will not clash with my service."  And then, as he stood staring in
astonishment, striving to read the riddle, I continued, "By the way,
are the rooms in the little Garden Pavilion aired?  They may be needed
next week; see that one of the women sleeps there to-night; a woman you
can depend on."

"Ah, Monsieur!"

He said no more, but I saw that he understood; and bidding him be
careful in following my instructions, I dismissed him.  The line I had
determined to take was attended by many uncertainties, however; and
more than once I repented that I had not followed my first; instinct,
and avowed the truth.  A hundred things might fall out to frustrate my
scheme and place me in a false position; from which--since the
confidence of his sovereign is the breath of a minister, and as easily
destroyed as a woman's reputation--I might find it impossible to
extricate myself with credit.

I slept, therefore, but ill that night; and in conjunctures apparently
more serious have felt less trepidation.  But experience has long ago
taught me that trifles, not great events, unseat the statesman, and
that of all intrigues those which revolve round a woman are the most
dangerous.  I rose early, therefore, and repaired to Court before my
usual hour, it being the essence of my plan to attack, instead of
waiting to be attacked.  Doubtless my early appearance was taken to
corroborate the rumour that I had made a false step, and was in
difficulties; for scarcely had I crossed the threshold of the
ante-chamber before the attitude of the courtiers caught my attention.
Some who twenty-four hours earlier would have been only too glad to
meet my eye and obtain a word of recognition, appeared to be absorbed
in conversation.  Others, less transparent or better inclined to me,
greeted me with unnatural effusion.  One who bore a grudge against me,
but had never before dared to do more than grin, now scowled openly;
while a second, perhaps the most foolish of all, came to me with
advice, drew me with insistency into a niche near the door, and adjured
me to be cautious.

"You are too bold," he said; "and that way your enemies find their
opening.  Do not go to the King now.  He is incensed against you.  But
we all know that he loves you; wait, therefore, my friend, until he has
had his day's hunting--he is just now booting himself and see him when
he has ridden off his annoyance."

"And when my friends, my dear Marquis, have had time to poison his mind
against me?  No, no," I answered, wondering much whether he were as
simple as he looked.

"But the Queen is with him now," he persisted, seizing the lappel of my
coat to stay me, "and she will be sure to put in a word against you."

"Therefore," I answered drily, "I had better see his Majesty before the
one word becomes two."

"Be persuaded," he entreated me.  "See him now, and nothing but ill
will come of it."

"Nothing but ill for some," I retorted, looking so keenly at him that
his visage fell.  And with that he let me go, and with a smile I passed
through the door.  The rumour had not yet gained such substance that
the crowd had lost all respect for me; it rolled back, and I passed
through it towards the end of the chamber, where the King was stooping
to draw on one of his boots. The Queen stood not far from him, gazing
into the fire with an air of ill-temper which the circle, serious and
silent, seemed to reflect, I looked everywhere for the Portuguese, but
he was not to be seen.

For a moment the King affected to be unaware of my presence, and even
turned his shoulder to me; but I observed that he reddened, and
fidgeted nervously with the boot which he was drawing on. Nothing
daunted, therefore, I waited until he perforce discovered me, and was
obliged to greet me.  "You are early this morning," he said, at last,
with a grudging air.

"For the best of reasons, sire," I answered hardily.  "I am ill placed
at home, and come to you for justice."

"What is it?"  he said churlishly and unwillingly.

I was about to answer, when the Queen interposed with a sneer. "I think
that I can tell you, sire," she said.  "M. de Sully is old enough to
know the adage, 'Bite before you are bitten.'"

"Madame," I said, respectfully but with firmness.  "I know this only,
that my house was last night the scene of a gross outrage; and by all I
can learn it was perpetrated by one who is under your Majesty's
protection."

"His name?"  she said, with a haughty gesture.

"M. Pimentel."

The Queen began to smile.  "What was this gross outrage?"  she asked
drily.

"In the course of last night he broke into my house with a gang of
wretches, and bore off one of the inmates."

The Queen's smile grew broader; the King began to grin.  Some of the
circle, watching them closely, ventured to smile also. "Come, my
friend," Henry said, almost with good humour, "this is all very well.
But this inmate of yours--was a very recent one."

"Was, in fact, I suppose, the rebellious little wench of whom you knew
nothing yesterday!"  the Queen cried harshly, and with an air of open
triumph.  "There can be no stealing of stolen goods, sir; and if M.
Pimentel, who had at least as much right as you to the girl--and more,
for I am her guardian--has carried her off, you have small ground to
complain."

"But, Madame," I said, with an air of bewilderment, "I really do
not--it must be my fault, but I do not understand."

Two or three sniggered, seeing me apparently checkmated and at the end
of my resources.  And the King laughed out with kindly malice.  "Come,
Grand Master," he said, "I think that you do. However, if Pimentel has
carried off the damsel, there, it seems to me, is an end of the matter."

"But, sire," I answered, looking sternly round the grinning circle, "am
I mad, or is there some mystery here?  I assured your Majesty yesterday
that Mademoiselle D'Oyley was not in my house. I say the same to-day.
She is not; your officers may search every room and closet.  And for
the woman whom M. Pimentel has carried off, she is no more Mademoiselle
D'Oyley than I am; she is one of my wife's waiting-maids.  If you doubt
me," I continued, "you have only to send and ask.  Ask the Portuguese
himself."

The King stared at me.  "Nonsense!"  he said, sharply.  "If Pimentel
has carried off anyone, it must be Mademoiselle D'Oyley."

"But it is not, sire," I answered with persistence.  "He has broken
into my house, and abducted my servant.  For Mademoiselle, she is not
there to be stolen."

"Let some one go for Pimentel," the King said curtly.

But the Portuguese, as it happened, was at the door even then, and
being called, had no alternative but to come forward.  His face and
mien as he entered and reluctantly showed himself were more than enough
to dissipate any doubts which the courtiers had hitherto entertained;
the former being as gloomy and downcast as the latter was timid and
cringing.  It is true he made some attempt at first, and for a time, to
face the matter out; stammering and stuttering, and looking piteously
to the Queen for help.  But he could not long delay the crisis, nor
deny that the person he had so cunningly abducted was one of my
waiting-women; and the moment that this confession was made his case
was at an end, the statement being received with so universal a peal of
laughter, the King leading, as at one and the same time discomfited
him, and must have persuaded any indifferent listener that all, from
the first, had been in the secret.

After that he would have spent himself in vain, had he contended that
Mademoiselle D'Oyley was at my house; and so clear was this that he
made no second attempt to do so, but at once admitting that his people
had made a mistake, he proffered me a handsome apology, and desired the
King to speak to me in his behalf.

This I, on my side, was pleased to take in good part; and having let
him off easily with a mild rebuke, turned from him to the Queen, and
informed her with much respect that I had learned at length where
Mademoiselle D'Oyley had taken refuge.

"Where, sir?"  she asked, eyeing me suspiciously and with no little
disfavour.

"At the Ursulines, Madame," I answered,

She winced, for she had already quarrelled with the abbess without
advantage.  And there for the moment the matter ended. At a later
period I took care to confess all to the King, and he did not fail to
laugh heartily at the clever manner in which I had outwitted Pimentel.
But this was not until the Portuguese had left the country and gone to
Italy, the affair between him and Mademoiselle D'Oyley (which resolved
itself into a contest between the Queen and the Ursulines) having come
to a close under circumstances which it may be my duty to relate in
another place.




X.

FARMING THE TAXES.


In the summer of the year 1608, determining to take up my abode, when
not in Paris, at Villebon, where I had lately enlarged my property, I
went thither from Rouen with my wife, to superintend the building and
mark out certain plantations which I projected. As the heat that month
was great, and the dust of the train annoying, I made each stage in the
evening and on horseback, leaving my wife to proceed at her leisure.
In this way I was able, by taking rough paths, to do in two or three
hours a distance which her coaches had scarcely covered in the day; but
on the third evening, intending to make a short cut by a ford on the
Vaucouleurs, I found, to my chagrin, the advantage on the other side,
the ford, when I reached it at sunset, proving impracticable.  As there
was every prospect, however, that the water would fall within a few
hours, I determined not to retrace my steps; but to wait where I was
until morning, and complete my journey to Houdan in the early hours.

There was a poor inn near the ford, a mere hovel of wood on a brick
foundation, yet with two storeys.  I made my way to this with Maignan
and La Trape, who formed, with two grooms, my only attendance; but on
coming near the house, and looking about with a curious eye, I remarked
something which fixed my attention, and, for the moment, brought me to
a halt.  This was the spectacle of three horses, of fair quality,
feeding in a field of growing corn, which was the only enclosure near
the inn.  They were trampling and spoiling more than they ate; and,
supposing that they had strayed into the place, and the house showing
no signs of life, I bade my grooms fetch them out.  The sun was about
setting, and I stood a moment watching the long shadows of the men as
they plodded through the corn, and the attitudes of the horses as, with
heads raised, they looked doubtfully at the newcomers.

Suddenly a man came round the corner of the house, and seeing us, and
what my men were doing, began to gesticulate violently, but without
sound.  The grooms saw him too, and stood; and he ran up to my stirrup,
his face flushed and sullen.

"Do you want to see us all ruined?"  he muttered.  And he begged me to
call my men out of the corn.

"You are more likely to be ruined that way," I answered, looking down
at him.  "Why, man, is it the custom in your country to turn horses
into the half-ripe corn?"

He shook his fist stealthily.  "God forbid!"  he said.  "But the devil
is within doors, and we must do his bidding."

"Ah!"  I replied, my curiosity aroused "I should like to see him."

The boor shaded his eyes, and looked at me sulkily from under his
matted and tangled hair.  "You are not of his company?"  he said with
suspicion.

"I hope not," I answered, smiling at his simplicity.  "But your corn is
your own.  I will call the men out."  On which I made a sign to them to
return.  "Now," I said, as I walked my horse slowly towards the house,
while he tramped along beside me, "who is within?"

"M. Gringuet," he said, with another stealthy gesture.

"Ah!"  I said, "I am afraid that I am no wiser."

"The tax-gatherer."

"Oh!  And those are his horses?"  He nodded.

"Still, I do not see why they are in the corn?"

"I have no hay."

"But there is grass."

"Ay," the inn-keeper answered bitterly.

"And he said that I might eat it.  It was not good enough for his
horses.  They must have hay or corn; and if I had none, so much the
worse for me."

Full of indignation, I made in my mind a note of M. Gringuet's name;
but at the moment I said no more, and we proceeded to the house, the
exterior of which, though meagre, and even miserable, gave me an
impression of neatness.  From the inside, however, a hoarse, continuous
noise was issuing, which resolved itself as we crossed the threshold
into a man's voice.  The speaker was out of sight, in an upper room to
which a ladder gave access, but his oaths, complaints, and imprecations
almost shook the house.  A middle-aged woman, scantily dressed, was
busy on the hearth; but perhaps that which, next to the perpetual
scolding that was going on above, most took my attention was a great
lump of salt that stood on the table at the woman's elbow, and seemed
to be evidence of greater luxury--for the GABELLE had not at that time
been reduced--than I could easily associate with the place.

The roaring and blustering continuing upstairs, I stood a moment in
sheer astonishment.  "Is that M. Gringuet?"  I said at last.

The inn-keeper nodded sullenly, while his wife stared at me. "But what;
is the matter with him?"  I said.

"The gout.  But for that he would have been gone these two days to
collect at Le Mesnil."

"Ah!"  I answered, beginning to understand.  "And the salt is for a
bath for his feet, is it?"

The woman nodded.

"Well," I said, as Maignan came in with my saddlebags and laid them on
the floor, "he will swear still louder when he gets the bill, I should
think."

"Bill?"  the housewife answered bitterly, looking up again from her
pots.  "A tax-gatherer's bill?  Go to the dead man and ask for the
price of his coffin; or to the babe for a nurse-fee!  You will get paid
as soon.  A tax-gatherer's bill?  Be thankful if he does not take the
dish with the sop!"

She spoke plainly; yet I found a clearer proof of the slavery in which
the man held them in the perfect indifference with which they regarded
my arrival--though a guest with two servants must have been a rarity in
such a place--and the listless way in which they set about attending to
my wants.  Keenly remembering that not long before this my enemies had
striven to prejudice me in the King's eyes by alleging that, though I
filled his coffers, I was grinding the poor into the dust--and even, by
my exactions, provoking a rebellion I was in no mood to look with an
indulgent eye on those who furnished such calumnies with a show of
reason. But it has never been my wont to act hastily; and while I stood
in the middle of the kitchen, debating whether I should order the
servants to fling the fellow out, and bid him appear before me at
Villebon, or should instead have him brought up there and then, the
man's coarse voice, which had never ceased to growl and snarl above us,
rose on a sudden still louder.  Something fell on the floor over our
heads and rolled across it; and immediately a young girl, barefoot and
short-skirted, scrambled hurriedly and blindly down the ladder and
landed among us.

She was sobbing, and a little blood was flowing from a cut in her lip;
and she trembled all over.  At sight of the blood and her tears the
woman seemed to be transported.  Snatching up a saucepan, she sprang
towards the ladder with a gesture of rage, and in a moment would have
ascended if her husband had not followed and dragged her back.  The
girl also, as soon as she could speak, added her entreaties to his,
while Maignan and La Trape looked sharply at me, as if they expected a
signal.

All this while, the bully above continued his maledictions. "Send that
slut back to me!"  he roared.  "Do you think that I am going to be left
alone in this hole?  Send her back, or--" and he added half-a-dozen
oaths of a kind to make an honest man's blood boil.  In the midst of
this, however, and while the woman was still contending with her
husband, he suddenly stopped and shrieked in anguish, crying out for
the salt-bath.

But the woman, whom her husband had only half-pacified, shook her fist
at the ceiling with a laugh of defiance.  "Shriek; ay, you may shriek,
you wretch!"  she cried.  "You must be waited on by my girl, must
you--no older face will do for you--and you beat her?  Your horses must
eat corn, must they, while we eat grass? And we buy salt for you, and
wheaten bread for you, and are beggars for you!  For you, you thieving
wretch, who tax the poor and let the rich go free; who--"

"Silence, woman!"  her husband cried, cutting her short, with a pale
face.  "Hush, hush; he will hear you!"

But the woman was too far gone in rage to obey.  "What!  and is it not
true?"  she answered, her eyes glittering.  "Will he not to-morrow go
to Le Mesnil and squeeze the poor?  Ay, and will not Lescauts the
corn-dealer, and Philippon the silk-merchant, come to him with bribes,
and go free?  And de Fonvelle and de Curtin--they with a DE,
forsooth!--plead their nobility, and grease his hands, and go free?
Ay, and--"

"Silence, woman!"  the man said again, looking apprehensively at me,
and from me to my attendants, who were grinning broadly. "You do not
know that this gentleman is not--"

"A tax-gatherer?"  I said, smiling.  "No.  But how long has your friend
upstairs been here?"

"Two days, Monsieur," she answered, wiping the perspiration from her
brow, and speaking more quietly.  "He is talking of sending on a deputy
to Le Mesnil; but Heaven send he may recover, and go from here himself!"

"Well," I answered, "at any rate, we have had enough of this noise.  My
servant shall go up and tell him that there is a gentleman here who
cannot put up with a disturbance.  Maignan," I continued, "see the man,
and tell him that the inn is not his private house, and that he must
groan more softly; but do not mention my name.  And let him have his
brine bath, or there will be no peace for anyone."

Maignan and La Trape, who knew me, and had counted on a very different
order, stared at me, wondering at my easiness and complaisance; for
there is a species of tyranny, unassociated with rank, that even the
coarsest view with indignation.  But the woman's statement, which,
despite its wildness and her excitement, I saw no reason to doubt, had
suggested to me a scheme of punishment more refined; and which might,
at one and the same time, be of profit to the King's treasury and a
lesson to Gringuet.  To carry it through I had to submit to some
inconvenience, and particularly to a night passed under the same roof
with the rogue; but as the news that a traveller of consequence was
come had the effect, aided by a few sharp words from Maignan, of
lowering his tone, and forcing him to keep within bounds, I was able to
endure this and overlook the occasional outbursts of spleen which his
disease and pampered temper still drew from him.

His two men, who had been absent on an errand at the time of my
arrival, presently returned, and were doubtless surprised to find a
second company in possession.  They tried my attendants with a number
of questions, but without success; while I, by listening while I had my
supper, learned more of their master's habits and intentions than they
supposed.  They suspected nothing, and at day-break we left them; and,
the water having duly fallen in the night, we crossed the river without
mishap, and for a league pursued our proper road.  Then I halted, and
despatching the two grooms to Houdan with a letter for my wife, I took,
myself, the road to Le Mesnil, which lies about three leagues to the
west.

At a little inn, a league short of Le Mesnil, I stopped, and
instructing my two attendants in the parts they were to play, prepared,
with the help of the seals, which never left Maignan's custody, the
papers necessary to enable me to enact the role of Gringuet's deputy.
Though I had been two or three times to Villebon, I had never been
within two leagues of Le Mesnil, and had no reason to suppose that I
should be recognised; but to lessen the probability of this I put on a
plain suit belonging to Maignan, with a black-hilted sword, and no
ornaments.  I furthermore waited to enter the town until evening, so
that my presence, being reported, might be taken for granted before I
was seen.

In a larger place my scheme must have miscarried, but in this little
town on the hill, looking over the plain of vineyards and cornfields,
with inn, market-house, and church in the square, and on the fourth
side the open battlements, whence the towers of Chartres could be seen
on a clear day, I looked to have to do only with small men, and saw no
reason why it should fail.

Accordingly, riding up to the inn about sunset, I called, with an air,
for the landlord.  There were half-a-dozen loungers seated in a row on
a bench before the door, and one of these went in to fetch him.  When
the host came out, with his apron twisted round his waist, I asked him
if he had a room.

"Yes," he said, shading his eyes to look at me, "I have."

"Very well," I answered pompously, considering that I had just such an
audience as I desired--by which I mean one that, without being too
critical, would spread the news.  "I am M. Gringuet's deputy, and I am
here with authority to collect and remit, receive and give receipts
for, his Majesty's taxes, tolls, and dues, now, or to be, due and
owing.  Therefore, my friend, I will trouble you to show me to my room."

I thought that this announcement would impress him as much as I
desired; but, to my surprise, he only stared at me.  "Eh!"  he
exclaimed at last, in a faltering tone, "M. Gringuet's deputy?"

"Yes," I said, dismounting somewhat impatiently; "he is ill with the
gout and cannot come."

"And you--are his deputy?"

"I have said so."

Still he did not move to do my bidding, but continued to rub his bald
head and stare at me as if I fascinated him.  "Well, I am--I mean--I
think we are full," he stammered at last, with his eyes like saucers.

I replied, with some impatience, that he had just said that he had a
room; adding, that if I was not in it and comfortably settled before
five minutes were up I would know the reason.  I thought that this
would settle the matter, whatever maggot had got into the man's head;
and, in a way, it did so, for he begged my pardon hastily, and made way
for me to enter, calling, at the same time, to a lad who was standing
by, to attend to the horses. But when we were inside the door, instead
of showing me through the kitchen to my room, he muttered something,
and hurried away; leaving me to wonder what was amiss with him, and why
the loungers outside, who had listened with all their ears to our
conversation, had come in after us as far as they dared, and were
regarding us with an odd mixture of suspicion and amusement.

The landlord remained long away, and seemed, from sounds that came to
my ears, to be talking with someone in a distant room. At length,
however, he returned, bearing a candle and followed by a serving-man.
I asked him roughly why he had been so long, and began to rate him; but
he took the words out of my mouth by his humility, and going before me
through the kitchen--where his wife and two or three maids who were
about the fire stopped to look at us, with the basting spoons in their
hands--he opened a door which led again into the outer air.

"It is across the yard," he said apologetically, as he went before, and
opening a second door, stood aside for us to enter. "But it is a good
room, and, if you please, a fire shall be lighted.  The shutters are
closed," he continued, as we passed him, Maignan and La Trape carrying
my baggage, "but they shall be opened.  Hallo!  Pierre!  Pierre, there!
Open these shut--"

On the word his voice rose--and broke; and in a moment the door,
through which we had all passed unsuspecting, fell to with a crash
behind us.  Before we could move we heard the bars drop across it.  A
little before, La Trape had taken a candle from someone's hand to light
me the better; and therefore we were not in darkness.  But the light
this gave only served to impress on us what the falling bars and the
rising sound of voices outside had already told us--that we were
outwitted!  We were prisoners.

The room in which we stood, looking foolishly at one another, was a
great barn-like chamber, with small windows high in the unplaistered
walls.  A long board set on trestles, and two or three stools placed
round it--on the occasion, perhaps, of some recent festivity--had for a
moment deceived us, and played the landlord's game.

In the first shock of the discovery, hearing the bars drop home, we
stood gaping, and wondering what it meant.  Then Maignan, with an oath,
sprang to the door and tried it--fruitlessly.

I joined him more at my leisure, and raising my voice, asked angrily
what this folly meant.  "Open the door there!  Do you hear, landlord?"
I cried.

No one moved, though Maignan continued to rattle the door furiously.

"Do you hear?"  I repeated, between anger and amazement at the fix in
which we had placed ourselves.  "Open!"

But, although the murmur of voices outside the door grew louder, no one
answered, and I had time to take in the full absurdity of the position;
to measure the height; of the windows with my eye and plumb the dark
shadows under the rafters, where the feebler rays of our candle lost
themselves; to appreciate, in a word, the extent of our predicament.
Maignan was furious, La Trape vicious, while my own equanimity scarcely
supported me against the thought that we should probably be where we
were until the arrival of my people, whom I had directed my wife to
send to Le Mesnil at noon next day.  Their coming would free us,
indeed, but at the cost of ridicule and laughter.  Never was man worse
placed.

Wincing at the thought, I bade Maignan be silent; and, drumming on the
door myself, I called for the landlord.  Someone who had been giving
directions in a tone of great, consequence ceased speaking, and came
close to the door.  After listening a moment, he struck it with his
hand.

"Silence, rogues!"  he cried.  "Do you hear?  Silence there, unless you
want your ears nailed to the post."

"Fool!"  I answered.  "Open the door instantly!  Are you all mad here,
that you shut up the King's servants in this way?"

"The King's servants!" he cried, jeering at us.  "Where are they?"

"Here!"  I answered, swallowing my rage as well as I might.  "I am M.
Gringuet's deputy, and if you do not this instant--"

"M. Gringuet's deputy!  Ho!  ho!"  he said.  "Why, you fool, M.
Gringuet's deputy arrived two hours before you.  You must get up a
little earlier another time.  They are poor tricksters who are too late
for the fair.  And now be silent, and it may save you a stripe or two
to-morrow."

There are situations in which even the greatest find it hard to
maintain their dignity, and this was one.  I looked at Maignan and La
Trape, and they at me, and by the light of the lanthorn which the
latter held I saw that they were smiling, doubtless at the dilemma in
which we had innocently placed ourselves.  But I found nothing to laugh
at in the position; since the people outside might at any moment leave
us where we were to fast until morning; and, after a moment's
reflection, I called out to know who the speaker on the other side was.

"I am M. de Fonvelle," he answered.

"Well, M. de Fonvelle," I replied, "I advise you to have a care what
you do.  I am M. Gringuet's deputy.  The other man is an impostor."

He laughed.

"He has no papers," I cried.

"Oh, yes, he has!"  he answered, mocking me.  "M. Curtin has seen them,
my fine fellow, and he is not one to pay money without warrant."

At this several laughed, and a quavering voice chimed in with "Oh, yes,
he has papers!  I have seen them.  Still, in a case--"

"There!"  M. Fonvelle cried, drowning the other's words.  "Now are you
satisfied--you in there?"

But M. Curtin had not done.  "He has papers," he piped again in his
thin voice.

"Still, M. de Fonvelle, it is well to be cautious, and--"

"Tut, tut!  it is all right."

"He has papers, but he has no authority!"  I shouted.

"He has seals," Fonvelle answered.  "It is all right."

"It is all wrong!"  I retorted.  "Wrong, I say!  Go to your man, and
you will find him gone--gone with your money, M. Curtin."

Two or three laughed, but I heard the sound of feet hurrying away, and
I guessed that Curtin had retired to satisfy himself. Nevertheless, the
moment which followed was an anxious one, since, if my random shot
missed, I knew that I should find myself in a worse position than
before.  But judging--from the fact that the deputy had not confronted
us himself--that he was an impostor, to whom Gringuet's illness had
suggested the scheme on which I had myself hit, I hoped for the best;
and, to be sure, in a moment an outcry arose in the house and quickly
spread.  Of those at the door, some cried to their fellows to hearken,
while others hastened off to see.  Yet still a little time elapsed,
during which I burned with impatience; and then the crowd came
trampling back, all wrangling and speaking at once.

At the door the chattering ceased, and, a hand being laid on the bar,
in a moment the door was thrown open, and I walked out with what
dignity I might.  Outside, the scene which met my eyes might have been,
under other circumstances, diverting.  Before me stood the landlord of
the inn, bowing with a light in each hand, as if the more he bent his
backbone the more he must propitiate me; while a fat, middle-aged man
at his elbow, whom I took to be Fonvelle, smiled feebly at me with a
chapfallen expression.  A little aside, Curtin, a shrivelled old
fellow, was wringing his hands over his loss; and behind and round
these, peeping over their shoulders and staring under their arms,
clustered a curious crowd of busybodies, who, between amusement at the
joke and awe of the great men, had much ado to control their merriment.

The host began to mutter apologies, but I cut him short.  "I will talk
to you to-morrow!"  I said, in a voice which made him shake in his
shoes.  "Now give me supper, lights, and a room--and hurry.  For you,
M. Fonvelle, you are an ass!  And for the gentleman there, who has
filled the rogue's purse, he will do well another time to pay the King
his dues!"

With that I left the two--Fonvelle purple with indignation, and Curtin
with eyes and mouth agape and tears stayed--and followed my host to his
best room, Maignan and La Trape attending me with very grim faces.
Here the landlord would have repeated his apologies, but my thoughts
beginning to revert to the purpose which had brought me hither, I
affected to be offended, that, by keeping all at a distance, I might
the more easily preserve my character.

I succeeded so well that, though half the town, through which the news
of my adventure had spread, as fire spreads in tinder, were assembled
outside the inn until a late hour, no one was admitted to see me; and
when I made my appearance next morning in the market-place and took my
seat, with my two attendants, at a table by the corn-measures, this
reserve had so far impressed the people that the smiles which greeted
me scarcely exceeded those which commonly welcome a tax-collector.
Some had paid, and, foreseeing the necessity of paying again, found
little that was diverting in the jest.  Others thought it no laughing
matter to pay once; and a few had come as ill out of the adventure as I
had.  Under these circumstances, we quickly settled to work, no one
entertaining the slightest suspicion; and La Trape, who could
accommodate himself to anything, playing the part of clerk, I was
presently receiving money and hearing excuses; the minute acquaintance
with the routine of the finances, which I had made it my business to
acquire, rendering the work easy to me.

We had not been long engaged, however, when Fonvelle put in an
appearance, and elbowing the peasants aside, begged to speak with me
apart.  I rose and stepped back with him two or three paces; on which
he winked at me in a very knowing fashion, "I am M. de Fonvelle," he
said.  And he winked again.

"Ah!"  I said.

"My name is not in your list."

"I find it there," I replied, raising a hand to my ear.

"Tut, tut!  you do not understand," he muttered.  "Has not Gringuet
told you?"

"What?"  I said, pretending to be a little deaf.

"Has not--"

I shook my head.

"Has not Gringuet told you?"  he repeated, reddening with anger; and
this time speaking, on compulsion, so loudly that the peasants could
hear him.

I answered him in the same tone.  "Yes," I said roundly.  "He has told
me; of course, that every year you give him two hundred livres to omit
your name."

He glanced behind him with an oath.  "Man, are you mad?"  he gasped,
his jaw falling.  "They will hear you."

"Yes," I said loudly, "I mean them to hear me."

I do not know what he thought of this--perhaps that I was mad--but he
staggered back from me, and looked wildly round.  Finding everyone
laughing, he looked again at me, but still failed to understand; on
which, with another oath, he turned on his heel, and forcing his way
through the grinning crowd, was out of sight in a moment.

I was about to return to my seat, when a pursy, pale-faced man, with
small eyes and a heavy jowl, whom I had before noticed, pushed his way
through the line, and came to me.  Though his neighbours were all
laughing he was sober, and in a moment I understood why.

"I am very deaf," he said in a whisper.  "My name, Monsieur, is
Philippon.  I am a--"

I made a sign to him that I could not hear.

"I am the silk merchant," he continued pretty audibly, but with a
suspicious glance behind him.  "Probably you have--"

Again I signed to him that I could not hear.

"You have heard of me?"

"From M. Gringuet?"  I said very loudly.

"Yes," he answered in a similar tone; for, aware that deaf persons
cannot hear their own voices and are seldom able to judge how loudly
they are speaking, I had led him to this.  "And I suppose that you will
do as he did?"

"How?"  I asked.  "In what way?"

He touched his pocket with a stealthy gesture, unseen by the people
behind him.

Again I made a sign as if I could not hear.

"Take the usual little gift?"  he said, finding himself compelled to
speak.

"I cannot hear a word," I bellowed.  By this time the crowd were
shaking with laughter.

"Accept the usual gift?"  he said, his fat, pale face perspiring, and
his little pig's eyes regarding me balefully.

"And let you pay one quarter?"  I said.

"Yes," he answered.

But this, and the simplicity with which he said it, drew so loud a roar
of laughter from the crowd as penetrated even to his dulled senses.
Turning abruptly, as if a bee had stung him, he found the place
convulsed with merriment; and perceiving, in an instant, that I had
played upon him, though he could not understand how or why, he glared
about him a moment, muttered something which I could not catch, and
staggered away with the gait of a drunken man.

After this, it was useless to suppose that I could amuse myself with
others.  The crowd, which had never dreamed of such a tax-collector,
and could scarcely believe either eyes or ears, hesitated to come
forward even to pay; and I was considering what I should do next, when
a commotion in one corner of the square drew my eyes to that quarter.
I looked and saw at first only Curtin.  Then, the crowd dividing and
making way for him, I perceived that he had the real Gringuet with
him--Gringuet, who rode through the market with an air of grim majesty,
with one foot in a huge slipper and eyes glaring with ill-temper.

Doubtless Curtin, going to him on the chance of hearing something of
the rogue who had cheated him, had apprised the tax-collector of the
whole matter; for on seeing me in my chair of state, he merely grinned
in a vicious way, and cried to the nearest not to let me escape.  "We
have lost one rogue, but we will hang the other," he said.  And while
the townsfolk stood dumbfounded round us, he slipped with a groan from
his horse, and bade his two servants seize me.

"And do you," he called to the host, "see that you help, my man! You
have harboured him, and you shall pay for it if he escapes."

With that he hopped a step nearer; and then, not dreaming of
resistance, sank with another groan--for his foot was immensely swollen
by the journey--into the chair from which I had risen.

A glance showed me that, if I would not be drawn into an unseemly
brawl, I must act; and meeting Maignan's eager eye fixed upon my face,
I nodded.  In a second he seized the unsuspecting Gringuet by the neck,
snatched him up from the chair, and flung him half-a-dozen paces away.
"Lie there," he cried, "you insolent rascal! Who told you to sit before
your betters?"

The violence of the action, and Maignan's heat, were such that the
nearest drew back affrighted; and even Gringuet's servants recoiled,
while the market people gasped with astonishment.  But I knew that the
respite would last a moment only, and I stood forward.  "Arrest that
man," I said, pointing to the collector, who was grovelling on the
ground, nursing his foot and shrieking foul threats at us.

In a second my two men stood over him.  "In the King's name," La Trape
cried; "let no man interfere."

"Raise him up," I continued, "and set him before me; and Curtin also,
and Fonvelle, and Philippon; and Lescaut, the corn-dealer, if he is
here."

I spoke boldly, but I felt some misgiving.  So mighty, however, is the
habit of command, that the crowd, far from resisting, thrust forward
the men I named.  Still, I could not count on this obedience, and it
was with pleasure that I saw at this moment, as I looked over the heads
of the crowd, a body of horsemen entering the square.  They halted an
instant, looking at the unusual concourse; while the townsfolk,
interrupted in the middle of the drama, knew not which way to stare.
Then Boisrueil, seeing me, and that I was holding some sort of court,
spurred his horse through the press, and saluted me.

"Let half-a-dozen of your varlets dismount and guard these men," I
said; "and do you, you rogue," I continued, addressing Gringuet,
"answer me, and tell me the truth.  How much does each of these knaves
give you to cheat the King, and your master? Curtin first.  How much
does he give you?"

"My lord," he answered, pale and shaking, yet with a mutinous gleam in
his eyes, "I have a right to know first before whom I stand."

"Enough," I thundered, "that it is before one who has the right to
question you!  answer me, villain, and be quick.  What is the sum of
Curtin's bribe?"

He stood white and mute.

"Fonvelle's?"

Still he stood silent, glaring with the devil in his eyes; while the
other men whimpered and protested their innocence, and the crowd stared
as if they could never see enough.

"Philippon's?"

"I take no bribes," he muttered.

"Lescaut's?"

"Not a denier."

"Liar!"  I exclaimed.  "Liar, who devour widows' houses and poor men's
corn!  Who grind the weak and say it is the King; and let the rich go
free.  Answer me, and answer the truth.  How much do these men give
you?"

"Nothing," he said defiantly.

"Very well," I answered; "then I will have the list.  It is in your
shoe."

"I have no list," he said, beginning to tremble.

"It is in your shoe," I repeated, pointing to his gouty foot. "Maignan,
off with his shoe, and look in it."

Disregarding his shrieks of pain, they tore it off and looked in it.
There was no list.

"Off with his stocking," I said roundly.

"It is there."

He flung himself down at that, cursing and protesting by turns. But I
remembered the trampled corn, and the girl's bleeding face, and I was
inexorable.  The stocking was drawn off, not too tenderly, and turned
inside out.  Still no list was found.

"He has it," I persisted.  "We have tried the shoe and we have tried
the stocking, now we must try the foot.  Fetch a stirrup-leather, and
do you hold him, and let one of the grooms give him a dozen on that
foot."

But at that he gave way; he flung himself on his knees, screaming for
mercy.

"The list!"  I said,

"I have no list!  I have none!"  he wailed.

"Then give it me out of your head.  Curtin, how much?"

He glanced at the man I named, and shivered, and for a moment was
silent.  But one of the grooms approaching with the stirrup-leather, he
found his voice.  "Forty crowns," he muttered.

"Fonvelle?"

"The same."

I made him confess also the sums which he had received from Lescaut and
Philippon, and then the names of seven others who had been in the habit
of bribing him.  Satisfied that he had so far told the truth, I bade
him put on his stocking and shoe.  "And now," I said to Boisrueil, when
this was done, "take him to the whipping-post there, and tie him up;
and see that each man of the eleven gives him a stripe for every crown
with which he has bribed him--and good ones, or I will have them tied
up in his place.  Do you hear, you rascals?"  I continued to the
trembling culprits.  "Off, and do your duty, or I will have your backs
bare."

But the wretch, as cowardly as he had been cruel, flung himself down
and crawled, sobbing and crying, to my feet.  I had no mercy, however.
"Take him away," I said, "It is such men as these give kings a bad
name.  Take him away, and see you flay him well."

He sprang up then, forgetting his gout, and made a frantic attempt to
escape.  But in a moment he was overcome, hauled away, and tied up; and
though I did not wait to see the sentence carried out, but entered the
inn, the shrill screams he uttered under the punishment reached me,
even there, and satisfied me that Fonvelle and his fellows were not;
holding their hands.

It is a sad reflection, however, that for one such sinner brought to
justice ten, who commit the same crimes, go free, and flourishing on
iniquity, bring the King's service, and his officers, into evil repute.




XI.

THE CAT AND THE KING.


It was in the spring of the year 1609 that at the King's instance I had
a suite of apartments fitted up for him at the Arsenal, that he might
visit me, whenever it pleased him, without putting my family to
inconvenience; in another place will be found an account of the six
thousand crowns a year which he was so obliging as to allow me for this
purpose.  He honoured me by using these rooms, which consisted of a
hall, a chamber, a wardrobe, and a closet, two or three times in the
course of that year, availing himself of my attendants and cook; and
the free opportunities of consulting me on the Great Undertaking, which
this plan afforded, led me to hope that notwithstanding the envy of my
detractors, he would continue to adopt it.  That he did not do so, nor
ever visited me after the close of that year, was due not so much to
the lamentable event, soon to be related, which within a few months
deprived France of her greatest sovereign, as to a strange matter that
attended his last stay with me.  I have since had cause to think that
this did not receive at the time as much attention as it deserved; and
have even imagined that had I groped a little deeper into the mystery I
might have found a clue to the future as well as the past, and averted
one more, and the last, danger from my beloved master.  But Providence
would not have it so; a slight indisposition under which I was
suffering at the time rendered me less able, both in mind and body; the
result being that Henry, who was always averse to the publication of
these ominous episodes, and held that being known they bred the like in
mischievous minds, had his way, the case ending in no more than the
punishment of a careless rascal.

On the occasion of this last visit--the third, I think, that he paid
me--the King, who had been staying at Chantilly, came to me from
Lusarche, where he lay the intervening night.  My coaches went to meet
him at the gates a little before noon, but he did not immediately
arrive, and being at leisure and having assured myself that the dinner
of twelve covers, which he had directed to be ready, was in course of
preparation, I went with my wife to inspect his rooms and satisfy
myself that everything was in order.

They were in charge of La Trape, a man of address and intelligence,
whom I have had cause to mention more than once in the course of these
memoirs.  He met me at the door and conducted us through the rooms with
an air of satisfaction; nor could I find the slightest fault, until my
wife, looking about her with a woman's eye for minute things, paused by
the bed in the chamber, and directed my attention to something on the
floor.

She stooped over it.  "What is this?"  she asked.  "Has something
been--"

"Upset here?"  I said, looking also.  There was a little pool of white
liquid on the floor beside the bed.

La Trape uttered an exclamation of annoyance, and explained that he had
not seen it before; that it had not been there five minutes earlier;
and that he did not know how it came to be there now.

"What is it?"  I said, looking about for some pitcher that might; have
overflowed; but finding none.  "Is it milk?"

"I don't know, your excellency," he answered.  "But it shall be removed
at once."

"See that it is," I said.  "Are the boughs in the fire-place fresh?"
For the weather was still warm and we had not lit a fire.

"Yes, your excellency; quite fresh."

"Well, see to that, and remove it," I said, pointing to the mess. "It
looks ill."

And with that the matter passed from my mind; the more completely as I
heard at that moment the sound of the King's approach, and went into
the court-yard to receive him.  He brought with him Roquelaure, de Vic,
Erard the engineer, and some others, but none whom he did not know that
I should be glad to receive.  He dined well, and after dinner amused
himself with seeing the young men ride at the ring, and even rode a
course himself with his usual skill; that being, if I remember rightly,
the last occasion on which I ever saw him take a lance.  Before supper
he walked for a time in the hall, with Sillery, for whom he had sent;
and after supper, pronouncing himself tired, he dismissed all, and
retired with me to his chamber.  Here we had some talk on a subject
that I greatly dreaded--I mean his infatuation for Madame de Conde; but
about eleven o'clock he yawned, and, after thanking me for a reception
which he said was quite to his mind, he bade me go to bed.

I was half way to the door when he called me back.  "Why, Grand
Master," he said, pointing to the little table by the head of the bed
on which his night drinks stood, "you might be going to drown me.  Do
you expect me to drink all these in the night?"

"I think that there is only your posset, sire," I said, "and the
lemon-water which you generally drink."

"And two or three other things?"

"Perhaps they have given your majesty some of the Arbois wine that you
were good enough to--"

"Tut-tut!" he said, lifting the cover of one of the cups.  "This is not
wine.  It may be a milk-posset."

"Yes, sire; very likely," I said drowsily.

"But it is not!" he answered, when he had smelled it.  "It is plain
milk!  Come, my friend," he continued, looking drolly at me, "have you
turned leech, or I babe is arms that you put such strong liquors before
me?  However, to show you that I have some childish tastes left, and am
not so depraved as you have been trying to make me out for the last
hour--I will drink your health in it.  It would serve you right if I
made you pledge me in the same liquor!"

The cup was at his lips when I sprang forward and, heedless of
ceremony, caught his arm.  "Pardon, sire!" I cried, in sudden
agitation.  "If that is milk, I gave no order that it should be placed
here; and I know nothing of its origin.  I beg that you will not drink
it, until I have made some inquiry."

"They have all been tasted?"  he asked, still holding the cup in his
hand with the lid raised, but looking at it gravely.

"They should have been!" I answered.  "But La Trape, whom I made
answerable for that, is outside.  I will go and question him.  If you
will wait, sire, a moment--"

"No," Henry said.  "Have him here."

I gave the order to the pages who were waiting outside, and in a moment
La Trape appeared, looking startled and uncomfortable. Naturally, his
first glance was given to the King, who had taken his seat on the edge
of the bed, but still held the cup in his hand.  After asking the
King's permission, I said, "What drinks did you place on the table,
here, sirrah?"

He looked more uncomfortable at this, but he answered boldly enough
that he had served a posset, some lemon water, and some milk.

"But orders were given only for the lemon-water and the posset," I said.

"True, your excellency," he answered.  "But when I went to the pantry
hatch, to see the under-butler carry up the tray, I found that the milk
was on the tray; and I supposed that you had given another order."

"Possibly Madame de Sully," the King said, looking at me, "gave the
order to add it?"

"She would not presume to do so, sire," I answered, sternly. "Nor do I
in the least understand the matter.  But at one thing we can easily
arrive.  You tasted all of these, man?"

La Trape said he had.

"You drank a quantity, a substantial quantity of each--according to the
orders given to you?  I persisted.

"Yes, your excellency."

But I caught a guilty look in his eyes, and in a gust of rage I cried
out that he lied.  "The truth!" I thundered, in a terrible voice.  "The
truth, you villain; you did not taste all?"

"I did, your excellency; as God is above, I did!" he answered. But he
had grown pale, and he looked at the King in a terrified way.

"You did?"

"Yes!"

Yet I did not believe him, and I was about to give him the lie again,
when the King intervened.  "Quite so," he said to La Trape with a
smile.  "You drank, my good fellow, of the posset and the lemon water,
and you tasted the milk, but you did not drink of it.  Is not that the
whole truth?"

"Yes, sire," he whimpered, breaking down.  "But I--I gave some to a
cat."

"And the cat is no worse?"

"No, sire."

"There, Grand Master," the King said, turning to me, "that is the
truth, I think.  What do you say to it?"

"That the rest is simple," I answered, grimly.  "He did not drink it
before; but he will drink it now, sire."

The King, sitting on the bed, laughed and looked at La Trape; as if his
good-nature almost led him to interpose.  But after a moment's
hesitation he thought better of it, and handed me the cup.  "Very
well," he said; "he is your man.  Have your way with him.  After all,
he should have drunk it."

"He shall drink it now, or be broken on the wheel!" I said.  "Do you
hear, you?"  I continued, turning to him in a white heat of rage at the
thought of his negligence, and the price it might have cost me.  "Take
it, and beware that you do not drop or spill it.  For I swear that that
shall not save you!"

He took the cup with a pale face, and hands that shook so much that he
needed both to support the vessel.  He hesitated, too, so long that,
had I not possessed the best of reasons for believing in his fidelity,
I should have suspected him of more than negligence.  The shadow of his
tall figure seemed to waver on the tapestry behind him; and with a
little imagination I might have thought that the lights in the room had
sunk.  The soft whispering of the pages outside could be heard, and a
stifled laugh; but inside there was not a sound.  He carried the cup to
his lips; then he lowered it again.

I took a step forward.

He recoiled a pace, his face ghastly.  "Patience, excellency," he said,
hoarsely.  "I shall drink it.  But I want to speak first."

"Speak!" the King answered.

"If there is death in it, I take God to witness that I know nothing,
and knew nothing!  There is some witch's work here it is not the first
time that I have come across this devil's milk to-day!  But I take God
to witness I know nothing!  Now it is here I will drink it, and--"

He did not finish the sentence, but drawing a deep breath raised the
cup to his lips.  I saw the apple in his throat rise and fall with the
effort he made to swallow, but he drank so slowly that it seemed to me
that he would never drain the cap.  Nor did he, for when he had
swallowed, as far as I could judge from the tilting of the cup, about
half of the milk, Henry rose suddenly and, seizing it, took it from him
with his own hand.

"That will do," the King said.  "Do you feel ill?"

La Trape drew a trembling hand across his brow, on which the sweat
stood in beads; but instead of answering he remained silent, gazing
fixedly before him.  We waited and watched, and at length, when I
should think three minutes had elapsed, he changed his position for one
of greater ease, and I saw his face relax. The unnatural pallor faded,
and the open lips closed.  A minute later he spoke.  "I feel nothing,
sire," he said.

The King looked at me drolly.  "Then take five minutes more," he said.
"Go, and stare at Judith there, cutting off the head of
Holofernes"--for that was the story of the tapestry--"and come when I
call you."

La Trape went to the other end of the chamber.  "Well," the King said,
inviting me by a sign to sit down beside him, "is it a comedy or a
tragedy, my friend?  Or, tell me, what was it he meant when he said
that about the other milk?"

I explained, the matter seeming so trivial now that I came to tell
it--though it; had doubtless contributed much to La Trape's
fright--that I had to apologize.

"Still it is odd," the King said.  "These drinks were not here, at that
time, of course?"

"No, sire; they have been brought up within the hour."

"Well, your butler must explain it."  And with that he raised his voice
and called La Trape back; who came, looking red and sheepish.

"Not dead yet?"  the King said.

"No, sire."

"Nor ill?"

"No, sire."

"Then begone.  Or, stay!" Henry continued.  "Throw the rest of this
stuff into the fire-place.  It may be harmless, but I have no mind to
drink it by mistake."

La Trape emptied the cup among the green boughs that filled the hearth,
and hastened to withdraw.  It seemed to be too late to make further
inquiries that night; so after listening to two or three explanations
which the King hazarded, but which had all too fanciful an air in my
eyes, I took my leave and retired.

Whether, however, the scene had raised too violent a commotion in my
mind, or I was already sickening for the illness I have mentioned, I
found it impossible to sleep; and spent the greater part of the night
in a fever of fears and forebodings.  The responsibility which the
King's presence cast upon me lay so heavily upon my waking mind that I
could not lie; and long before the King's usual hour of rising I was at
his door inquiring how he did.  No one knew, for the page whose turn it
was to sleep at his feet had not come out; but while I stood
questioning, the King's voice was heard, bidding me enter.  I went in,
and found him sitting up with a haggard face, which told me, before he
spoke, that he had slept little better than I had.  The shutters were
thrown wide open, and the cold morning light poured into the room with
an effect rather sombre than bright; the huge figures on the tapestry
looming huger from a drab and melancholy background, and the chamber
presenting all those features of disorder that in a sleeping-room lie
hid at night, only to show themselves in a more vivid shape in the
morning.

The King sent his page out, and bade me sit by him.  "I have had a bad
night," he said, with a shudder.  "Grand Master, I doubt that
astrologer was right, and I shall never see Germany, nor carry out my
designs."

Seeing the state in which he was, I could think of nothing better than
to rally him, and even laugh at him.  "You think so now, sire," I said.
"It is the cold hour.  By and by, when you have broken your fast, you
will think differently."

"But, it may be, less correctly," he answered; and as he sat looking
before him with gloomy eyes, he heaved a deep sigh.  "My friend," he
said, mournfully, "I want to live, and I am going to die."

"Of what?"  I asked, gaily.

"I do not know; but I dreamed last night that a house fell on me in the
Rue de la Ferronerie, and I cannot help thinking that I shall die in
that way."

"Very well," I said.  "It is well to know that."

He asked me peevishly what I meant.

"Only," I explained, "that, in that case, as your Majesty need never
pass through that street, you have it in your hands to live for ever."

"Perhaps it may not happen there--in that very street," he answered.

"And perhaps it may not happen yet," I rejoined.  And then, more
seriously, "Come, sire," I continued, "why this sudden weakness? I have
known you face death a hundred times."

"But not after such a dream as I had last night," he said, with a
grimace--yet I could see that he was already comforted.  "I thought
that I was passing along that street in my coach, and on a sudden,
between St. Innocent's church and the notary's--there is a notary's
there?"

"Yes, sire," I said, somewhat surprised.

"I heard a great roar, and something struck me down, and I found myself
pinned to the ground, in darkness, with my mouth full of dust, and an
immense beam on my chest.  I lay for a time in agony, fighting for
breath, and then my brain seemed to burst in my head, and I awoke."

"I have had such a dream, sire," I said, drily.

"Last night?"

"No," I said, "not last night."

He saw what I meant, and laughed; and being by this time quite himself,
left that and passed to discussing the strange affair of La Trape and
the milk.  "Have you found, as yet, who was good enough to supply it?"
he asked.

"No, sire," I answered.  "But I will see La Trape, and as soon as I
have learned anything, your majesty shall know it."

"I suppose he is not far off now," he suggested.  "Send for him. Ten to
one he will have made inquiries, and it will amuse us."

I went to the door and, opening it a trifle, bade the page who waited
send La Trape.  He passed on the message to a crowd of sleepy
attendants, and quickly, but not before I had gone back to the King's
bedside, La Trape entered.

Having my eyes turned the other way, I did not at once remark anything.
But the King did; and his look of astonishment, no less than the
exclamation which accompanied it, arrested my attention.  "St. Gris,
man!" he cried.  "What is the matter? Speak!"

La Trape, who had stopped just within the door, made an effort to do
so, but no sound passed his lips; while his pallor and the fixed glare
of his eyes filled me with the worst apprehensions. It was impossible
to look at him and not share his fright, and I stepped forward and
cried out to him to speak.  "Answer the King, man," I said.  "What is
it?"

He made an effort, and with a ghastly grimace, "The cat is dead!" he
said.

For a moment we were all silent.  Then I looked at the King, and he at
me, with gloomy meaning in our eyes.  He was the first to speak.  "The
cat to whom you gave the milk?"  he said.

"Yes, sire," La Trape answered, in a voice that seemed to come from his
heart.

"But still, courage!" the King cried.  "Courage, man!  A dose that
would kill a cat may not kill a man.  Do you feel ill?"

"Oh, yes, sire," La Trape moaned.

"What do you feel?"

"I have a trembling in all my limbs, and ah--ah, my God, I am a dead
man!  I have a burning here--a pain like hot coals in my vitals!" And,
leaning against the wall, the unfortunate man clasped his arms round
his body and bent himself up and down in a paroxysm of suffering.

"A doctor!  a doctor!" Henry cried, thrusting one leg out of bed. "Send
for Du Laurens!" Then, as I went to the door to do so, "Can you be
sick, man?"  he asked.  "Try!"

"No, no; it is impossible!"

"But try, try!  when did this cat die?"

"It is outside," La Trape groaned.  He could say no more.

I had opened the door by this time, and found the attendants, whom the
man's cries had alarmed, in a cluster round it. Silencing them sternly,
I bade one go for M. Du Laurens, the King's physician, while another
brought me the cat that was dead.

The page who had spent the night in the King's chamber, fetched it.  I
told him to bring it in, and ordering the others to let the doctor pass
when he arrived, I closed the door upon their curiosity, and went back
to the King.  He had left his bed and was standing near La Trape,
endeavouring to hearten him; now telling him to tickle his throat with
a feather, and now watching his sufferings in silence, with a face of
gloom and despondency that sufficiently betrayed his reflections.  At
sight of the page, however, carrying the dead cat, he turned briskly,
and we both examined the beast which, already rigid, with staring eyes
and uncovered teeth, was not a sight to cheer anyone, much less the
stricken man.  La Trape, however, seemed to be scarcely aware of its
presence.  He had sunk upon a chest which stood against the wall, and,
with his body strangely twisted, was muttering prayers, while he rocked
himself to and fro unceasingly.

"It's stiff," the King said in a low voice.  "It has been dead some
hours."

"Since midnight," I muttered.

"Pardon, sire," the page, who was holding the cat, said; "I saw it
after midnight.  It was alive then."

"You saw it!" I exclaimed.  "How?  Where?"

"Here, your excellency," the boy answered, quailing a little.

"What?  In this room?"

"Yes, excellency.  I heard a noise about--I think about two
o'clock--and his Majesty breathing very heavily, It was a noise like a
cat spitting.  It frightened me, and I rose from my pallet and went
round the bed.  I was just in time to see the cat jump down."

"From the bed?"

"Yes, your excellency.  From his Majesty's chest, I think."

"And you are sure that it was this cat?"

"Yes, sire; for as soon as it was on the floor it began to writhe and
roll and bite itself, with all its fur on end, like a mad cat.  Then it
flew to the door and tried to get out, and again began to spit
furiously.  I thought that it would awaken the King, and I let it out."

"And then the King did awake?"

"He was just awaking, your excellency."

"Well, sire," I said, smiling, "this accounts, I think, for your dream
of the house that fell, and the beam that lay on your chest."

It would have been difficult to say whether at this the King looked
more foolish or more relieved.  Whichever the sentiment he entertained,
however, it was quickly cut short by a lamentable cry that drove the
blood from our cheeks.  La Trape was in another paroxysm.  "Oh, the
poor man!" Henry cried.

"I suppose that the cat came in unseen," I said; "with him last night,
and then stayed in the room?"

"Doubtless."

"And was seized with a paroxysm here?"

"Such as he has now!" Henry answered; for La Trape had fallen to the
floor.  "Such as he has now!" he repeated, his eyes flaming, his face
pale.  "Oh, my friend, this is too much.  Those who do these things are
devils, not men.  Where is Du Laurens?  Where is the doctor?  He will
perish before our eyes."

"Patience, sire," I said.  "He will come."

"But in the meantime the man dies."

"No, no," I said, going to La Trape, and touching his hand. "Yet, he is
very cold."  And turning, I sent the page to hasten the doctor.  Then I
begged the King to allow me to have the man conveyed into another room.
"His sufferings distress you, sire, and you do him no good," I said.

"No, he shall not go!" he answered.  "Ventre Saint Gris!  man, he is
dying for me!  He is dying in my place.  He shall die here."

Still ill satisfied, I was about to press him farther, when La Trape
raised his voice, and feebly asked for me.  A page who had taken the
other's place was supporting his head, and two or three of my
gentlemen, who had come in unbidden, were looking on with scared faces.
I went to the poor fellow's side, and asked what I could do for him.

"I am dying!" he muttered, turning up his eyes.  "The doctor! the
doctor!"

I feared that he was passing, but I bade him have courage.  "In a
moment he will be here," I said; while the King in distraction sent
messenger on messenger.

"He will come too late," the sinking man answered.  "Excellency?"

"Yes, my good fellow," I said, stooping that I might hear him the
better.

"I took ten pistoles yesterday from a man to get him a scullion's
place; and there is none vacant."

"It is forgiven," I said, to soothe him.

"And your excellency's favourite hound, Diane," he gasped.  "She had
three puppies, not two.  I sold the other."

"Well, it is forgiven, my friend.  It is forgiven.  Be easy," I said
kindly.

"Ah, I have been a villain," he groaned.  "I have lived loosely. Only
last night I kissed the butler's wench, and--"

"Be easy, be easy," I said.  "Here is the doctor.  He will save you
yet."

And I made way for M. Du Laurens, who, having saluted the King, knelt
down by the sick man, and felt his pulse; while we all stood round,
looking down on the two with grave faces.  It seemed to me that the
man's eyes were growing dim, and I had little hope.  The King was the
first to break the silence.  "You have hope?"  he said.  "You can save
him?"

"Pardon, sire, a moment," the physician answered, rising from his
knees.  "Where is the cat?"

Someone brought it, and M. Du Laurens, after looking at it, said
curtly, "It has been poisoned."

La Trape uttered a groan of despair.  "At what hour did it take the
milk?"  the physician asked.

"A little before ten last evening," I said, seeing that La Trape was
too far gone for speech.

"Ah!  And the man?"

"An hour later."

Du Laurens shook his head, and was preparing to lay down the cat, which
he had taken in his hands, when some appearance led him to examine it
again and more closely.  "Why what is this?"  he exclaimed, in a tone
of surprise, as he took the body to the window.  "There is a large
swelling under its chin."

No one answered.

"Give me a pair of scissors," he continued; and then, after a minute,
when they had been handed to him and he had removed the fur, "Ha!" he
said gravely, "this is not so simple as I thought. The cat has been
poisoned, but by a prick with some sharp instrument."

The King uttered an exclamation of incredulity.  "But it drank the
milk," he said.  "Some milk that--"

"Pardon, sire," Du Laurens answered positively.  "A draught of milk,
however drugged, does not produce an external swelling with a small
blue puncture in the middle."

"What does?"  the King asked, with something like a sneer.

"Ah, that is the question," the physician answered.  "A ring, perhaps,
with a poison-chamber and hollow dart."

"But there is no question of that here," I said.  "Let us be clear.  Do
you say that the cat did not die of the milk?"

"I see no proof that it did," he answered.  "And many things to show
that it died of poison administered by puncture."

"But then," I answered, in no little confusion of thought, "what of La
Trape?"

He turned, and with him all eyes, to the unfortunate equerry, who still
lay seemingly moribund, with his head propped on some cushions.  M. Du
Laurens advanced to him and again felt his pulse, an operation which
appeared to bring a slight tinge of colour to the fading cheeks.  "How
much milk did he drink?"  the physician asked after a pause.

"More than half a pint," I answered.

"And what besides?"

"A quantity of the King's posset, and a little lemonade."

"And for supper?  What did you have?"  the leech continued, addressing
himself to his patient.

"I had some wine," he answered feebly.  "And a little Frontignac with
the butler; and some honey-mead that the gipsy-wench gave me.

"The gipsy-wench?"

"The butler's girl, of whom I spoke."

M. Du Laurens rose slowly to his feet, and, to my amazement, dealt the
prostrate man a hearty kick; bidding him at the same time to rise.
"Get up, fool!  Get up," he continued harshly, yet with a ring of
triumph in his voice, "all you have got is the colic, and it is no more
than you deserve.  Get up, I say, and beg his Majesty's pardon!"

"But," the King remonstrated in a tone of anger, "the man is dying!"

"He is no more dying than you are, sire," the other answered. "Or, if
he is, it is of fright.  There, he can stand as well as you or I!"

And to be sure, as he spoke, La Trape scrambled to his feet, and with a
mien between shame and doubt stood staring at us, the very picture of a
simpleton.  It was no wonder that his jaw fell and his impudent face
burned; for the room shook with such a roar of laughter, at first low,
and then as the King joined in it, swelling louder and louder, as few
of us had ever heard, Though I was not a little mortified by the way in
which we had deceived ourselves, I could not help joining in the laugh;
particularly as the more closely we reviewed the scene in which we had
taken part, the more absurd seemed the jest.  It was long before
silence could be obtained; but at length Henry, quite exhausted by the
violence of his mirth held up his hand.  I seized the opportunity.

"Why, you rascal!" I said, addressing La Trape, who did not know which
way to look, "where are the ten crowns of which you defrauded the
scullion?"

"To be sure," the King said, going off into another roar.  "And the
third puppy?"

"Yes," I said, "you scoundrel; and the third puppy?"

"Ay, and the gipsy girl?"  the King continued.  "The butler's wench,
what of her?  And of your evil living?  Begone, begone, rascal!" he
continued, falling into a fresh paroxysm, "or you will kill US in
earnest.  Would nothing else do for you but to die in my chamber?
Begone!"

I took this as a hint to clear the room, not only of La Trape himself
but of all; and presently only I and Du Laurens remained with the King.
It then appeared that there was still a mystery, and one which it
behoved us to clear up; inasmuch as Du Laurens took the cat's death
very seriously, insisting that it had died of poison administered in a
most sinister fashion, and one that could not fail to recall to our
minds the Borgian popes.  It needed no more than this to direct my
suspicions to the Florentines who swarmed about the Queen, and against
whom the King had let drop so many threats.  But the indisposition
which excitement had for a time kept at bay began to return upon me;
and I was presently glad to drop the subject; and retire to my own
apartments, leaving the King to dress.

Consequently, I was not with him when the strange discovery which
followed was made.  In the ordinary course of dressing, one of the
servants going to the fire-place to throw away a piece of waste linen,
thought that he heard a rat stir among the boughs. He moved them, and
in a moment a small snake crawled out, hissing and darting out its
tongue.  It was killed, and then it at once occurred to the King that
he had the secret of the cat's death. He came to me hot-foot with the
news, and found me with Du Laurens who was in the act of ordering me to
bed.

I confess that I heard the story almost with apathy, so ill was I.  Not
so the physician.  After examining the snake, which by the King's
orders had been brought for my inspection, he pronounced that it was
not of French origin.  "It has escaped from some snake-charmer," he
said.

The King seemed to be incredulous.

"I assure you that I speak the truth, sire," Du Laurens persisted.

"But how then did it come in my room?"

"That is what I should like to know, sire," the physician answered
severely; "and yet I think that I can guess.  It was put there, I
fancy, by the person who sent up the milk to your chamber."

"Why do you say so?"  Henry asked

"Because, sire, all snakes are inordinately fond of milk."

"Ah!" the King said slowly, with a change of countenance and a shudder
which he could not repress; "and there was milk on the floor in the
morning."

"Yes, sire; on the floor, and beside the head of your bed."

But at this stage I was attacked by a fit of illness so severe that I
had to break in on the discussion, and beg the King to withdraw.  The
sickness increased on me during the day, and by noon I was prostrate,
neither taking interest in anything, nor allowing others, who began to
fear for my life, to divert their attention.  After twenty-four hours I
began to mend, but still several days elapsed before I was able to
devote myself to business; and then I found that, the master-mind being
absent, and the King, as always, lukewarm in the pursuit, nothing had
been done to detect and punish the criminal.

I could not rest easy, however, with so abominable a suspicion
attaching to my house; and as soon as I could bend my mind to the
matter I began an inquiry.  At the first stage, however, I came to an
IMPASSE; the butler, who had been long in my service, cleared himself
without difficulty, but a few questions discovered the fact that a
person who had been in his department on the evening in question was
now to seek, having indeed disappeared from that time.  This was the
gipsy-girl, whom La Trape had mentioned, and whose presence in my
household seemed to need the more elucidation the farther I pushed the
inquiry.  In the end I had the butler punished, but though my agents
sought the girl through Paris, and even traced her to Meaux, she was
never discovered.

The affair, at the King's instance, was not made public; nevertheless,
it gave him so strong a distaste for the Arsenal that he did not again
visit me, nor use the rooms I had prepared. That later, when the first
impression wore off, he would have done so, is probable; but, alas,
within a few months the malice of his enemies prevailed over my utmost
precautions, and robbed me of the best of masters; strangely enough, as
all the world now knows, at the corner of that very Rue de la
Feronnerie which he had seen in his dream.




XII. AT

FONTAINEBLEAU.


The passion which Henry still felt for Madame de Conde, and which her
flight from the country was far from assuaging, had a great share in
putting him upon the immediate execution of the designs we had so long
prepared.  Looking to find in the stir and bustle of a German campaign
that relief of mind which the Court could no longer afford him, he
discovered in the unhoped-for wealth of his treasury an additional
incitement; and now waited only for the opening of spring and the
Queen's coronation to remove the last obstacles that kept him from the
field.

Nevertheless, relying on my assurances that all things were ready, and
persuaded that the more easy he showed himself the less prepared would
he find the enemy, he made no change in his habits; but in March, 1610,
went, as usual, to Fontainebleau, where he diverted himself with
hunting.  It was during this visit that the Court credited him with
seeing--I think, on the Friday before the Feast of the Virgin--the
Great Huntsman; and even went so far as to specify the part of the
forest in which he came upon it, and the form--that of a gigantic black
horseman, surrounded by hounds--which it assumed The spectre had not
been seen since the year 1598; nevertheless, the story spread widely,
those who whispered it citing in its support not only the remarkable
agitation into which the Queen fell publicly on the evening of that
day, but also some strange particulars that attended the King's return
from the forest; and, being taken up and repeated, and confirmed, as
many thought, by the unhappy sequence of his death, the fable found a
little later almost universal credence, so that it may now be found
even in books.

As it happened, however, I was that day at Fontainebleau, and hunted
with the King; and, favoured both by chance and the confidence with
which my master never failed to honour me, am able not only to refute
this story, but to narrate the actual facts from which it took its
rise.  And though there are some, I know, who boast that they had the
tale from the King's own mouth, I undertake to prove either that they
are romancers who seek to add an inch to their stature, or dull fellows
who placed their own interpretation on the hasty words he vouchsafed
such chatterers.

As a fact, the King, on that day wishing to discuss with me the
preparations for the Queen's entry, bade me keep close to him, since he
had more inclination for my company than the chase.  But the crowd that
attended him was so large, the day being fine and warm--and comprised,
besides, so many ladies, whose badinage and gaiety he could never
forego--that I found him insensibly drawn from me.  Far from being
displeased, I was glad to see him forget the moodiness which had of
late oppressed him; and beyond keeping within sight of him, gave up,
for the time, all thought of affairs, and found in the beauty of the
spectacle sufficient compensation.  The bright dresses and waving
feathers of the party showed to the greatest advantage, as the long
cavalcade wound through the heather and rocks of the valley below the
Apremonts; and whether I looked to front or rear--on the huntsmen, with
their great horns, or the hounds straining in the leashes--I was
equally charmed with a sight at once joyous and gallant, and one to
which the calls of duty had of late made me a stranger.

On a sudden a quarry was started, and the company, galloping off
pell-mell, with a merry burst of music, were in a moment dispersed,
some taking this track, and others that, through the rocks and DEBRIS
that make that part of the forest difficult. Singling out the King, I
kept as near him as possible until the chase led us into the Apremont
coverts, where, the trees growing thickly, and the rides cut through
them being intricate, I lost him for a while.  Again, however, I caught
sight of him flying down a ride bordered by dark-green box-trees,
against which his white hunting coat showed vividly; but now he was
alone, and riding in a direction which each moment carried him farther
from the line of the chase, and entangled him more deeply in the forest.

Supposing that he had made a bad cast and was in error, I dashed the
spurs into my horse, and galloped after him; then, finding that he
still held his own, and that I did not overtake him, but that, on the
contrary, he was riding at the top of his speed, I called to him.  "You
are in error, sire, I think!"  I cried. "The hounds are the other way!"

He heard, for he raised his hand, and, without turning his head, made
me a sign; but whether of assent or denial, I could not tell.  And he
still held on his course.  Then, for a moment, I fancied that his horse
had got the better of him, and was running away; but no sooner had the
thought occurred to me than I saw that he was spurring it, and exciting
it to its utmost speed, so that we reached the end of that ride, and
rushed through another and still another, always making, I did not fail
to note, for the most retired part of the forest.

We had proceeded in this way about a mile, and the sound of the hunt
had quite died away behind us, and I was beginning to chafe, as well as
marvel, at conduct so singular, when at last I saw that he was
slackening his pace.  My horse, which was on the point of failing,
began, in turn, to overhaul his, while I looked out with sharpened
curiosity for the object of pursuit.  I could see nothing, however, and
no one; and had just satisfied myself that this was one of the droll
freaks in which he would sometimes indulge, and that in a second or two
he would turn and laugh at my discomfiture, when, on a sudden, with a
final pull at the reins, he did turn, and showed me a face flushed with
passion and chagrin.

I was so taken aback that I cried out.  "MON DIEU!  sire," I said.
"What is it?  What is the matter?"

"Matter enough!"  he cried, with an oath.  And on that, halting his
horse, he looked at me as if he would read my heart.  "VENTRE DE SAINT
GRIS!"  he said, in a voice that made me tremble, "if I were sure that
there was no mistake, I would--I would never see your face again!"

I uttered an exclamation.

"Have you not deceived me?"  quoth he.

"Oh, sire, I am weary of these suspicions!"  I answered, affecting an
indifference I did not feel.  "If your Majesty does not--"

But he cut me short.  "Answer me!"  he said harshly, his mouth working
in his beard and his eyes gleaming with excitement. "Have you not
deceived me?"

"No, sire!"  I said.

"Yet you have told me day by day that Madame de Conde remained in
Brussels?"

"Certainly!"

"And you still say so?"

"Most certainly!"  I answered firmly, beginning to think that his
passion had turned his brain.  "I had despatches to that effect this
morning."

"Of what date?"

"Three days gone.  The courier travelled night and day."

"They may be true, and still she may be here to-day?"  he said, staring
at me.

"Impossible, sire!"

"But, man, I have just seen her!"  he cried impatiently.

"Madame de Conde?"

"Yes, Madame de Conde, or I am a madman!"  Henry answered, speaking a
little more moderately.  "I saw her gallop out of the patch of rocks at
the end of the Dormoir--where the trees begin. She did not heed the
line of the hounds, but turned straight down the boxwood ride; and,
after that, led as I followed.  Did you not see her?"

"No, sire," I said, inexpressibly alarmed--I could take it for nothing
but fantasy--"I saw no one."

"And I saw her as clearly as I see you," he answered.  "She wore the
yellow ostrich-feather she wore last year, and rode her favourite
chestnut horse with a white stocking.  But I could have sworn to her by
her figure alone; and she waved her hand to me."

"But, sire, out of the many ladies riding to-day--"

"There is no lady wearing a yellow feather," he answered passionately.
"And the horse!  And I knew her, man!  Besides, she waved to me!  And,
for the others--why should they turn from the hunt and take to the
woods?"

I could not answer this, but I looked at him in fear; for, as it was
impossible that the Princess de Conde could be here, I saw no
alternative but to think him smitten with madness.  The extravagance of
the passion which he had entertained for her, and the wrath into which
the news of her flight with her young husband had thrown him, to say
nothing of the depression under which he had since suffered, rendered
the idea not so unlikely as it now seems.  At any rate, I was driven
for a moment to entertain it; and gazed at him in silence, a prey to
the most dreadful apprehensions.

We stood in a narrow ride, bordered by evergreens, with which that part
of the forest is planted; and but for the songs of the birds the
stillness would have been absolute.  On a sudden the King removed his
eyes from me, and, walking his horse a pace or two along the ride,
uttered a cry of joy.

He pointed to the ground.  "We are right!"  he said.  "There are her
tracks!  Come!  We will overtake her yet!"

I looked, and saw the fresh prints of a horse's shoes, and felt a great
weight roll off my mind, for at least he had seen someone. I no longer
hesitated to fall in with his humour, but, riding after him, kept at
his elbow until he reached the end of the ride.  Here, a vista opening
right and left, and the ground being hard and free from tracks, we
stood at a loss; until the King, whose eyesight was always of the
keenest, uttered an exclamation, and started from me at a gallop.

I followed more slowly, and saw him dismount and pick up a glove,
which, even at that distance, he had discerned lying in the middle of
one of the paths.  He cried, with a flushed face, that it was Madame de
Conde's; and added:  "It has her perfume--her perfume, which no one
else uses!"

I confess that this so staggered me that I knew not what to think; but,
between sorrow at seeing my master so infatuated and bewilderment at a
riddle that grew each moment more perplexing, I sat gaping at Henry
like a man without counsel.  However, at the moment, he needed none,
but, getting to his saddle as quickly as he could, he began again to
follow the tracks of the horse's feet, which here were visible, the
path running through a beech wood.  The branches were still bare, and
the shining trunks stood up like pillars, the ground about them being
soft.  We followed the prints through this wood for a mile and a half
or more, and then, with a cry, the King darted from me, and, in an
instant, was racing through the wood at break-neck speed.

I had a glimpse of a woman flying far ahead of us; and now hidden from
us by the trunks and now disclosed; and could even see enough to
determine that she wore a yellow feather drooping from her hat, and was
in figure not unlike the Princess.  But that was all; for, once
started, the inequalities of the ground drew my eyes from the flying
form, and, losing it, I could not again recover it.  On the contrary,
it was all I could do to keep up with the King; and of the speed at
which the woman was riding, could best judge by the fact that in less
than five minutes he, too, pulled-up with a gesture of despair, and
waited for me to come abreast of him.

"You saw her?"  he said, his face grim, and with something of suspicion
lurking in it.

"Yes, sire," I answered, "I saw a woman, and a woman with a yellow
feather; but whether it was the Princess--"

"It was!"  he said.  "If not, why should she flee from us?"

To that, again, I had not a word to say, and for a moment we rode in
silence.  Observing, however, that this last turn had brought us far on
the way home, I called the King's attention to this; but he had sunk
into a fit of gloomy abstraction, and rode along with his eyes on the
ground.  We proceeded thus until the slender path we followed brought
up into the great road that leads through the forest to the kennels and
the new canal.

Here I asked him if he would not return to the chase, as the day was
still young.

"Mon Dieu, no!"  he answered passionately.  "I have other work to do.
Hark ye, M. le Duc, do you still think that she is in Brussels?"

"I swear that she was there three days ago, sire!"

"And you are not deceiving me?  If it be so, God forgive you, for I
shall not!"

"It is no trick of mine, sire," I answered firmly.

"Trick?"  he cried, with a flash of his eyes.  "A trick, you say? No,
VENTRE DE SAINT GRIS!  there is no man in France dare trick me so!"

I did not contradict him, the rather as we were now close to the
kennels, and I was anxious to allay his excitement; that it might not
be detected by the keen eyes that lay in wait for us, and so add to the
gossip to which his early return must give rise.  I hoped that at that
hour he might enter unperceived, by way of the kennels and the little
staircase; but in this I was disappointed, the beauty of the day having
tempted a number of ladies, and others who had not hunted, to the
terrace by the canal; whence, walking up and down, their fans and
petticoats fluttering in the sunshine, and their laughter and chatter
filling the air, they were able to watch our approach at their leisure.

Unfortunately, Henry had no longer the patience and self-control
needful for such a RENCONTRE.  He dismounted with a dark and peevish
air, and, heedless of the staring, bowing throng, strode up the steps.
Two or three, who stood high in favour, put themselves forward to catch
a smile or a word, but he vouchsafed neither.  He walked through them
with a sour air, and entered the chateau with a precipitation that left
all tongues wagging.

To add to the misfortune, something--I forget what--detained me a
moment, and that cost us dear.  Before I could cross the terrace,
Concini, the Italian, came up, and, saluting me, said that the Queen
desired to speak to me.

"The Queen?"  I said, doubtfully, foreseeing trouble.

"She is waiting at the gate of the farther court," he answered
politely, his keen black eyes reverting, with eager curiosity, to the
door by which the King had disappeared.

I could not refuse, and went to her.  "The King has returned early, M.
le Duc?"  she said.

"Yes, madame," I answered.  "He had a fancy to discuss affairs to-day,
and we lost the hounds."

"Together?"

"I had the honour, Madame."

"You do not seem to have agreed very well?"  she said, smiling.

"Madame," I answered bluntly, "his Majesty has no more faithful
servant; but we do not always agree."

She raised her hand, and, with a slight gesture, bade her ladies stand
back, while her face lost its expression of good-temper, and grew sharp
and dark.  "Was it about the Conde?"  she said, in a low, grating
voice.  "No, madame," I answered; "it was about certain provisions.
The King's ear had been grossly abused, and his Majesty led to
believe--"

"Faugh!"  she cried, with a wave of contempt, "that is an old story!  I
am sick of it.  Is she still at Brussels?"

"Still, madame."

"Then see that she stops there!"  her Majesty retorted, with a meaning
look.

And with that she dismissed me, and went into the chateau.  I proposed
to rejoin the King; but, to my chagrin, I found, when I reached the
closet, that he had already sent for Varennes, and was shut up with
him.  I went back to my rooms therefore, and, after changing my hunting
suit and transacting some necessary business, sat down to dinner with
Nicholas, the King's secretary, a man fond of the table, whom I often
entertained.  He kept me in talk until the afternoon was well advanced,
and we were still at table when Maignan appeared and told me that the
King had sent for me.

"I will go," I said, rising.

"He is with the Queen, your Excellency," he continued.

This somewhat surprised me, but I thought no evil; and, finding one of
the Queen's Italian pages at the door waiting to conduct me, I followed
him across the court that lay between my lodgings and her apartments.
Two or three of the King's gentlemen were in the anteroom when I
arrived, and Varennes, who was standing by one of the fire-places
toying with a hound, made me a face of dismay; he could not speak,
owing to the company.

Still this, in a degree, prepared me for the scene in the chamber,
where I found the Queen storming up and down the room, while the King,
still in his hunting dress, sat on a low chair by the fire, apparently
drying his boots.  Mademoiselle Galigai, the Queen's waiting-woman,
stood in the background; but more than this I had not time to observe,
for, before I had reached the middle of the floor, the Queen turned on
me, and began to abuse me with a vehemence which fairly shocked me.

"And you!"  she cried, "who speak so slow, and look so solemn, and all
the time do his dirty work, like the meanest cook he has ennobled!  It
is well you are here!  ENFIN, you are found out--you and your
provisions!  Your provisions, of which you talked in the wood!"

"MON DIEU!"  the King groaned; "give me patience!"

"He has given me patience these ten years, sire!"  she retorted
passionately.  "Patience to see myself flouted by your favourites,
insulted and displaced, and set aside!  But this is too much!  It was
enough that you made yourself the laughing-stock of France once with
this madame!  I will not have it again--no:  though twenty of your
counsellors frown at me!"

"Your Majesty seems displeased," I said.  "But as I am quite in the
dark--"

"Liar!"  she cried, giving way to her fury.  "When you were with her
this morning!  When you saw her!  When you stooped to--"

"Madame!" the King said sternly, "if you forget yourself, be good
enough to remember that you are speaking to French gentlemen, not to
traders of Florence!"

She sneered.  "You think to wound me by that!"  she cried, breathing
quickly.  "But I have my grandfather's blood in me, sire; and no King
of France--"

"One King of France will presently make your uncle of that blood sing
small!"  the King answered viciously.  "So much for that; and for the
rest, sweetheart, softly, softly!"

"Oh!"  she cried, "I will go:  I will not stay to be outraged by that
woman's presence!"

I had now an inkling what was the matter; and discerning that the
quarrel was a more serious matter than their every-day bickerings, and
threatened to go to lengths that might end in disaster, I ignored the
insult her Majesty had flung at me, and entreated her to be calm.  "If
I understand aright, madame," I said, "you have some grievance against
his Majesty.  Of that I know nothing.  But I also understand that you
allege something against me; and it is to speak to that, I presume,
that I am summoned.  If you will deign to put the matter into words--"

"Words!"  she cried.  "You have words enough!  But get out of this,
Master Grave-Airs, if you can!  Did you, or did you not, tell me this
morning that the Princess of Conde was in Brussels?"

"I did, madame."

"Although half an hour before you had seen her, you had talked with
her, you had been with her in the forest?"

"But I had not, madame!"

"What?"  she cried, staring at me, surprised doubtless that I
manifested no confusion.  "Do you say that you did not see her?"

"I did not."

"Nor the King?"

"The King, Madame, cannot have seen her this morning," I said, "because
he is here and she is in Brussels."

"You persist in that?"

"Certainly!"  I said.  "Besides, madame," I continued, "I have no doubt
that the King has given you his word--"

"His word is good for everyone but his wife!"  she answered bitterly.
"And for yours, M. le Duc, I will show you what it is worth.
Mademoiselle, call--"

"Nay, madame!"  I said, interrupting her with spirit, "if you are going
to call your household to contradict me--"

"But I am not!"  she cried in a voice of triumph that, for the moment,
disconcerted me.  "Mademoiselle, send to M. de Bassompierre's lodgings,
and bid him come to me!"

The King whistled softly, while I, who knew Bassompierre to be devoted
to him, and to be, in spite of the levity to which his endless
gallantries bore witness, a man of sense and judgment, prepared myself
for a serious struggle; judging that we were in the meshes of an
intrigue, wherein it was impossible to say whether the Queen figured as
actor or dupe.  The passion she evinced as she walked to and fro with
clenched hands, or turned now and again to dart a fiery glance at the
Cordovan curtain that hid the door, was so natural to her character
that I found myself leaning to the latter supposition.  Still, in grave
doubt what part Bassompierre was to play, I looked for his coming as
anxiously as anyone.  And probably the King shared this feeling; but he
affected indifference, and continued to sit over the fire with an air
of mingled scorn and peevishness.

At length Bassompierre entered, and, seeing the King, advanced with an
open brow that persuaded me, at least, of his innocence. Attacked on
the instant, however, by the Queen, and taken by surprise, as it were,
between two fires--though the King kept silence, and merely shrugged
his shoulders--his countenance fell. He was at that time one of the
handsomest gallants about the Court, thirty years old, and the darling
of women; but at this his APLOMB failed him, and with it my heart sank
also.

"Answer, sir!  answer!"  the Queen cried.  "And without subterfuge!
Who was it, sir, whom you saw come from the forest this morning?"

"Madame?"

"In one word!"

"If your Majesty will--"

"I will permit you to answer," the Queen exclaimed.

"I saw his Majesty return," he faltered--"and M. de Sully."

"Before them!  before them!"

"I may have been mistaken."

"Pooh, man!"  the Queen cried with biting contempt.  "You have told it
to half-a-dozen.  Discretion comes a little late."

"Well, if you will, madame," he said, striving to assert himself, but
cutting a poor figure, "I fancied that I saw Madame de Conde--"

"Come out of the wood ten minutes before the King?"

"It may have been twenty," he muttered.

But the Queen cared no more for him.  She turned, looking superb in her
wrath, to the King.  "Now, sir!"  she said.  "Am I to bear this?"

"Sweet!"  the King said, governing his temper in a way that surprised
me, "hear reason, and you shall have it in a word.  How near was
Bassompierre to the lady he saw?"

"I was not within fifty paces of her!"  the favourite cried eagerly.

"But others saw her!"  the Queen rejoined sharply.  "Madame Paleotti,
who was with the gentleman, saw her also, and knew her."

"At a distance of fifty paces?"  the King said drily.  "I don't attach
much weight to that."  And then, rising, with a slight yawn.  "Madame,"
he continued, with the air of command which he knew so well how to
assume, "for the present, I am tired!  If Madame de Conde is here, it
will not be difficult to get further evidence of her presence.  If she
is at Brussels, that fact, too, you can ascertain.  Do the one or the
other, as you please; but, for to-day, I beg that you will excuse me."

"And that," the Queen cried shrilly--"that is to be--"

"All, madame!"  the King said sternly.  "Moreover, let me have no
prating outside this room.  Grand-Master, I will trouble you."

And with these words, uttered in a voice and with an air that silenced
even the angry woman before us, he signed to me to follow him, and went
from the room; the first glance of his eye stilling the crowded
ante-chamber, as if the shadow of death passed with him.  I followed
him to his closet; but, until he reached it, had no inkling of what was
in his thoughts.  Then he turned to me.

"Where is she?"  he said sharply.

I stared at him a moment.  "Pardon, sire?" I said.  "Do you think that
it was Madame de Conde?"

"Why not?"

"She is in Brussels."

"I tell you I saw her this morning!"  he answered.  "Go, learn all you
can!  Find her!  Find her!  If she has returned, I will--God knows what
I will do!"  he cried, in a voice shamefully broken. "Go; and send
Varennes to me.  I shall sup alone:  let no one wait."

I would have remonstrated with him, but he was in no mood to bear it;
and, sad at heart, I withdrew, feeling the perplexity, which the
situation caused me, a less heavy burden than the pain with which I
viewed the change that had of late come over my master; converting him
from the gayest and most DEBONAIRE of men into this morose and solitary
dreamer.  Here, had I felt any temptation to moralise on the tyranny of
passion, was the occasion; but, as the farther I left the closet behind
me the more instant became the crisis, the present soon reasserted its
power.  Reflecting that Henry, in this state of uncertainty, was
capable of the wildest acts, and that not less was to be feared from
his imprudence than from the Queen's resentment, I cudgelled my brains
to explain the RENCONTRE of the morning; but as the courier, whom I
questioned, confirmed the report of my agents, and asseverated most
confidently that he had left Madame in Brussels, I was flung back on
the alternative of an accidental resemblance.  This, however, which
stood for a time as the most probable solution, scarcely accounted for
the woman's peculiar conduct, and quite fell to the ground when La
Trape, making cautious inquiries, ascertained that no lady hunting that
day had worn a yellow feather.  Again, therefore, I found myself at a
loss; and the dejection of the King and the Queen's ill-temper giving
rise to the wildest surmises, and threatening each hour to supply the
gossips of the Court with a startling scandal, the issue of which no
one could foresee, I went so far as to take into my confidence MM.
Epernon and Montbazon; but with no result.

Such being my state of mind, and such the suspense I suffered during
two days, it may be imagined that M. Bassompierre was not more happy.
Despairing of the King's favour unless he could clear up the matter,
and by the event justify his indiscretion, he became for those two days
the wonder, and almost the terror, of the Court.  Ignorant of what he
wanted, the courtiers found only insolence in his mysterious questions,
and something prodigious in an activity which carried him in one day to
Paris and back, and on the following to every place in the vicinity
where news of the fleeting beauty might by any possibility be gained;
so that he far outstripped my agents, who were on the same quest.  But
though I had no mean opinion of his abilities, I hoped little from
these exertions, and was proportionately pleased when, on the third
day, he came to me with a radiant face and invited me to attend the
Queen that evening.

"The King will be there," he said, "and I shall surprise you. But I
will not tell you more.  Come!  and I promise to satisfy you."

And that was all he would say; so that, finding my questions useless,
and the man almost frantic with joy, I had to be content with it; and
at the Queen's hour that evening presented myself in her gallery, which
proved to be unusually full.

Making my way towards her in some doubt of my reception, I found my
worst fears confirmed.  She greeted me with a sneering face, and was
preparing, I was sure, to put some slight upon me--a matter wherein she
could always count on the applause of her Italian servants--when the
entrance of the King took her by surprise.  He advanced up the gallery
with a listless air, and, after saluting her, stood by one of the
fireplaces talking to Epernon and La Force.  The crowd was pretty dense
by this time, and the hum of talk filled the room when, on a sudden, a
voice, which I recognised as Bassompierre's, was lifted above it.

"Very well!" he cried gaily, "then I appeal to her Majesty.  She shall
decide, mademoiselle!  No, no; I am not satisfied with your claim!"

The King looked that way with a frown, but the Queen took the outburst
in good part.  "What is it, M. de Bassompierre?"  she said.  "What am I
to decide?"

"To-day, in the forest, I found a ring, madame," he answered, coming
forward.  "I told Mademoiselle de la Force of my discovery, and she now
claims the ring."

"I once had a ring like it," cried mademoiselle, blushing and laughing.

"A sapphire ring?"  Bassompierre answered, holding his hand aloft.

"Yes."

"With three stones?"

"Yes,"

"Precisely, mademoiselle!"  he answered, bowing.  "But the stones in
this ring are not sapphires, nor are there three of them."

There was a great laugh at this, and the Queen said, very wittily, that
as neither of the claimants could prove a right to the ring it must
revert to the judge.

"In one moment your Majesty shall at least see it," he answered. "But,
first, has anyone lost a ring?  Oyez!  Oyez!  Oyez!  Lost, in the
forest, within the last three days, a ring!"

Two or three, falling in with his humour, set up absurd claims to it;
but none could describe the ring, and in the end he handed it to the
Queen.  As he did so his eyes met mine and challenged my attention.  I
was prepared, therefore, for the cry of surprise which broke from the
Queen.

"Why, this is Caterina's!"  she cried.  "Where is the child?"

Someone pushed forward Mademoiselle Paleotti, sister-in-law to Madame
Paleotti, the Queen's first chamberwoman.  She was barely out of her
teens, and, ordinarily, was a pretty girl; but the moment I saw her
dead-white face, framed in a circle of fluttering fans and pitiless,
sparkling eyes, I discerned tragedy in the farce; and that M. de
Bassompierre was acting in a drama to which only he and one other held
the key.  The contrast between the girl's blanched face and the beauty
and glitter in the midst of which she stood struck others, so that,
before another word was said, I caught the gasp of surprise that passed
through the room; nor was I the only one who drew nearer.

"Why, girl," the Queen said, "this is the ring I gave you on my
birthday!  When did you lose it?  And why have you made a secret of it?"

Mademoiselle stood speechless; but madame her sister-in-law answered
for her.  "Doubtless she was afraid that your Majesty would think her
careless," she answered.

"I did not ask you!"  the Queen rejoined.

She spoke harshly and suspiciously, looking from the ring to the
trembling girl.  The silence was such that the chatter of the pages in
the anteroom could be heard.  Still Mademoiselle stood dumb and
confounded.

"Well, what is the mystery?"  the Queen said, looking round with a
little wonder.  "What is the matter?  It IS the ring.  Why do you not
own it?"

"Perhaps mademoiselle is wondering where are the other things she left
with it!"  Bassompierre said in a silky tone.  "The things she left at
Parlot the verderer's, when she dropped the ring. But she may free her
mind; I have them here."

"What do you mean?"  the Queen said.  "What things, monsieur? What has
the girl been doing?"

"Only what many have done before her," Bassompierre answered, bowing to
his unfortunate victim, who seemed to be paralysed by terror:
"masquerading in other people's clothes.  I propose, madame, that, for
punishment, you order her to dress in them, that we may see what her
taste is."

"I do not understand?"  the Queen said.

"Your Majesty will, if Mademoiselle Paleotti will consent to humour us."

At that the girl uttered a cry, and looked round the circle as if for a
way of escape; but a Court is a cruel place, in which the ugly or
helpless find scant pity.  A dozen voices begged the Queen to insist;
and, amid laughter and loud jests, Bassompierre hastened to the door,
and returned with an armful of women's gear, surmounted by a wig and a
feathered hat.

"If the Queen will command mademoiselle to retire and put these on," he
said, "I will undertake to show her something that will please her."

"Go!"  said the Queen.

But the girl had flung herself on her knees before her, and, clinging
to her skirts, burst, into a flood of tears and prayers; while her
sister-in-law stepped forward as if to second her, and cried out, in
great excitement, that her Majesty would not be so cruel as to--

"Hoity, toity!"  said the Queen, cutting her short, very grimly. "What
is all this?  I tell the girl to put on a masquerade--which it seems
that she has been keeping at some cottage--and you talk as if I were
cutting off her head!  It seems to me that she escapes very lightly!
Go!  go!  and see, you, that you are arrayed in five minutes, or I will
deal with you!"

"Perhaps Mademoiselle de la Force will go with her, and see that
nothing is omitted," Bassompierre said with malice.

The laughter and applause with which this proposal was received took me
by surprise; but later I learned that the two young women were rivals.
"Yes, yes," the Queen said.  "Go, mademoiselle, and see that she does
not keep us waiting."

Knowing what I did, I had by this time a fair idea of the discovery
which Bassompierre had made; but the mass of courtiers and ladies round
me, who had not this advantage, knew not what to expect--nor,
especially, what part M. Bassompierre had in the business--but made
most diverting suggestions, the majority favouring the opinion that
Mademoiselle Paleotti had repulsed him, and that this was his way of
avenging himself.  A few of the ladies even taxed him with this, and
tried, by random reproaches, to put him at least on his defence; but,
merrily refusing to be inveigled, he made to all the same answer that
when Mademoiselle Paleotti returned they would see.  This served only
to whet a curiosity already keen, insomuch that the door was watched by
as many eyes as if a miracle had been promised; and even MM. Epernon
and Vendome, leaving the King's side, pressed into the crowd that they
might see the better.  I took the opportunity of going to him, and,
meeting his eyes as I did so, read in them a look of pain and distress.
As I advanced he drew back a pace, and signed to me to stand before him.

I had scarcely done so when the door opened and Mademoiselle Paleotti,
pale, and supported on one side by her rival, appeared at it; but so
wondrously transformed by a wig, hat, and redingote that I scarcely
knew her.  At first, as she stood, looking with shamed eyes at the
staring crowd, the impression made was simply one of bewilderment, so
complete was the disguise.  But Bassompierre did not long suffer her to
stand so.  Advancing to her side, his hat under his arm, he offered his
hand.

"Mademoiselle," he said, "will you oblige me by walking as far as the
end of the gallery with me?"

She complied involuntarily, being almost unable to stand alone. But the
two had not proceeded half-way down the gallery before a low murmur
began to be heard, that, growing quickly louder, culminated in an
astonished cry of "Madame de Conde!  Madame de Conde!"

M. Bassompierre dropped her hand with a low bow, and turned to the
Queen.  "Madame," he said, "this, I find, is the lady whom I saw on the
Terrace when Madame Paleotti was so good as to invite me to walk on the
Bois-le-Roi road.  For the rest, your Majesty may draw your
conclusions."

It was easy to see that the Queen had already drawn them; but, for the
moment, the unfortunate girl was saved from her wrath. With a low cry,
Mademoiselle Paleotti did that which she would have done a little
before, had she been wise, and swooned on the floor.

I turned to look at the King, and found him gone.  He had withdrawn
unseen in the first confusion of the surprise; nor did I dare at once
to interrupt him, or intrude on the strange mixture of regret and
relief, wrath and longing, that probably possessed him in the silence
of his closet.  It was enough for me that the Italians' plot had
failed, and that the danger of a rupture between the King and Queen,
which these miscreants desired, and I had felt to be so great and
imminent, was, for this time, overpast.

The Paleottis were punished, being sent home in disgrace, and a penury,
which, doubtless, they felt more keenly.  But, alas, the King could not
banish with them all who hated him and France; nor could I, with every
precaution, and by the unsparing use of all the faculties that, during
a score of years, had been at the service of my master, preserve him
for his country and the world. Before two months had run he perished by
a mean hand, leaving the world the poorer by the greatest and most
illustrious sovereign that ever ruled a nation.  And men who loved
neither France nor him entered into his labours, whose end also I have
seen.

========================================
========================================

Note:

In this Etext, text in italics has been written in capital letters.

Many French words in the text have accents, etc. which have been
omitted.





THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF

A Romance


by

STANLEY WEYMAN




CONTENTS.


 CHAP.

    I.--WARE WOLF!
   II.--THE VIDAME'S THREAT.
  III.--THE ROAD TO PARIS.
   IV.--ENTRAPPED!
    V.--A PRIEST AND A WOMAN.
   VI.--MADAME'S FRIGHT.
  VII.--A YOUNG KNIGHT ERRANT.
 VIII.--THE PARISIAN MATINS.
   IX.--THE HEAD OF ERASMUS.
    X.--HAU, HAU, HUGUENOTS!
   XI.--A NIGHT OF SORROW.
  XII.--JOY IN THE MORNING.



INTRODUCTION.

The following is a modern English version of a curious French memoir,
or fragment of autobiography, apparently written about the year 1620 by
Anne, Vicomte de Caylus, and brought to this country--if, in fact, the
original ever existed in England--by one of his descendants after the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes.  This Anne, we learn from other
sources, was a principal figure at the Court of Henry IV., and,
therefore, in August, 1572, when the adventures here related took
place, he and his two younger brothers, Marie and Croisette, who shared
with him the honour and the danger, must have been little more than
boys. From the tone of his narrative, it appears that, in reviving old
recollections, the veteran renewed his youth also, and though his story
throws no fresh light upon the history of the time, it seems to possess
some human interest.




THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF.



CHAPTER I.

WARE WOLF!

I had afterwards such good reason to look back upon and remember the
events of that afternoon, that Catherine's voice seems to ring in my
brain even now.  I can shut my eyes and see again, after all these
years, what I saw then--just the blue summer sky, and one grey angle of
the keep, from which a fleecy cloud was trailing like the smoke from a
chimney.  I could see no more because I was lying on my back, my head
resting on my hands. Marie and Croisette, my brothers, were lying by me
in exactly the same posture, and a few yards away on the terrace,
Catherine was sitting on a stool Gil had brought out for her.  It was
the second Thursday in August, and hot.  Even the jackdaws were silent.
I had almost fallen asleep, watching my cloud grow longer and longer,
and thinner and thinner, when Croisette, who cared for heat no more
than a lizard, spoke up sharply, "Mademoiselle," he said, "why are you
watching the Cahors road?"

I had not noticed that she was doing so.  But something in the keenness
of Croisette's tone, taken perhaps with the fact that Catherine did not
at once answer him, aroused me; and I turned to her.  And lo!  she was
blushing in the most heavenly way, and her eyes were full of tears, and
she looked at us adorably.  And we all three sat up on our elbows, like
three puppy dogs, and looked at her.  And there was a long silence.
And then she said quite simply to us, "Boys, I am going to be married
to M. de Pavannes."

I fell flat on my back and spread out my arms.  "Oh, Mademoiselle!" I
cried reproachfully.

"Oh, Mademoiselle!" cried Marie.  And he fell flat on his back, and
spread out his arms and moaned.  He was a good brother, was Marie, and
obedient.

And Croisette cried, "Oh, mademoiselle!"  too.  But he was always
ridiculous in his ways.  He fell flat on his back, and flopped his arms
and squealed like a pig.

Yet he was sharp.  It was he who first remembered our duty, and went to
Catherine, cap in hand, where she sat half angry and half confused, and
said with a fine redness in his cheeks, "Mademoiselle de Caylus, our
cousin, we give you joy, and wish you long life; and are your servants,
and the good friends and aiders of M. de Pavannes in all quarrels, as--"

But I could not stand that.  "Not so fast, St. Croix de Caylus" I said,
pushing him aside--he was ever getting before me in those days--and
taking his place.  Then with my best bow I began, "Mademoiselle, we
give you joy and long life, and are your servants and the good friends
and aiders of M. de Pavannes in all quarrels, as--as--"

"As becomes the cadets of your house," suggested Croisette, softly.

"As becomes the cadets of your house," I repeated.  And then Catherine
stood up and made me a low bow and we all kissed her hand in turn,
beginning with me and ending with Croisette, as was becoming.
Afterwards Catherine threw her handkerchief over her face--she was
crying--and we three sat down, Turkish fashion, just where we were, and
said "Oh, Kit!"  very softly.

But presently Croisette had something to add.  "What will the Wolf
say?"  he whispered to me.

"Ah!  To be sure!"  I exclaimed aloud.  I had been thinking of myself
before; but this opened quite another window.  "What will the Vidame
say, Kit?"

She dropped her kerchief from her face, and turned so pale that I was
sorry I had spoken--apart from the kick Croisette gave me. "Is M. de
Bezers at his house?"  she asked anxiously.

"Yes," Croisette answered.  "He came in last night from St. Antonin,
with very small attendance."

The news seemed to set her fears at rest instead of augmenting them as
I should have expected.  I suppose they were rather for Louis de
Pavannes, than for herself.  Not unnaturally, too, for even the Wolf
could scarcely have found it in his heart to hurt our cousin.  Her
slight willowy figure, her pale oval face and gentle brown eyes, her
pleasant voice, her kindness, seemed to us boys and in those days, to
sum up all that was womanly.  We could not remember, not even Croisette
the youngest of us--who was seventeen, a year junior to Marie and
myself--we were twins--the time when we had not been in love with her.

But let me explain how we four, whose united ages scarce exceeded
seventy years, came to be lounging on the terrace in the holiday
stillness of that afternoon.  It was the summer of 1572.  The great
peace, it will be remembered, between the Catholics and the Huguenots
had not long been declared; the peace which in a day or two was to be
solemnized, and, as most Frenchmen hoped, to be cemented by the
marriage of Henry of Navarre with Margaret of Valois, the King's
sister.  The Vicomte de Caylus, Catherine's father and our guardian,
was one of the governors appointed to see the peace enforced; the
respect in which he was held by both parties--he was a Catholic, but no
bigot, God rest his soul!--recommending him for this employment.  He
had therefore gone a week or two before to Bayonne, his province.  Most
of our neighbours in Quercy were likewise from home, having gone to
Paris to be witnesses on one side or the other of the royal wedding.
And consequently we young people, not greatly checked by the presence
of good-natured, sleepy Madame Claude, Catherine's duenna, were
disposed to make the most of our liberty; and to celebrate the peace in
our own fashion.

We were country-folk.  Not one of us had been to Pau, much less to
Paris.  The Vicomte held stricter views than were common then, upon
young people's education; and though we had learned to ride and shoot,
to use our swords and toss a hawk, and to read and write, we knew
little more than Catherine herself of the world; little more of the
pleasures and sins of court life, and not one-tenth as much as she did
of its graces.  Still she had taught us to dance and make a bow.  Her
presence had softened our manners; and of late we had gained something
from the frank companionship of Louis de Pavannes, a Huguenot whom the
Vicomte had taken prisoner at Moncontour and held to ransom.  We were
not, I think, mere clownish yokels.

But we were shy.  We disliked and shunned strangers.  And when old Gil
appeared suddenly, while we were still chewing the melancholy cud of
Kit's announcement, and cried sepulchrally, "M. le Vidame de Bezers to
pay his respects to Mademoiselle!"--Well, there was something like a
panic, I confess!

We scrambled to our feet, muttering, "The Wolf!"  The entrance at
Caylus is by a ramp rising from the gateway to the level of the
terrace.  This sunken way is fenced by low walls so that one may
not--when walking on the terrace--fall into it.  Gil had spoken before
his head had well risen to view, and this gave us a moment, just a
moment.  Croisette made a rush for the doorway into the house; but
failed to gain it, and drew himself up behind a buttress of the tower,
his finger on his lip.  I am slow sometimes, and Marie waited for me,
so that we had barely got to our legs--looking, I dare say, awkward and
ungainly enough--before the Vidame's shadow fell darkly on the ground
at Catherine's feet.

"Mademoiselle!"  he said, advancing to her through the sunshine, and
bending over her slender hand with a magnificent grace that was born of
his size and manner combined, "I rode in late last night from Toulouse;
and I go to-morrow to Paris.  I have but rested and washed off the
stains of travel that I may lay my--ah!"

He seemed to see us for the first time and negligently broke off in his
compliment; raising himself and saluting us.  "Ah," he continued
indolently, "two of the maidens of Caylus, I see.  With an odd pair of
hands apiece, unless I am mistaken, Why do you not set them spinning,
Mademoiselle?"  and he regarded us with that smile which--with other
things as evil--had made him famous.

Croisette pulled horrible faces behind his back.  We looked hotly at
him; but could find nothing to say.

"You grow red!"  he went on, pleasantly--the wretch!--playing with us
as a cat does with mice.  "It offends your dignity, perhaps, that I bid
Mademoiselle set you spinning?  I now would spin at Mademoiselle's
bidding, and think it happiness!"

"We are not girls!"  I blurted out, with the flush and tremor of a
boy's passion.  "You had not called my godfather, Anne de Montmorenci a
girl, M. le Vidame!"  For though we counted it a joke among ourselves
that we all bore girls' names, we were young enough to be sensitive
about it.

He shrugged his shoulders.  And how he dwarfed us all as he stood there
dominating our terrace!  "M. de Montmorenci was a man," he said
scornfully.  "M. Anne de Caylus is--"

And the villain deliberately turned his great back upon us, taking his
seat on the low wall near Catherine's chair.  It was clear even to our
vanity that he did not think us worth another word--that we had passed
absolutely from his mind.  Madame Claude came waddling out at the same
moment, Gil carrying a chair behind her.  And we--well we slunk away
and sat on the other side of the terrace, whence we could still glower
at the offender.

Yet who were we to glower at him?  To this day I shake at the thought
of him.  It was not so much his height and bulk, though he was so big
that the clipped pointed fashion of his beard a fashion then new at
court--seemed on him incongruous and effeminate; nor so much the
sinister glance of his grey eyes--he had a slight cast in them; nor the
grim suavity of his manner, and the harsh threatening voice that
permitted of no disguise. It was the sum of these things, the great
brutal presence of the man--that was overpowering--that made the great
falter and the poor crouch.  And then his reputation!  Though we knew
little of the world's wickedness, all we did know had come to us linked
with his name.  We had heard of him as a duellist, as a bully, an
employer of bravos.  At Jarnac he had been the last to turn from the
shambles.  Men called him cruel and vengeful even for those days--gone
by now, thank God!--and whispered his name when they spoke of
assassinations; saying commonly of him that he would not blench before
a Guise, nor blush before the Virgin.

Such was our visitor and neighbour, Raoul de Mar, Vidame de Bezers.  As
he sat on the terrace, now eyeing us askance, and now paying Catherine
a compliment, I likened him to a great cat before which a butterfly has
all unwittingly flirted her prettiness.  Poor Catherine!  No doubt she
had her own reasons for uneasiness; more reasons I fancy than I then
guessed.  For she seemed to have lost her voice.  She stammered and
made but poor replies; and Madame Claude being deaf and stupid, and we
boys too timid after the rebuff we had experienced to fill the gap, the
conversation languished.  The Vidame was not for his part the man to
put himself out on a hot day.

It was after one of these pauses--not the first but the longest--that I
started on finding his eyes fixed on mine.  More, I shivered.  It is
hard to describe, but there was a look in the Vidame's eyes at that
moment which I had never seen before.  A look of pain almost:  of dumb
savage alarm at any rate.  From me they passed slowly to Marie and
mutely interrogated him.  Then the Vidame's glance travelled back to
Catherine, and settled on her.

Only a moment before she had been but too conscious of his presence.
Now, as it chanced by bad luck, or in the course of Providence,
something had drawn her attention elsewhere.  She was unconscious of
his regard.  Her own eyes were fixed in a far-away gaze.  Her colour
was high, her lips were parted, her bosom heaved gently.

The shadow deepened on the Vidame's face.  Slowly he took his eyes from
hers, and looked northwards also.

Caylus Castle stands on a rock in the middle of the narrow valley of
that name.  The town clusters about the ledges of the rock so closely
that when I was a boy I could fling a stone clear of the houses.  The
hills are scarcely five hundred yards distant on either side, rising in
tamer colours from the green fields about the brook.  It is possible
from the terrace to see the whole valley, and the road which passes
through it lengthwise. Catherine's eyes were on the northern extremity
of the defile, where the highway from Cahors descends from the uplands.
She had been sitting with her face turned that way all the afternoon.

I looked that way too.  A solitary horseman was descending the steep
track from the hills.

"Mademoiselle!"  cried the Vidame suddenly.  We all looked up. His tone
was such that the colour fled from Kit's face.  There was something in
his voice she had never heard in any voice before--something that to a
woman was like a blow. "Mademoiselle," he snarled, "is expecting news
from Cahors, from her lover.  I have the honour to congratulate M. de
Pavannes on his conquest."

Ah!  he had guessed it!  As the words fell on the sleepy silence, an
insult in themselves, I sprang to my feet, amazed and angry, yet
astounded by his quickness of sight and wit.  He must have recognized
the Pavannes badge at that distance.  "M. le Vidame," I said
indignantly--Catherine was white and voiceless--"M. le Vidame--" but
there I stopped and faltered stammering.  For behind him I could see
Croisette; and Croisette gave me no sign of encouragement or support.

So we stood face to face for a moment; the boy and the man of the
world, the stripling and the ROUE.  Then the Vidame bowed to me in
quite a new fashion.  "M. Anne de Caylus desires to answer for M. de
Pavannes?"  he asked smoothly; with a mocking smoothness.

I understood what he meant.  But something prompted me--Croisette said
afterwards that it was a happy thought, though now I know the crisis to
have been less serious than he fancied to answer, "Nay, not for M. de
Pavannes.  Rather for my cousin."  And I bowed.  "I have the honour on
her behalf to acknowledge your congratulations, M. le Vidame.  It
pleases her that our nearest neighbour should also be the first outside
the family to wish her well.  You have divined truly in supposing that
she will shortly be united to M. de Pavannes."

I suppose--for I saw the giant's colour change and his lip quiver as I
spoke--that his previous words had been only a guess.  For a moment the
devil seemed to be glaring through his eyes; and he looked at Marie and
me as a wild animal at its keepers.  Yet he maintained his cynical
politeness in part.  "Mademoiselle desires my congratulations?"  he
said, slowly, labouring with each word it seemed.  "She shall have them
on the happy day.  She shall certainly have them then.  But these are
troublous times.  And Mademoiselle's betrothed is I think a Huguenot,
and has gone to Paris.  Paris--well, the air of Paris is not good for
Huguenots, I am told."

I saw Catherine shiver; indeed she was on the point of fainting, I
broke in rudely, my passion getting the better of my fears. "M. de
Pavannes can take care of himself, believe me," I said brusquely.

"Perhaps so," Bezers answered, his voice like the grating of steel on
steel.  "But at any rate this will be a memorable day for Mademoiselle.
The day on which she receives her first congratulations--she will
remember it as long as she lives!  Oh, yes, I will answer for that, M.
Anne," he said looking brightly at one and another of us, his eyes more
oblique than ever, "Mademoiselle will remember it, I am sure!"

It would be impossible to describe the devilish glance he flung at the
poor sinking girl as he withdrew, the horrid emphasis he threw into
those last words, the covert deadly threat they conveyed to the dullest
ears.  That he went then, was small mercy.  He had done all the evil he
could do at present.  If his desire had been to leave fear behind him,
he had certainly succeeded.

Kit crying softly went into the house; her innocent coquetry more than
sufficiently punished already.  And we three looked at one another with
blank faces, It was clear that we had made a dangerous enemy, and an
enemy at our own gates.  As the Vidame had said, these were troublous
times when things were done to men--ay, and to women and
children--which we scarce dare to speak of now.  "I wish the Vicomte
were here," Croisette said uneasily after we had discussed several
unpleasant contingencies.

"Or even Malines the steward," I suggested.

"He would not be much good," replied Croisette.

"And he is at St. Antonin, and will not be back this week. Father
Pierre too is at Albi."

"You do not think," said Marie, "that he will attack us?"

"Certainly not!" Croisette retorted with contempt.  "Even the Vidame
would not dare to do that in time of peace.  Besides, he has not half a
score of men here," continued the lad, shrewdly, "and counting old Gil
and ourselves we have as many.  And Pavannes always said that three men
could hold the gate at the bottom of the ramp against a score.  Oh, he
will not try that!"

"Certainly not!" I agreed.  And so we crushed Marie.  "But for Louis de
Pavannes--"

Catherine interrupted me.  She came out quickly looking a different
person; her face flushed with anger, her tears dried.

"Anne!" she cried, imperiously, "what is the matter down below--will
you see?"

I had no difficulty in doing that.  All the sounds of town life came up
to us on the terrace.  Lounging there we could hear the chaffering over
the wheat measures in the cloisters of the market-square, the yell of a
dog, the voice of a scold, the church bell, the watchman's cry.  I had
only to step to the wall to overlook it all.  On this summer afternoon
the town had been for the most part very quiet.  If we had not been
engaged in our own affairs we should have taken the alarm before,
remarking in the silence the first beginnings of what was now a very
respectable tumult.  It swelled louder even as we stepped to the wall.

We could see--a bend in the street laying it open--part of the Vidame's
house; the gloomy square hold which had come to him from his mother.
His own chateau of Bezers lay far away in Franche Comte, but of late he
had shown a preference--Catherine could best account for it,
perhaps--for this mean house in Caylus.  It was the only house in the
town which did not belong to us.  It was known as the House of the
Wolf, and was a grim stone building surrounding a courtyard.  Rows of
wolves' heads carved in stone flanked the windows, whence their bare
fangs grinned day and night at the church porch opposite.

The noise drew our eyes in this direction; and there lolling in a
window over the door, looking out on the street with a laughing eye,
was Bezers himself.  The cause of his merriment--we had not far to look
for it--was a horseman who was riding up the street under difficulties.
He was reining in his steed--no easy task on that steep greasy
pavement--so as to present some front to a score or so of ragged knaves
who were following close at his heels, hooting and throwing mud and
pebbles at him.  The man had drawn his sword, and his oaths came up to
us, mingled with shrill cries of "VIVE LA MESSE!"  and half drowned by
the clattering of the horse's hoofs.  We saw a stone strike him in the
face, and draw blood, and heard him swear louder than before.

"Oh!"  cried Catherine, clasping her hands with a sudden shriek of
indignation, "my letter!  They will get my letter!"

"Death!"  exclaimed Croisette, "She is right!  It is M. de Pavannes'
courier!  This must be stopped!  We cannot stand this, Anne!"

"They shall pay dearly for it, by our Lady!"  I cried swearing myself.
"And in peace time too--the villains!  Gil!  Francis!" I shouted,
"where are you?"

And I looked round for my fowling piece, while Croisette jumped on the
wall, and forming a trumpet with his hands, shrieked at the top of his
voice, "Back!  he bears a letter from the Vicomte!"

But the device did not succeed, and I could not find my gun.  For a
moment we were helpless, and before I could have fetched the gun from
the house, the horseman and the hooting rabble at his heels, had turned
a corner and were hidden by the roofs.

Another turn however would bring them out in front of the gateway, and
seeing this we hurried down the ramp to meet them. I stayed a moment to
tell Gil to collect the servants, and, this keeping me, Croisette
reached the narrow street outside before me.  As I followed him I was
nearly knocked down by the rider, whose face was covered with, dirt and
blood, while fright had rendered his horse unmanageable.  Darting aside
I let him pass--he was blinded and could not see me--and then found
that Croisette--brave lad!  had collared the foremost of the ruffians,
and was beating him with his sheathed sword, while the rest of the
rabble stood back, ashamed, yet sullen, and with anger in their eyes.
A dangerous crew, I thought; not townsmen, most of them.

"Down with the Huguenots!"  cried one, as I appeared, one bolder than
the rest.

"Down with the CANAILLE!"  I retorted, sternly eyeing the ill-looking
ring.  "Will you set yourselves above the king's peace, dirt that you
are?  Go back to your kennels!"

The words were scarcely out of my mouth, before I saw that the fellow
whom Croisette was punishing had got hold of a dagger.  I shouted a
warning, but it came too late.  The blade fell, and--thanks to
God--striking the buckle of the lad's belt, glanced off harmless.  I
saw the steel flash up again--saw the spite in the man's eyes:  but
this time I was a step nearer, and before the weapon fell, I passed my
sword clean through the wretch's body. He went down like a log,
Croisette falling with him, held fast by his stiffening fingers.

I had never killed a man before, nor seen a man die; and if I had
stayed to think about it, I should have fallen sick perhaps.  But it
was no time for thought; no time for sickness.  The crowd were close
upon us, a line of flushed threatening faces from wall to wall.  A
single glance downwards told me that the man was dead, and I set my
foot upon his neck.  "Hounds!  Beasts!"  I cried, not loudly this time,
for though I was like one possessed with rage, it was inward rage, "go
to your kennels!  Will you dare to raise a hand against a Caylus?
Go--or when the Vicomte returns, a dozen of you shall hang in the
market-place!"

I suppose I looked fierce enough--I know I felt no fear, only a strange
exaltation--for they slunk away.  Unwillingly, but with little delay
the group melted, Bezers' following--of whom I knew the dead man was
one--the last to go.  While I still glared at them, lo!  the street was
empty; the last had disappeared round the bend.  I turned to find Gil
and half-a-dozen servants standing with pale faces at my back.
Croisette seized my hand with a sob.  "Oh, my lord," cried Gil,
quaveringly.  But I shook one off, I frowned at the other.

"Take up this carrion!"  I said, touching it with my foot, "And hang it
from the justice-elm.  And then close the gates!  See to it, knaves,
and lose no time."



CHAPTER II.

THE VIDAME'S THREAT.

Croisette used to tell a story, of the facts of which I have no
remembrance, save as a bad dream.  He would have it that I left my
pallet that night--I had one to myself in the summer, being the eldest,
while he and Marie slept on another in the same room--and came to him
and awoke him, sobbing and shaking and clutching him; and begging him
in a fit of terror not to let me go.  And that so I slept in his arms
until morning.  But as I have said, I do not remember anything of this,
only that I had an ugly dream that night, and that when I awoke I was
lying with him and Marie; so I cannot say whether it really happened.

At any rate, if I had any feeling of the kind it did not last long; on
the contrary--it would be idle to deny it--I was flattered by the
sudden respect, Gil and the servants showed me. What Catherine thought
of the matter I could not tell.  She had her letter and apparently
found it satisfactory.  At any rate we saw nothing of her.  Madame
Claude was busy boiling simples, and tending the messenger's hurts.
And it seemed natural that I should take command.

There could be no doubt--at any rate we had none that the assault on
the courier had taken place at the Vidame's instance.  The only wonder
was that he had not simply cut his throat and taken the letter.  But
looking back now it seems to me that grown men mingled some
childishness with their cruelty in those days--days when the religious
wars had aroused our worst passions.  It was not enough to kill an
enemy.  It pleased people to make--I speak literally--a football of his
head, to throw his heart to the dogs.  And no doubt it had fallen in
with the Vidame's grim humour that the bearer of Pavannes' first love
letter should enter his mistress's presence, bleeding and plaistered
with mud. And that the riff-raff about our own gates should have part
in the insult.

Bezers' wrath would be little abated by the issue of the affair, or the
justice I had done on one of his men.  So we looked well to bolts, and
bars, and windows, although the castle is well-nigh impregnable, the
smooth rock falling twenty feet at least on every side from the base of
the walls.  The gatehouse, Pavannes had shown us, might be blown up
with gunpowder indeed, but we prepared to close the iron grating which
barred the way half-way up the ramp.  This done, even if the enemy
should succeed in forcing an entrance he would only find himself caught
in a trap--in a steep, narrow way exposed to a fire from the top of the
flanking walls, as well as from the front.  We had a couple of
culverins, which the Vicomte had got twenty years before, at the time
of the battle of St. Quentin.  We fixed one of these at the head of the
ramp, and placed the other on the terrace, where by moving it a few
paces forward we could train it on Bezers' house, which thus lay at our
mercy.

Not that we really expected an attack.  But we did not know what to
expect or what to fear.  We had not ten servants, the Vicomte having
taken a score of the sturdiest lackeys and keepers to attend him at
Bayonne.  And we felt immensely responsible.  Our main hope was that
the Vidame would at once go on to Paris, and postpone his vengeance.
So again and again we cast longing glances at the House of the Wolf
hoping that each symptom of bustle heralded his departure.

Consequently it was a shock to me, and a great downfall of hopes, when
Gil with a grave face came to me on the terrace and announced that M.
le Vidame was at the gate, asking to see Mademoiselle.

"It is out of the question that he should see her," the old servant
added, scratching his head in grave perplexity.

"Most certainly.  I will see him instead," I answered stoutly. "Do you
leave Francis and another at the gate, Gil.  Marie, keep within sight,
lad.  And let Croisette stay with me."

These preparations made--and they took up scarcely a moment--I met the
Vidame at the head of the ramp.  "Mademoiselle de Caylus," I said,
bowing, "is, I regret to say, indisposed to-day, Vidame."

"She will not see me?"  he asked, eyeing me very unpleasantly.

"Her indisposition deprives her of the pleasure," I answered with an
effort.  He was certainly a wonderful man, for at sight of him,
three-fourths of my courage, and all my importance, oozed out at the
heels of my boots.

"She will not see me.  Very well," he replied, as if I had not spoken.
And the simple words sounded like a sentence of death. "Then, M. Anne,
I have a crow to pick with you.  What compensation do you propose to
make for the death of my servant? A decent, quiet fellow, whom you
killed yesterday, poor man, because his enthusiasm for the true faith
carried him away a little."

"Whom I killed because he drew a dagger on M. St. Croix de Caylus at
the Vicomte's gate," I answered steadily.  I had thought about this of
course and was ready for it.  "You are aware, M. de Bezers," I
continued, "that the Vicomte has jurisdiction extending to life and
death over all persons within the valley?"

"My household excepted," he rejoined quietly.

"Precisely; while they are within the curtilage of your house," I
retorted.  "However as the punishment was summary, and the man had no
time to confess himself, I am willing to--"

"Well?"

"To pay Father Pierre to say ten masses for his soul."

The way the Vidame received this surprised me.  He broke into
boisterous laughter.  "By our Lady, my friend," he cried with rough
merriment, "but you are a joker!  You are indeed.  Masses? Why the man
was a Protestant!"

And that startled me more than anything which had gone before; more
indeed than I can explain.  For it seemed to prove that this man,
laughing his unholy laugh was not like other men.  He did not pick and
choose his servants for their religion.  He was sure that the Huguenot
would stone his fellow at his bidding; the Catholic cry "Vive Coligny!"
I was so completely taken aback that I found no words to answer him,
and it was Croisette who said smartly, "Then how about his enthusiasm
for the true faith, M. le Vidame?"

"The true faith," he answered--"for my servants is my faith." Then a
thought seemed to strike him.  "What is more."  he continued slowly,
"that it is the true and only faith for all, thousands will learn
before the world is ten days older.  Bear my words in mind, boy!  They
will come back to you.  And now hear me," he went on in his usual tone,
"I am anxious to accommodate a neighbour.  It goes without saying that
I would not think of putting you, M. Anne, to any trouble for the sake
of that rascal of mine.  But my people will expect something.  Let the
plaguy fellow who caused all this disturbance be given up to me, that I
may hang him; and let us cry quits."

"That is impossible!"  I answered coolly.  I had no need to ask what he
meant.  Give up Pavannes' messenger indeed!  Never!

He regarded me--unmoved by my refusal--with a smile under which I
chafed, while I was impotent to resent it.  "Do not build too much on a
single blow, young gentleman," he said, shaking his head waggishly.  "I
had fought a dozen times when I was your age. However, I understand
that you refuse to give me satisfaction?"

"In the mode you mention, certainly," I replied.  "But--"

"Bah!"  he exclaimed with a sneer, "business first and pleasure
afterwards!  Bezers will obtain satisfaction in his own way, I promise
you that!  And at his own time.  And it will not be on unfledged
bantlings like you.  But what is this for?"  And he rudely kicked the
culverin which apparently he had not noticed before, "So!  so!
understand," he continued, casting a sharp glance at one and another of
us.  "You looked to be besieged! Why you, booby, there is the shoot of
your kitchen midden, twenty feet above the roof of old Fretis' store!
And open, I will be sworn!  Do you think that I should have come this
way while there was a ladder in Caylus!  Did you take the wolf for a
sheep?"

With that he turned on his heel, swaggering away in the full enjoyment
of his triumph.  For a triumph it was.  We stood stunned; ashamed to
look one another in the face.  Of course the shoot was open.  We
remembered now that it was, and we were so sorely mortified by his
knowledge and our folly, that I failed in my courtesy, and did not see
him to the gate, as I should have done.  We paid for that later.

"He is the devil in person!"  I exclaimed angrily, shaking my fist at
the House of the Wolf, as I strode up and down impatiently.  "I hate
him worse!"

"So do I!"  said Croisette, mildly.  "But that he hates us is a matter
of more importance.  At any rate we will close the shoot."

"Wait a moment!"  I replied, as after another volley of complaints
directed at our visitor, the lad was moving off to see to it. "What is
going on down there?"

"Upon my word, I believe he is leaving us!"  Croisette rejoined sharply.

For there was a noise of hoofs below us, clattering on the pavement.
Half-a-dozen horsemen were issuing from the House of the Wolf, the ring
of their bridles and the sound of their careless voices coming up to us
through the clear morning air Bezers' valet, whom we knew by sight, was
the last of them.  He had a pair of great saddle-bags before him, and
at sight of these we uttered a glad exclamation.  "He is going!"  I
murmured, hardly able to believe my eyes.  "He is going after all!"

"Wait!"  Croisette answered drily.

But I was right.  We had not to wait long.  He WAS going.  In another
moment he came out himself, riding a strong iron-grey horse:  and we
could see that he had holsters to his saddle.  His steward was running
beside him, to take I suppose his last orders.  A cripple, whom the
bustle had attracted from his usual haunt, the church porch, held up
his hand for alms.  The Vidame as he passed, cut him savagely across
the face with his whip, and cursed him audibly.

"May the devil take him!"  exclaimed Croisette in just rage.  But I
said nothing, remembering that the cripple was a particular pet of
Catherine's.  I thought instead of an occasion, not so very long ago,
when the Vicomte being at home, we had had a great hawking party.
Bezers and Catherine had ridden up the street together, and Catherine
giving the cripple a piece of money, Bezers had flung to him all his
share of the game.  And my heart sank.

Only for a moment, however.  The man was gone; or was going at any
rate.  We stood silent and motionless, all watching, until, after what
seemed a long interval, the little party of seven became visible on the
white road far below us--to the northward, and moving in that
direction.  Still we watched them, muttering a word to one another, now
and again, until presently the riders slackened their pace, and began
to ascend the winding track that led to the hills and Cahors; and to
Paris also, if one went far enough.

Then at length with a loud "Whoop!"  we dashed across the terrace,
Croisette leading, and so through the courtyard to the parlour; where
we arrived breathless.  "He is off!"  Croisette cried shrilly.  "He has
started for Paris!  And bad luck go with him!"  And we all flung up our
caps and shouted.

But no answer, such as we expected, came from the women folk. When we
picked up our caps, and looked at Catherine, feeling rather foolish,
she was staring at us with a white face and great scornful eyes.
"Fools!"  she said.  "Fools!"

And that was all.  But it was enough to take me aback.  I had looked to
see her face lighten at our news; instead it wore an expression I had
never seen on it before.  Catherine, so kind and gentle, calling us
fools!  And without cause!  I did not understand it.  I turned
confusedly to Croisette.  He was looking at her, and I saw that he was
frightened.  As for Madame Claude, she was crying in the corner.  A
presentiment of evil made my heart sink like lead.  What had happened?

"Fools!"  my cousin repeated with exceeding bitterness, her foot
tapping the parquet unceasingly.  "Do you think he would have stooped
to avenge himself on YOU?  On you!  Or that he could hurt me one
hundredth part as much here as--as--"  She broke off stammering.  Her
scorn faltered for an instant.  "Bah!  he is a man!  He knows!"  she
exclaimed superbly, her chin in the air, "but you are boys.  You do not
understand!"

I looked amazedly at this angry woman.  I had a difficulty in
associating her with my cousin.  As for Croisette, he stepped forward
abruptly, and picked up a white object which was lying at her feet.

"Yes, read it!"  she cried, "read it!  Ah!"  and she clenched her
little hand, and in her passion struck the oak table beside her, so
that a stain of blood sprang out on her knuckles.  "Why did you not
kill him?  Why did you not do it when you had the chance? You were
three to one," she hissed.  "You had him in your power! You could have
killed him, and you did not!  Now he will kill me!"

Madame Claude muttered something tearfully; something about Pavannes
and the saints.  I looked over Croisette's shoulder, and read the
letter.  It began abruptly without any term of address, and ran thus,
"I have a mission in Paris, Mademoiselle, which admits of no delay,
your mission, as well as my own--to see Pavannes.  You have won his
heart.  It is yours, and I will bring it you, or his right hand in
token that he has yielded up his claim to yours.  And to this I pledge
myself."

The thing bore no signature.  It was written in some red fluid--blood
perhaps--a mean and sorry trick!  On the outside was scrawled a
direction to Mademoiselle de Caylus.  And the packet was sealed with
the Vidame's crest, a wolf's head.

"The coward!  the miserable coward!"  Croisette cried.  He was the
first to read the meaning of the thing.  And his eyes were full of
tears--tears of rage.

For me I was angry exceedingly.  My veins seemed full of fire, as I
comprehended the mean cruelty which could thus torture a girl.

"Who delivered this?"  I thundered.  "Who gave it to Mademoiselle? How
did it reach her hands?  Speak, some one!"

A maid, whimpering in the background, said that Francis had given it to
her to hand to Mademoiselle.

I ground my teeth together, while Marie, unbidden, left the room to
seek Francis--and a stirrup leather.  The Vidame had brought the note
in his pocket no doubt, rightly expecting that he would not get an
audience of my cousin.  Returning to the gate alone he had seen his
opportunity, and given the note to Francis, probably with a small fee
to secure its transmission.

Croisette and I looked at one another, apprehending all this. "He will
sleep at Cahors to-night," I said sullenly.

The lad shook his head and answered in a low voice, "I am afraid not.
His horses are fresh.  I think he will push on.  He always travels
quickly.  And now you know--"

I nodded, understanding only too well.

Catherine had flung herself into a chair.  Her arms lay nerveless on
the table.  Her face was hidden in them.  But now, overhearing us, or
stung by some fresh thought, she sprang to her feet in anguish.  Her
face twitched, her form seemed to stiffen as she drew herself up like
one in physical pain.  "Oh, I cannot bear it!"  she cried to us in
dreadful tones.  "Oh, will no one do anything?  I will go to him!  I
will tell him I will give him up! I will do whatever he wishes if he
will only spare him!"

Croisette went from the room crying.  It was a dreadful sight for
us--this girl in agony.  And it was impossible to reassure her! Not one
of us doubted the horrible meaning of the note, its covert threat.
Civil wars and religious hatred, and I fancy Italian modes of thought,
had for the time changed our countrymen to beasts.  Far more dreadful
things were done then than this which Bezers threatened--even if he
meant it literally--far more dreadful things were suffered.  But in the
fiendish ingenuity of his vengeance on her, the helpless, loving woman,
I thought Raoul de Bezers stood alone.  Alas!  it fares ill with the
butterfly when the cat has struck it down.  Ill indeed!

Madame Claude rose and put her arms round the girl, dismissing me by a
gesture.  I went out, passing through two or three scared servants, and
made at once for the terrace.  I felt as if I could only breathe there.
I found Marie and St. Croix together, silent, the marks of tears on
their faces.  Our eyes met and they told one tale.

We all spoke at the same time.  "When?"  we said.  But the others
looked to me for an answer.

I was somewhat sobered by that, and paused to consider before I
replied.  "At daybreak to-morrow," I decided presently.  "It is an hour
after noon already.  We want money, and the horses are out.  It will
take an hour to bring them in.  After that we might still reach Cahors
to-night, perhaps; but more haste less speed you know.  At daybreak
to-morrow we will start."

They nodded assent.

It was a great thing we meditated.  No less than to go to Paris--the
unknown city so far beyond the hills--and seek out M. de Pavannes, and
warn him.  It would be a race between the Vidame and ourselves; a race
for the life of Kit's suitor.  Could we reach Paris first, or even
within twenty-four hours of Bezers' arrival, we should in all
probability be in time, and be able to put Pavannes on his guard.  It
had been the first thought of all of us, to take such men as we could
get together and fall upon Bezers wherever we found him, making it our
simple object to kill him.  But the lackeys M. le Vicomte had left with
us, the times being peaceful and the neighbours friendly, were
poor-spirited fellows.  Bezers' handful, on the contrary, were reckless
Swiss riders--like master, like men.  We decided that it would be wiser
simply to warn Pavannes, and then stand by him if necessary.

We might have despatched a messenger.  But our servants--Gil excepted,
and he was too old to bear the journey--were ignorant of Paris.  Nor
could any one of them be trusted with a mission so delicate.  We
thought of Pavannes' courier indeed.  But he was a Rochellois, and a
stranger to the capital.  There was nothing for it but to go ourselves.

Yet we did not determine on this adventure with light hearts, I
remember.  Paris loomed big and awesome in the eyes of all of us. The
glamour of the court rather frightened than allured us.  We felt that
shrinking from contact with the world which a country life engenders,
as well as that dread of seeming unlike other people which is peculiar
to youth.  It was a great plunge, and a dangerous which we meditated.
And we trembled.  If we had known more--especially of the future--we
should have trembled more.

But we were young, and with our fears mingled a delicious excitement.
We were going on an adventure of knight errantry in which we might win
our spurs.  We were going to see the world and play men's parts in it!
to save a friend and make our mistress happy!

We gave our orders.  But we said nothing to Catherine or Madame Claude;
merely bidding Gil tell them after our departure.  We arranged for the
immediate despatch of a message to the Vicomte at Bayonne, and charged
Gil until he should hear from him to keep the gates closed, and look
well to the shoot of the kitchen midden.  Then, when all was ready, we
went to our pallets, but it was with hearts throbbing with excitement
and wakeful eyes.

"Anne!  Anne!"  said Croisette, rising on his elbow and speaking to me
some three hours later, "what do you think the Vidame meant this
morning when he said that about the ten days?"

"What about the ten days?"  I asked peevishly.  He had roused me just
when I was at last falling asleep.

"About the world seeing that his was the true faith--in ten days?"

"I am sure I do not know.  For goodness' sake let us go to sleep," I
replied.  For I had no patience with Croisette, talking such nonsense,
when we had our own business to think about.



CHAPTER III.

THE ROAD TO PARIS.

The sun had not yet risen above the hills when we three with a single
servant behind us drew rein at the end of the valley; and easing our
horses on the ascent, turned in the saddle to take a last look at
Caylus--at the huddled grey town, and the towers above it.  A little
thoughtful we all were, I think.  The times were rough and our errand
was serious.  But youth and early morning are fine dispellers of care;
and once on the uplands we trotted gaily forward, now passing through
wide glades in the sparse oak forest, where the trees all leaned one
way, now over bare, wind-swept downs; or once and again descending into
a chalky bottom, where the stream bubbled through deep beds of fern,
and a lonely farmhouse nestled amid orchards.

Four hours' riding, and we saw below us Cahors, filling the bend of the
river.  We cantered over the Vallandre Bridge, which there crosses the
Lot, and so to my uncle's house of call in the square.  Here we ordered
breakfast, and announced with pride that we were going to Paris.

Our host raised his hands.  "Now there!"  he exclaimed, regret in his
voice.  "And if you had arrived yesterday you could have travelled up
with the Vidame de Bezers!  And you a small party--saving your
lordships' presence--and the roads but so-so!"

"But the Vidame was riding with only half-a-dozen attendants also!"  I
answered, flicking my boot in a careless way.

The landlord shook his head.  "Ah, M. le Vidame knows the world!" he
answered shrewdly.  "He is not to be taken off his guard, not he!  One
of his men whispered me that twenty staunch fellows would join him at
Chateauroux.  They say the wars are over, but"--and the good man,
shrugging his shoulders, cast an expressive glance at some fine
flitches of bacon which were hanging in his chimney. "However, your
lordships know better than I do," he added briskly.  "I am a poor man.
I only wish to live at peace with my neighbours, whether they go to
mass or sermon."

This was a sentiment so common in those days and so heartily echoed by
most men of substance both in town and country, that we did not stay to
assent to it; but having received from the worthy fellow a token which
would insure our obtaining fresh cattle at Limoges, we took to the road
again, refreshed in body, and with some food for thought.

Five-and-twenty attendants were more than even such a man as Bezers,
who had many enemies, travelled with in those days; unless accompanied
by ladies.  That the Vidame had provided such a reinforcement seemed to
point to a wider scheme than the one with which we had credited him.
But we could not guess what his plans were; since he must have ordered
his people before he heard of Catherine's engagement.  Either his
jealousy therefore had put him on the alert earlier, or his threatened
attack on Pavannes was only part of a larger plot.  In either case our
errand seemed more urgent, but scarcely more hopeful.

The varied sights and sounds however of the road--many of them new to
us--kept us from dwelling over much on this.  Our eyes were young, and
whether it was a pretty girl lingering behind a troop of gipsies, or a
pair of strollers from Valencia--JONGLEURS they still called
themselves--singing in the old dialect of Provence, or a Norman
horse-dealer with his string of cattle tied head and tail, or the Puy
de Dome to the eastward over the Auvergne hills, or a tattered old
soldier wounded in the wars--fighting for either side, according as
their lordships inclined--we were pleased with all.

Yet we never forgot our errand.  We never I think rose in the
morning--too often stiff and sore--without thinking "To-day or
to-morrow or the next day--" as the case might be--"we shall make all
right for Kit!"  For Kit!  Perhaps it was the purest enthusiasm we were
ever to feel, the least selfish aim we were ever to pursue.  For Kit!

Meanwhile we met few travellers of rank on the road.  Half the nobility
of France were still in Paris enjoying the festivities which were being
held to mark the royal marriage.  We obtained horses where we needed
them without difficulty.  And though we had heard much of the dangers
of the way, infested as it was said to be by disbanded troopers, we
were not once stopped or annoyed.

But it is not my intention to chronicle all the events of this my first
journey, though I dwell on them with pleasure; or to say what I thought
of the towns, all new and strange to me, through which we passed.
Enough that we went by way of Limoges, Chateauroux and Orleans, and
that at Chateauroux we learned the failure of one hope we had formed.
We had thought that Bezers when joined there by his troopers would not
be able to get relays; and that on this account we might by travelling
post overtake him; and possibly slip by him between that place and
Paris.  But we learned at Chateauroux that his troop had received fresh
orders to go to Orleans and await him there; the result being that he
was able to push forward with relays so far.  He was evidently in hot
haste.  For leaving there with his horses fresh he passed through
Angerville, forty miles short of Paris, at noon, whereas we reached it
on the evening of the same day--the sixth after leaving Caylus.

We rode into the yard of the inn--a large place, seeming larger in the
dusk--so tired that we could scarcely slip from our saddles.  Jean, our
servant, took the four horses, and led them across to the stables, the
poor beasts hanging their heads, and following meekly.  We stood a
moment stamping our feet, and stretching our legs.  The place seemed in
a bustle, the clatter of pans and dishes proceeding from the windows
over the entrance, with a glow of light and the sound of feet hurrying
in the passages.  There were men too, half-a-dozen or so standing at
the doors of the stables, while others leaned from the windows.  One or
two lanthorns just kindled glimmered here and there in the
semi-darkness; and in a corner two smiths were shoeing a horse.

We were turning from all this to go in, when we heard Jean's voice
raised in altercation, and thinking our rustic servant had fallen into
trouble, we walked across to the stables near which he and the horses
were still lingering.  "Well, what is it?"  I said sharply.

"They say that there is no room for the horses," Jean answered
querulously, scratching his head; half sullen, half cowed, a country
servant all over.

"And there is not!"  cried the foremost of the gang about the door,
hastening to confront us in turn.  His tone was insolent, and it needed
but half an eye to see that his fellows were inclined to back him up.
He stuck his arms akimbo and faced us with an impudent smile.  A
lanthorn on the ground beside him throwing an uncertain light on the
group, I saw that they all wore the same badge.

"Come," I said sternly, "the stables are large, and your horses cannot
fill them.  Some room must be found for mine."

"To be sure!  Make way for the king!"  he retorted.  While one jeered
"VIVE LE ROI!"  and the rest laughed.  Not good-humouredly, but with a
touch of spitefulness.

Quarrels between gentlemen's servants were as common then as they are
to-day.  But the masters seldom condescended to interfere. "Let the
fellows fight it out," was the general sentiment.  Here, however, poor
Jean was over-matched, and we had no choice but to see to it ourselves.

"Come, men, have a care that you do not get into trouble," I urged,
restraining Croisette by a touch, for I by no means wished to have a
repetition of the catastrophe which had happened at Caylus.  "These
horses belong to the Vicomte de Caylus.  If your master be a friend of
his, as may very probably be the case, you will run the risk of getting
into trouble."

I thought I heard, as I stopped speaking, a subdued muttering, and
fancied I caught the words, "PAPEGOT!  Down with the Guises!" But the
spokesman's only answer aloud was "Cock-a-doodle-doo!"
"Cock-a-doodle-doo!"  he repeated, flapping his arms in defiance. "Here
is a cock of a fine hackle!"  And so on, and so forth, while he turned
grinning to his companions, looking for their applause.

I was itching to chastise him, and yet hesitating, lest the thing
should have its serious side, when a new actor appeared.  "Shame, you
brutes!"  cried a shrill voice above us in the clouds it seemed.  I
looked up, and saw two girls, coarse and handsome, standing at a window
over the stable, a light between them.  "For shame!  Don't you see that
they are mere children?  Let them be," cried one.

The men laughed louder than ever; and for me, I could not stand by and
be called a child.  "Come here," I said, beckoning to the man in the
doorway.  "Come here, you rascal, and I will give you the thrashing you
deserve for speaking to a gentleman!"

He lounged forward, a heavy fellow, taller than myself and six inches
wider at the shoulders.  My heart failed me a little as I measured him.
But the thing had to be done.  If I was slight, I was wiry as a hound,
and in the excitement had forgotten my fatigue.  I snatched from Marie
a loaded riding-whip he carried, and stepped forward.

"Have a care, little man!"  cried the girl gaily--yet half in pity, I
think.  "Or that fat pig will kill you!"

My antagonist did not join in the laugh this time.  Indeed it struck me
that his eye wandered and that he was not so ready to enter the ring as
his mates were to form it.  But before I could try his mettle, a hand
was laid on my shoulder.  A man appearing from I do not know
where--from the dark fringe of the group, I suppose--pushed me aside,
roughly, but not discourteously.

"Leave this to me!"  he said, coolly stepping before me.  "Do not dirty
your hands with the knave, master.  I am pining for work and the job
will just suit me!  I will fit him for the worms before the nuns above
can say an AVE!"

I looked at the newcomer.  He was a stout fellow; not over tall, nor
over big; swarthy, with prominent features.  The plume of his bonnet
was broken, but he wore it in a rakish fashion; and altogether he
swaggered with so dare-devil an air, clinking his spurs and swinging
out his long sword recklessly, that it was no wonder three or four of
the nearest fellows gave back a foot.

"Come on!"  he cried, boisterously, forming a ring by the simple
process of sweeping his blade from side to side, while he made the
dagger in his left hand flash round his head.  "Who is for the game?
Who will strike a blow for the little Admiral?  Will you come one, two,
three at once; or all together?  Anyway, come on, you--" And he closed
his challenge with a volley of frightful oaths, directed at the group
opposite.

"It is no quarrel of yours," said the big man, sulkily; making no show
of drawing his sword, but rather drawing back himself.

"All quarrels are my quarrels!  and no quarrels are your quarrels. That
is about the truth, I fancy!"  was the smart retort; which our champion
rendered more emphatic by a playful lunge that caused the big bully to
skip again.

There was a loud laugh at this, even among the enemy's backers. "Bah,
the great pig!"  ejaculated the girl above.  "Spit him!" and she spat
down on the whilom Hector--who made no great figure now.

"Shall I bring you a slice of him, my dear?"  asked my rakehelly
friend, looking up and making his sword play round the shrinking
wretch.  "Just a tit-bit, my love?"  he added persuasively.  "A
mouthful of white liver and caper sauce?"

"Not for me, the beast!"  the girl cried, amid the laughter of the yard.

"Not a bit?  If I warrant him tender?  Ladies' meat?"

"Bah!  no!"  and she stolidly spat down again.

"Do you hear?  The lady has no taste for you," the tormentor cried.
"Pig of a Gascon!"  And deftly sheathing his dagger, he seized the big
coward by the ear, and turning him round, gave him a heavy kick which
sent him spinning over a bucket, and down against the wall.  There the
bully remained, swearing and rubbing himself by turns; while the victor
cried boastfully, "Enough of him.  If anyone wants to take up his
quarrel, Blaise Bure is his man.  If not, let us have an end of it.
Let someone find stalls for the gentlemen's horses before they catch a
chill; and have done with it.  As for me," he added, and then he turned
to us and removed his hat with an exaggerated flourish, "I am your
lordship's servant to command."

I thanked him with a heartiness, half-earnest, half-assumed.  His cloak
was ragged, his trunk hose, which had once been fine enough, were
stained, and almost pointless, He swaggered inimitably, and had
led-captain written large upon him.  But he had done us a service, for
Jean had no further trouble about the horses.  And besides one has a
natural liking for a brave man, and this man was brave beyond question.

"You are from Orleans," he said respectfully enough, but as one
asserting a fact, not asking a question.

"Yes," I answered, somewhat astonished, "Did you see us come in?"

"No, but I looked at your boots, gentlemen," he replied.  "White dust,
north; red dust, south.  Do you see?"

"Yes, I see," I said, with admiration.  "You must have been brought up
in a sharp school, M. Bure."

"Sharp masters make sharp scholars," he replied, grinning.  And that
answer I had occasion to remember afterwards.

"You are from Orleans, also?"  I asked, as we prepared to go in.

"Yes, from Orleans too, gentlemen.  But earlier in the day.  With
letters--letters of importance!"  And bestowing something like a wink
of confidence on us, he drew himself up, looked sternly at the
stable-folk, patted himself twice on the chest, and finally twirled his
moustaches, and smirked at the girl above, who was chewing straws.

I thought it likely enough that we might find it hard to get rid of
him.  But this was not so.  After listening with gratification to our
repeated thanks, he bowed with the same grotesque flourish, and marched
off as grave as a Spaniard, humming--

  "Ce petit homme tant joli!
  Qui toujours cause et toujours rit,
  Qui toujours baise sa mignonne,
  Dieu gard' de mal ce petit homme!"

On our going in, the landlord met us politely, but with curiosity, and
a simmering of excitement also in his manner. "From Paris, my lords?"
he asked, rubbing his hands and bowing low.  "Or from the south?"

"From the south," I answered.  "From Orleans, and hungry and tired,
Master Host."

"Ah!"  he replied, disregarding the latter part of my answer, while his
little eyes twinkled with satisfaction.  "Then I dare swear, my lords,
you have not heard the news?"  He halted in the narrow passage, and
lifting the candle he carried, scanned our faces closely, as if he
wished to learn something about us before he spoke.

"News!"  I answered brusquely, being both tired, and as I had told him,
hungry.  "We have heard none, and the best you can give us will be that
our supper is ready to be served."

But even this snub did not check his eagerness to tell his news. "The
Admiral de Coligny," he said, breathlessly, "you have not heard what
has happened to him?"

"To the admiral?  No, what?"  I inquired rapidly.  I was interested at
last.

For a moment let me digress.  The few of my age will remember, and the
many younger will have been told, that at this time the Italian
queen-mother was the ruling power in France.  It was Catharine de'
Medici's first object to maintain her influence over Charles the
Ninth--her son; who, ricketty, weak, and passionate, was already doomed
to an early grave.  Her second, to support the royal power by balancing
the extreme Catholics against the Huguenots.  For the latter purpose
she would coquet first with one party, then with the other.  At the
present moment she had committed herself more deeply than was her wont
to the Huguenots.  Their leaders, the Admiral Gaspard de Coligny, the
King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, were supposed to be high in
favour, while the chiefs of the other party, the Duke of Guise, and the
two Cardinals of his house, the Cardinal of Lorraine and the Cardinal
of Guise, were in disgrace; which, as it seemed, even their friend at
court, the queen's favourite son, Henry of Anjou, was unable to
overcome.

Such was the outward aspect of things in August, 1572, but there were
not wanting rumours that already Coligny, taking advantage of the
footing given him, had gained an influence over the young king, which
threatened Catharine de' Medici herself.  The admiral, therefore, to
whom the Huguenot half of France had long looked as to its leader, was
now the object of the closest interest to all; the Guise faction,
hating him--as the alleged assassin of the Duke of Guise--with an
intensity which probably was not to be found in the affection of his
friends, popular with the latter as he was.

Still, many who were not Huguenots had a regard for him as a great
Frenchman and a gallant soldier.  We--though we were of the old faith,
and the other side--had heard much of him, and much good.  The Vicomte
had spoken of him always as a great man, a man mistaken, but brave,
honest and capable in his error.  Therefore it was that when the
landlord mentioned him, I forgot even my hunger.

"He was shot, my lords, as he passed through the Rue des Fosses,
yesterday," the man declared with bated breath.  "It is not known
whether he will live or die.  Paris is in an uproar, and there are some
who fear the worst."

"But," I said doubtfully, "who has dared to do this?  He had a safe
conduct from the king himself."

Our host did not answer; shrugging his shoulders instead, he opened the
door, and ushered us into the eating-room.

Some preparations for our meal had already been made at one end of the
long board.  At the other was seated a man past middle age; richly but
simply dressed.  His grey hair, cut short about a massive head, and his
grave, resolute face, square-jawed, and deeply-lined, marked him as one
to whom respect was due apart from his clothes.  We bowed to him as we
took our seats.

He acknowledged the salute, fixing us a moment with a penetrating
glance; and then resumed his meal.  I noticed that his sword and belt
were propped against a chair at his elbow, and a dag, apparently
loaded, lay close to his hand by the candlestick.  Two lackeys waited
behind his chair, wearing the badge we had remarked in the inn yard.

We began to talk, speaking in low tones that we might not disturb him.
The attack on Coligny had, if true, its bearing on our own business.
For if a Huguenot so great and famous and enjoying the king's special
favour still went in Paris in danger of his life, what must be the risk
that such an one as Pavannes ran?  We had hoped to find the city quiet.
If instead it should be in a state of turmoil Bezers' chances were so
much the better; and ours--and Kit's, poor Kit's--so much the worse.

Our companion had by this time finished his supper.  But he still sat
at table, and seemed to be regarding us with some curiosity. At length
he spoke.  "Are you going to Paris, young gentlemen?" he asked, his
tone harsh and high-pitched.

We answered in the affirmative.  "To-morrow?"  he questioned.

"Yes," we answered; and expected him to continue the conversation.  But
instead he became silent, gazing abstractedly at the table; and what
with our meal, and our own talk we had almost forgotten him again, when
looking up, I found him at my elbow, holding out in silence a small
piece of paper.

I started his face was so grave.  But seeing that there were
half-a-dozen guests of a meaner sort at another table close by, I
guessed that he merely wished to make a private communication to us;
and hastened to take the paper and read it.  It contained a scrawl of
four words only--

  "Va chasser l'Idole."

No more.  I looked at him puzzled; able to make nothing out of it.  St.
Croix wrinkled his brow over it with the same result. It was no good
handing it to Marie, therefore.

"You do not understand?"  the stranger continued, as he put the scrap
of paper back in his pouch.

"No," I answered, shaking my head.  We had all risen out of respect to
him, and were standing a little group about him.

"Just so; it is all right then," he answered, looking at us as it
seemed to me with grave good-nature.  "It is nothing.  Go your way.
But--I have a son yonder not much younger than you, young gentlemen.
And if you had understood, I should have said to you, 'Do not go!
There are enough sheep for the shearer!'"

He was turning away with this oracular saying when Croisette touched
his sleeve.  "Pray can you tell us if it be true," the lad said
eagerly, "that the Admiral de Coligny was wounded yesterday?"

"It is true," the other answered, turning his grave eyes on his
questioner, while for a moment his stern look failed him, "It is true,
my boy," he added with an air of strange solemnity.  "Whom the Lord
loveth, He chasteneth.  And, God forgive me for saying it, whom He
would destroy, He first maketh mad."

He had gazed with peculiar favour at Croisette's girlish face, I
thought:  Marie and I were dark and ugly by the side of the boy. But he
turned from him now with a queer, excited gesture, thumping his
gold-headed cane on the floor.  He called his servants in a loud,
rasping voice, and left the room in seeming anger, driving them before
him, the one carrying his dag, and the other, two candles.

When I came down early next morning, the first person I met was Blaise
Bure.  He looked rather fiercer and more shabby by daylight than
candlelight.  But he saluted me respectfully; and this, since it was
clear that he did not respect many people, inclined me to regard him
with favour.  It is always so, the more savage the dog, the more highly
we prize its attentions.  I asked him who the Huguenot noble was who
had supped with us.  For a Huguenot we knew he must be.

"The Baron de Rosny," he answered; adding with a sneer, "He is a
careful man!  If they were all like him, with eyes on both sides of his
head and a dag by his candle--well, my lord, there would be one more
king in France--or one less!  But they are a blind lot:  as blind as
bats."  He muttered something farther in which I caught the word
"to-night."  But I did not hear it all; or understand any of it.

"Your lordships are going to Paris?"  he resumed in a different tone.
When I said that we were, he looked at me in a shamefaced way, half
timid, half arrogant.  "I have a small favour to ask of you then," he
said.  "I am going to Paris myself.  I am not afraid of odds, as you
have seen.  But the roads will be in a queer state if there be anything
on foot in the city, and--well, I would rather ride with you gentlemen
than alone."

"You are welcome to join us," I said.  "But we start in half-an-hour.
Do you know Paris well?"

"As well as my sword-hilt," he replied briskly, relieved I thought by
my acquiescence, "And I have known that from my breeching.  If you want
a game at PAUME, or a pretty girl to kiss, I can put you in the way for
the one or the other."

The half rustic shrinking from the great city which I felt, suggested
to me that our swashbuckling friend might help us if he would.  "Do you
know M. de Pavannes?"  I asked impulsively, "Where he lives in Paris, I
mean?"

"M. Louis de Pavannes?"  quoth he.

"Yes."

"I know--" he replied slowly, rubbing his chin and looking at the
ground in thought--"where he had his lodgings in town a while ago,
before--Ah!  I do know!  I remember," he added, slapping his thigh,
"when I was in Paris a fortnight ago I was told that his steward had
taken lodgings for him in the Rue St. Antoine."

"Good!"  I answered overjoyed.  "Then we want to dismount there, if you
can guide us straight to the house."

"I can," he replied simply.  "And you will not be the worse for my
company.  Paris is a queer place when there is trouble to the fore, but
your lordships have got the right man to pilot you through it."

I did not ask him what trouble he meant, but ran indoors to buckle on
my sword, and tell Marie and Croisette of the ally I had secured.  They
were much pleased, as was natural; so that we took the road in
excellent spirits intending to reach the city in the afternoon.  But
Marie's horse cast a shoe, and it was some time before we could find a
smith.  Then at Etampes, where we stopped to lunch, we were kept an
unconscionable time waiting for it.  And so we approached Paris for the
first time at sunset.  A ruddy glow was at the moment warming the
eastern heights, and picking out with flame the twin towers of Notre
Dame, and the one tall tower of St. Jacques la Boucherie.  A dozen
roofs higher than their neighbours shone hotly; and a great bank of
cloud, which lay north and south, and looked like a man's hand
stretched over the city, changed gradually from blood-red to violet,
and from violet to black, as evening fell.

Passing within the gates and across first one bridge and then another,
we were astonished and utterly confused by the noise and hubbub through
which we rode.  Hundreds seemed to be moving this way and that in the
narrow streets.  Women screamed to one another from window to window.
The bells of half-a-dozen churches rang the curfew.  Our country ears
were deafened.  Still our eyes had leisure to take in the tall houses
with their high-pitched roofs, and here and there a tower built into
the wall; the quaint churches, and the groups of townsfolk--sullen
fellows some of them with a fierce gleam in their eyes--who, standing
in the mouths of reeking alleys, watched us go by.

But presently we had to stop.  A crowd had gathered to watch a little
cavalcade of six gentlemen pass across our path.  They were riding two
and two, lounging in their saddles and chattering to one another,
disdainfully unconscious of the people about them, or the remarks they
excited.  Their graceful bearing and the richness of their dress and
equipment surpassed anything I had ever seen.  A dozen pages and
lackeys were attending them on foot, and the sound of their jests and
laughter came to us over the heads of the crowd.

While I was gazing at them, some movement of the throng drove back
Bure's horse against mine.  Bure himself uttered a savage oath;
uncalled for so far as I could see.  But my attention was arrested the
next moment by Croisette, who tapped my arm with his riding whip.
"Look!"  he cried in some excitement, "is not that he?"

I followed the direction of the lad's finger--as well as I could for
the plunging of my horse which Bure's had frightened--and scrutinized
the last pair of the troop.  They were crossing the street in which we
stood, and I had only a side view of them; or rather of the nearer
rider.  He was a singularly handsome man, in age about twenty-two or
twenty-three with long lovelocks falling on his lace collar and cloak
of orange silk.  His face was sweet and kindly and gracious to a
marvel.  But he was a stranger to me.

"I could have sworn," exclaimed Croisette, "that that was Louis
himself--M. de Pavannes!"

"That?"  I answered, as we began to move again, the crowd melting
before us.  "Oh, dear, no!"

"No!  no!  The farther man!"  he explained.

But I had not been able to get a good look at the farther of the two.
We turned in our saddles and peered after him.  His back in the dusk
certainly reminded me of Louis.  Bure, however, who said he knew M. de
Pavannes by sight, laughed at the idea.  "Your friend," he said, "is a
wider man than that!"  And I thought he was right there--but then it
might be the cut of the clothes. "They have been at the Louvre playing
paume, I'll be sworn!"  he went on.  "So the Admiral must be better.
The one next us was M. de Teligny, the Admiral's son-in-law.  And the
other, whom you mean, was the Comte de la Rochefoucault."

We turned as he spoke into a narrow street near the river, and could
see not far from us a mass of dark buildings which Bure told us was the
Louvre--the king's residence.  Out of this street we turned into a
short one; and here Bure drew rein and rapped loudly at some heavy
gates.  It was so dark that when, these being opened, he led the way
into a courtyard, we could see little more than a tall, sharp-gabled
house, projecting over us against a pale sky; and a group of men and
horses in one corner. Bure spoke to one of the men, and begging us to
dismount, said the footman would show us to M. de Pavannes.

The thought that we were at the end of our long journey, and in time to
warn Louis of his danger, made us forget all our exertions, our fatigue
and stiffness.  Gladly throwing the bridles to Jean we ran up the steps
after the servant.  The thing was done.  Hurrah!  the thing was done!

The house--as we passed through a long passage and up some
steps--seemed full of people.  We heard voices and the ring of arms
more than once.  But our guide, without pausing, led us to a small room
lighted by a hanging lamp.  "I will inform M. de Pavannes of your
arrival," he said respectfully, and passed behind a curtain, which
seemed to hide the door of an inner apartment.  As he did so the clink
of glasses and the hum of conversation reached us.

"He has company supping with him," I said nervously.  I tried to flip
some of the dust from my boots with my whip.  I remembered that this
was Paris.

"He will be surprised to see us," quoth Croisette, laughing--a little
shyly, too, I think.  And so we stood waiting.

I began to wonder as minutes passed by--the gay company we had seen
putting it in my mind, I suppose--whether M. de Pavannes, of Paris,
might not turn out to be a very different person from Louis de
Pavannes, of Caylus; whether the king's courtier would be as friendly
as Kit's lover.  And I was still thinking of this without having
settled the point to my satisfaction, when the curtain was thrust aside
again.  A very tall man, wearing a splendid suit of black and silver
and a stiff trencher-like ruff, came quickly in, and stood smiling at
us, a little dog in his arms.  The little dog sat up and snarled:  and
Croisette gasped. It was not our old friend Louis certainly!  It was
not Louis de Pavannes at all.  It was no old friend at all, It was the
Vidame de Bezers!

"Welcome, gentlemen!"  he said, smiling at us--and never had the cast
been so apparent in his eyes.  "Welcome to Paris, M. Anne!"



CHAPTER IV.

ENTRAPPED!

There was a long silence.  We stood glaring at him, and he smiled upon
us--as a cat smiles.  Croisette told me afterwards that he could have
died of mortification--of shame and anger that we had been so
outwitted.  For myself I did not at once grasp the position.  I did not
understand.  I could not disentangle myself in a moment from the belief
in which I had entered the house--that it was Louis de Pavannes' house.
But I seemed vaguely to suspect that Bezers had swept him aside and
taken his place.  My first impulse therefore--obeyed on the
instant--was to stride to the Vidame's side and grasp his arm.  "What
have you done?"  I cried, my voice sounding hoarsely even in my own
ears.  "What have you done with M. de Pavannes?  Answer me!"

He showed just a little more of his sharp white teeth as he looked down
at my face--a flushed and troubled face doubtless. "Nothing--yet," he
replied very mildly.  And he shook me off.

"Then," I retorted, "how do you come here?"

He glanced at Croisette and shrugged his shoulders, as if I had been a
spoiled child.  "M. Anne does not seem to understand," he said with
mock courtesy, "that I have the honour to welcome him to my house the
Hotel Bezers, Rue de Platriere."

"The Hotel Bezers!  Rue de Platriere!"  I cried confusedly.  "But
Blaise Bure told us that this was the Rue St. Antoine!"

"Ah!"  he replied as if slowly enlightened--the hypocrite!  "Ah! I
see!"  and he smiled grimly.  "So you have made the acquaintance of
Blaise Bure, my excellent master of the horse! Worthy Blaise! Indeed,
indeed, now I understand.  And you thought, you whelps," he continued,
and as he spoke his tone changed strangely, and he fixed us suddenly
with angry eyes, "to play a rubber with me!  With me, you imbeciles!
You thought the wolf of Bezers could be hunted down like any hare!
Then listen, and I will tell you the end of it.  You are now in my
house and absolutely at my mercy.  I have two score men within call who
would cut the throats of three babes at the breast, if I bade them!
Ay," he, added, a wicked exultation shining in his eyes, "they would,
and like the job!"

He was going on to say more, but I interrupted him.  The rage I felt,
caused as much by the thought of our folly as by his arrogance, would
let me be silent no longer.  "First, M. de Bezers, first," I broke out
fiercely, my words leaping over one another in my haste, "a word with
you!  Let me tell you what I think of you!  You are a treacherous
hound, Vidame!  A cur!  a beast!  And I spit upon you!  Traitor and
assassin!"  I shouted, "is that not enough?  Will nothing provoke you?
If you call yourself a gentleman, draw!"

He shook his head; he was still smiling, still unmoved.  "I do not do
my own dirty work," he said quietly, "nor stint my footmen of their
sport, boy."

"Very well!"  I retorted.  And with the words I drew my sword, and
sprang as quick as lightning to the curtain by which he had entered.
"Very well, we will kill you first!"  I cried wrathfully, my eye on his
eye, and every savage passion in my breast aroused, "and take our
chance with the lackeys afterwards! Marie!  Croisette!"  I cried
shrilly, "on him, lads!"

But they did not answer!  They did not move or draw.  For the moment
indeed the man was in my power.  My wrist was raised, and I had my
point at his breast, I could have run him through by a single thrust.
And I hated him.  Oh, how I hated him!  But he did not stir.  Had he
spoken, had he moved so much as an eyelid, or drawn back his foot, or
laid his hand on his hilt, I should have killed him there.  But he did
not stir and I could not do it.  My hand dropped.  "Cowards!"  I cried,
glancing bitterly from him to them--they had never failed me before.
"Cowards!"  I muttered, seeming to shrink into myself as I said the
word.  And I flung my sword clattering on the floor.

"That is better!"  he drawled quite unmoved, as if nothing more than
words had passed, as if he had not been in peril at all. "It was what I
was going to ask you to do.  If the other young gentlemen will follow
your example, I shall be obliged.  Thank you.  Thank you."

Croisette, and a minute later Marie, obeyed him to the letter!  I could
not understand it.  I folded my arms and gave up the game in despair,
and but for very shame I could have put my hands to my face and cried.
He stood in the middle under the lamp, a head taller than the tallest
of us; our master.  And we stood round him trapped, beaten, for all the
world like children.  Oh, I could have cried!  This was the end of our
long ride, our aspirations, our knight-errantry!

"Now perhaps you will listen to me," he went on smoothly, "and hear
what I am going to do.  I shall keep you here, young gentlemen, until
you can serve me by carrying to mademoiselle, your cousin, some news of
her betrothed.  Oh, I shall not detain you long," he added with an evil
smile.  "You have arrived in Paris at a fortunate moment.  There is
going to be a--well, there is a little scheme on foot appointed for
to-night--singularly lucky you are!--for removing some objectionable
people, some friends of ours perhaps among them, M. Anne.  That is all.
You will hear shots, cries, perhaps screams.  Take no notice.  You will
be in no danger.  For M. de Pavannes," he continued, his voice sinking,
"I think that by morning I shall be able to give you a--a more
particular account of him to take to Caylus--to Mademoiselle, you
understand."

For a moment the mask was off.  His face took a sombre brightness.  He
moistened his lips with his tongue as though he saw his vengeance
worked out then and there before him, and were gloating over the
picture.  The idea that this was so took such a hold upon me that I
shrank back, shuddering; reading too in Croisette's face the same
thought--and a late repentance.  Nay, the malignity of Bezers' tone,
the savage gleam of joy in his eyes appalled me to such an extent that
I fancied for a moment I saw in him the devil incarnate!

He recovered his composure very quickly, however; and turned carelessly
towards the door.  "If you will follow me," he said, "I will see you
disposed of.  You may have to complain of your lodging--I have other
things to think of to-night than hospitality, But you shall not need to
complain of your supper."

He drew aside the curtain as he spoke, and passed into the next room
before us, not giving a thought apparently to the possibility that we
might strike him from behind.  There certainly was an odd quality
apparent in him at times which seemed to contradict what we knew of him.

The room we entered was rather long than wide, hung with tapestry, and
lighted by silver lamps.  Rich plate, embossed, I afterwards learned,
by Cellini the Florentine--who died that year I remember--and richer
glass from Venice, with a crowd of meaner vessels filled with meats and
drinks covered the table; disordered as by the attacks of a numerous
party.  But save a servant or two by the distant dresser, and an
ecclesiastic at the far end of the table, the room was empty.

The priest rose as we entered, the Vidame saluting him as if they had
not met that day.  "You are welcome M. le Coadjuteur," he said; saying
it coldly, however, I thought.  And the two eyed one another with
little favour; rather as birds of prey about to quarrel over the spoil,
than as host and guest.  Perhaps the Coadjutor's glittering eyes and
great beak-like nose made me think of this.

"Ho!  ho!"  he said, looking piercingly at us--and no doubt we must
have seemed a miserable and dejected crew enough.  "Who are these?  Not
the first-fruits of the night, eh?"

The Vidame looked darkly at him.  "No," he answered brusquely. "They
are not.  I am not particular out of doors, Coadjutor, as you know, but
this is my house, and we are going to supper. Perhaps you do not
comprehend the distinction.  Still it exists--for me," with a sneer.

This was as good as Greek to us.  But I so shrank from the priest's
malignant eyes, which would not quit us, and felt so much disgust
mingled with my anger that when Bezers by a gesture invited me to sit
down, I drew back.  "I will not eat with you," I said sullenly;
speaking out of a kind of dull obstinacy, or perhaps a childish
petulance.

It did not occur to me that this would pierce the Vidame's armour.  Yet
a dull red showed for an instant in his cheek, and he eyed me with a
look, that was not all ferocity, though the veins in his great temples
swelled.  A moment, nevertheless, and he was himself again.  "Armand,"
he said quietly to the servant, "these gentlemen will not sup with me.
Lay for them at the other end."

Men are odd.  The moment he gave way to me I repented of my words.  It
was almost with reluctance that I followed the servant to the lower
part of the table.  More than this, mingled with the hatred I felt for
the Vidame, there was now a strange sentiment towards him--almost of
admiration; that had its birth I think in the moment, when I held his
life in my hand, and he had not flinched.

We ate in silence; even after Croisette by grasping my hand under the
table had begged me not to judge him hastily.  The two at the upper end
talked fast, and from the little that reached us, I judged that the
priest was pressing some course on his host, which the latter declined
to take.

Once Bezers raised his voice.  "I have my own ends to serve!"  he broke
out angrily, adding a fierce oath which the priest did not rebuke, "and
I shall serve them.  But there I stop.  You have your own.  Well, serve
them, but do not talk to me of the cause! The cause?  To hell with the
cause!  I have my cause, and you have yours, and my lord of Guise has
his!  And you will not make me believe that there is any other!"

"The king's?"  suggested the priest, smiling sourly.

"Say rather the Italian woman's!"  the Vidame answered
recklessly--meaning the queen-mother, Catharine de' Medici, I supposed.

"Well, then, the cause of the Church?"  the priest persisted.

"Bah!  The Church?  It is you, my friend!"  Bezers rejoined, rudely
tapping his companion--at that moment in the act of crossing
himself--on the chest.  "The Church?"  he continued; "no, no, my
friend.  I will tell you what you are doing.  You want me to help you
to get rid of your branch, and you offer in return to aid me with
mine--and then, say you, there will be no stick left to beat either of
us.  But you may understand once for all"--and the Vidame struck his
hand heavily down among the glasses--"that I will have no interference
with my work, master Clerk!  None!  Do you hear?  And as for yours, it
is no business of mine.  That is plain speaking, is it not?"

The priest's hand shook as he raised a full glass to his lips, but he
made no rejoinder, and the Vidame, seeing we had finished, rose.
"Armand!"  he cried, his face still dark, "take these gentlemen to
their chamber.  You understand?"

We stiffly acknowledged his salute--the priest taking no notice of
us--and followed the servant from the room; going along a corridor and
up a steep flight of stairs, and seeing enough by the way to be sure
that resistance was hopeless.  Doors opened silently as we passed, and
grim fellows, in corslets and padded coats, peered out.  The clank of
arms and murmur of voices sounded continuously about us; and as we
passed a window the jingle of bits, and the hollow clang of a restless
hoof on the flags below, told us that the great house was for the time
a fortress.  I wondered much.  For this was Paris, a city with gates
and guards; the night a short August night.  Yet the loneliest manor in
Quercy could scarcely have bristled with more pikes and musquetoons, on
a winter's night and in time of war.

No doubt these signs impressed us all; and Croisette not least. For
suddenly I heard him stop, as he followed us up the narrow staircase,
and begin without warning to stumble down again as fast as he could.  I
did not know what he was about; but muttering something to Marie, I
followed the lad to see.  At the foot of the flight of stairs I looked
back, Marie and the servant were standing in suspense, where I had left
them.  I heard the latter bid us angrily to return.

But by this time Croisette was at the end of the corridor; and
reassuring the fellow by a gesture I hurried on, until brought to a
standstill by a man opening a door in my face.  He had heard our
returning footsteps, and eyed me suspiciously; but gave way after a
moment with a grunt of doubt I hastened on, reaching the door of the
room in which we had supped in time to see something which filled me
with grim astonishment; so much so that I stood rooted where I was, too
proud at any rate to interfere.

Bezers was standing, the leering priest at his elbow.  And Croisette
was stooping forward, his hands stretched out in an attitude of
supplication.

"Nay, but M. le Vidame," the lad cried, as I stood, the door in my
hand, "it were better to stab her at once than break her heart!  Have
pity on her!  If you kill him, you kill her!"

The Vidame was silent, seeming to glower on the boy.  The priest
sneered.  "Hearts are soon mended--especially women's," he said.

"But not Kit's!"  Croisette said passionately--otherwise ignoring him.
"Not Kit's!  You do not know her, Vidame!  Indeed you do not!"

The remark was ill-timed.  I saw a spasm of anger distort Bezers' face.
"Get up, boy!"  he snarled, "I wrote to Mademoiselle what I would do,
and that I shall do!  A Bezers keeps his word.  By the God above us--if
there be a God, and in the devil's name I doubt it to-night!--I shall
keep mine!  Go!"

His great face was full of rage.  He looked over Croisette's head as he
spoke, as if appealing to the Great Registrar of his vow, in the very
moment in which he all but denied Him.  I turned and stole back the way
I had come; and heard Croisette follow.

That little scene completed my misery.  After that I seemed to take no
heed of anything or anybody until I was aroused by the grating of our
gaoler's key in the lock, and became aware that he was gone, and that
we were alone in a small room under the tiles. He had left the candle
on the floor, and we three stood round it. Save for the long shadows we
cast on the walls and two pallets hastily thrown down in one corner,
the place was empty.  I did not look much at it, and I would not look
at the others.  I flung myself on one of the pallets and turned my face
to the wall, despairing.  I thought bitterly of the failure we had made
of it, and of the Vidame's triumph.  I cursed St. Croix especially for
that last touch of humiliation he had set to it.  Then, forgetting
myself as my anger abated, I thought of Kit so far away at Caylus--of
Kit's pale, gentle face, and her sorrow.  And little by little I
forgave Croisette.  After all he had not begged for us--he had not
stooped for our sakes, but for hers.

I do not know how long I lay at see-saw between these two moods. Or
whether during that time the others talked or were silent, moved about
the room or lay still.  But it was Croisette's hand on my shoulder,
touching me with a quivering eagerness that instantly communicated
itself to my limbs, which recalled me to the room and its shadows.
"Anne!"  he cried.  "Anne!  Are you awake?"

"What is it?"  I said, sitting up and looking at him.

"Marie," he began, "has--"

But there was no need for him to finish.  I saw that Marie was standing
at the far side of the room by the unglazed window; which, being in a
sloping part of the roof, inclined slightly also.  He had raised the
shutter which closed it, and on his tip-toes--for the sill was almost
his own height from the floor--was peering out.  I looked sharply at
Croisette.  "Is there a gutter outside?"  I whispered, beginning to
tingle all over as the thought of escape for the first time occurred to
me.

"No," he answered in the same tone.  "But Marie says he can see a beam
below, which he thinks we can reach."

I sprang up, promptly displaced Marie, and looked out.  When my eyes
grew accustomed to the gloom I discerned a dark chaos of roofs and
gables stretching as far as I could see before me. Nearer, immediately
under the window, yawned a chasm--a narrow street.  Beyond this was a
house rather lower than that in which we were, the top of its roof not
quite reaching the level of my eyes.

"I see no beam," I said.

"Look below!"  quoth Marie, stolidly,

I did so, and then saw that fifteen or sixteen feet below our window
there was a narrow beam which ran from our house to the opposite
one--for the support of both, as is common in towns.  In the shadow
near the far end of this--it was so directly under our window that I
could only see the other end of it--I made out a casement, faintly
illuminated from within.

I shook my head.

"We cannot get down to it," I said, measuring the distance to the beam
and the depth below it, and shivering.

"Marie says we can, with a short rope," Croisette replied.  His eyes
were glistening with excitement.

"But we have no rope!"  I retorted.  I was dull--as usual.  Marie made
no answer.  Surely he was the most stolid and silent of brothers.  I
turned to him.  He was taking off his waistcoat and neckerchief.

"Good!"  I cried.  I began to see now.  Off came our scarves and
kerchiefs also, and fortunately they were of home make, long and
strong.  And Marie had a hank of four-ply yarn in his pocket as it
turned out, and I had some stout new garters, and two or three yards of
thin cord, which I had brought to mend the girths, if need should
arise.  In five minutes we had fastened them cunningly together.

"I am the lightest," said Croisette.

"But Marie has the steadiest head," I objected.  We had learned that
long ago--that Marie could walk the coping-stones of the battlements
with as little concern as we paced a plank set on the ground.

"True," Croisette had to admit.  "But he must come last, because
whoever does so will have to let himself down."

I had not thought of that, and I nodded.  It seemed that the lead was
passing out of my hands and I might resign myself.  Still one thing I
would have.  As Marie was to come last, I would go first. My weight
would best test the rope.  And accordingly it was so decided.

There was no time to be lost.  At any moment we might be interrupted.
So the plan was no sooner conceived than carried out.  The rope was
made fast to my left wrist.  Then I mounted on Marie's shoulders, and
climbed--not without quavering--through the window, taking as little
time over it as possible, for a bell was already proclaiming midnight.

All this I had done on the spur of the moment.  But outside, hanging by
my hands in the darkness, the strokes of the great bell in my ears, I
had a moment in which to think.  The sense of the vibrating depth below
me, the airiness, the space and gloom around, frightened me.  "Are you
ready?"  muttered Marie, perhaps with a little impatience.  He had not
a scrap of imagination, had Marie.

"No!  wait a minute!"  I blurted out, clinging to the sill, and taking
a last look at the bare room, and the two dark figures between me and
the light.  "No!"  I added, hurriedly. "Croisette--boys, I called you
cowards just now.  I take it back! I did not mean it!  That is all!"  I
gasped.  "Let go!"

A warm touch on my hand.  Something like a sob.

The next moment I felt myself sliding down the face of the house, down
into the depth.  The light shot up.  My head turned giddily. I clung,
oh, how I clung to that rope!  Half way down the thought struck me that
in case of accident those above might not be strong enough to pull me
up again.  But it was too late to think of that, and in another second
my feet touched the beam.  I breathed again.  Softly, very gingerly, I
made good my footing on the slender bridge, and, disengaging the rope,
let it go.  Then, not without another qualm, I sat down astride of the
beam, and whistled in token of success.  Success so far!

It was a strange position, and I have often dreamed of it since. In the
darkness about me Paris lay to all seeming asleep.  A veil, and not the
veil of night only, was stretched between it and me; between me, a mere
lad, and the strange secrets of a great city; stranger, grimmer, more
deadly that night than ever before or since.  How many men were
watching under those dimly-seen roofs, with arms in their hands?  How
many sat with murder at heart?  How many were waking, who at dawn would
sleep for ever, or sleeping who would wake only at the knife's edge?
These things I could not know, any more than I could picture how many
boon-companions were parting at that instant, just risen from the dice,
one to go blindly--the other watching him--to his death?  I could not
imagine, thank Heaven for it, these secrets, or a hundredth part of the
treachery and cruelty and greed that lurked at my feet, ready to burst
all bounds at a pistol-shot.  It had no significance for me that the
past day was the 23rd of August, or that the morrow was St.
Bartholomew's feast!

No.  Yet mingled with the jubilation which the possibility of triumph
over our enemy raised in my breast, there was certainly a foreboding.
The Vidame's hints, no less than his open boasts, had pointed to
something to happen before morning--something wider than the mere
murder of a single man.  The warning also which the Baron de Rosny had
given us at the inn occurred to me with new meaning.  And I could not
shake the feeling off.  I fancied, as I sat in the darkness astride of
my beam, that I could see, closing the narrow vista of the street, the
heavy mass of the Louvre; and that the murmur of voices and the tramp
of men assembling came from its courts, with now and again the stealthy
challenge of a sentry, the restrained voice of an officer. Scarcely a
wayfarer passed beneath me:  so few, indeed, that I had no fear of
being detected from below.  And yet unless I was mistaken, a furtive
step, a subdued whisper were borne to me on every breeze, from every
quarter.  And the night was full of phantoms.

Perhaps all this was mere nervousness, the outcome of my position.  At
any rate I felt no more of it when Croisette joined me.  We had our
daggers, and that gave me some comfort.  If we could once gain entrance
to the house opposite, we had only to beg, or in the last resort force
our way downstairs and out, and then to hasten with what speed we might
to Pavannes' dwelling. Clearly it was a question of time only now;
whether Bezers' band or we should first reach it.  And struck by this I
whispered Marie to be quick.  He seemed to be long in coming.

He scrambled down hand over hand at last, and then I saw that he had
not lingered above for nothing.  He had contrived after getting out of
the window to let down the shutter.  And more he had at some risk
lengthened our rope, and made a double line of it, so that it ran round
a hinge of the shutter; and when he stood beside us, he took it by one
end and disengaged it.  Good, clever Marie!

"Bravo!"  I said softly, clapping him on the back.  "Now they will not
know which way the birds have flown!"

So there we all were, one of us, I confess, trembling.  We slid easily
enough along the beam to the opposite house.  But once there in a row
one behind the other with our faces to the wall, and the night air
blowing slantwise--well I am nervous on a height and I gasped.  The
window was a good six feet above the beam, The casement--it was
unglazed--was open, veiled by a thin curtain, and alas!  protected by
three horizontal bars--stout bars they looked.

Yet we were bound to get up, and to get in; and I was preparing to rise
to my feet on the giddy bridge as gingerly as I could, when Marie
crawled quickly over us, and swung himself up to the narrow sill, much
as I should mount a horse on the level.  He held out his foot to me,
and making an effort I reached the same dizzy perch.  Croisette for the
time remained below.

A narrow window-ledge sixty feet above the pavement, and three bars to
cling to!  I cowered to my holdfasts, envying even Croisette.  My legs
dangled airily, and the black chasm of the street seemed to yawn for
me.  For a moment I turned sick.  I recovered from that to feel
desperate.  I remembered that go forward we must, bars or no bars.  We
could not regain our old prison if we would.

It was equally clear that we could not go forward if the inmates should
object.  On that narrow perch even Marie was helpless. The bars of the
window were close together.  A woman, a child, could disengage our
hands, and then--I turned sick again.  I thought of the cruel stones.
I glued my face to the bars, and pushing aside a corner of the curtain,
looked in.

There was only one person in the room--a woman, who was moving about
fully dressed, late as it was.  The room was a mere attic, the
counterpart of that we had left.  A box-bed with a canopy roughly
nailed over it stood in a corner.  A couple of chairs were by the
hearth, and all seemed to speak of poverty and bareness.  Yet the woman
whom we saw was richly dressed, though her silks and velvets were
disordered.  I saw a jewel gleam in her hair, and others on her hands.
When she turned her face towards us--a wild, beautiful face, perplexed
and tear-stained--I knew her instantly for a gentlewoman, and when she
walked hastily to the door, and laid her hand upon it, and seemed to
listen--when she shook the latch and dropped her hands in despair and
went back to the hearth, I made another discovery I knew at once,
seeing her there, that we were likely but to change one prison for
another.  Was every house in Paris then a dungeon?  And did each roof
cover its tragedy?

"Madame!"  I said, speaking softly, to attract her attention. "Madame!"

She started violently, not knowing whence the sound came, and looked
round, at the door first.  Then she moved towards the window, and with
an affrighted gesture drew the curtain rapidly aside.

Our eyes met.  What if she screamed and aroused the house?  What,
indeed?  "Madame," I said again, speaking hurriedly, and striving to
reassure her by the softness of my voice, "we implore your help!
Unless you assist us we are lost."

"You!  Who are you?"  she cried, glaring at us wildly, her hand to her
head.  And then she murmured to herself, "Mon Dieu!  what will become
of me?"

"We have been imprisoned in the house opposite," I hastened to explain,
disjointedly I am afraid.  "And we have escaped.  We cannot get back if
we would.  Unless you let us enter your room and give us shelter--"

"We shall be dashed to pieces on the pavement," supplied Marie, with
perfect calmness--nay, with apparent enjoyment.

"Let you in here?"  she answered, starting back in new terror; "it is
impossible."

She reminded me of our cousin, being, like her pale and dark-haired.
She wore her hair in a coronet, disordered now.  But though she was
still beautiful, she was older than Kit, and lacked her pliant grace.
I saw all this, and judging her nature, I spoke out of my despair.
"Madame," I said piteously, "we are only boys.  Croisette!  Come up!"
Squeezing myself still more tightly into my corner of the ledge, I made
room for him between us.  "See, Madame," I cried, craftily, "will you
not have pity on three boys?"

St. Crois's boyish face and fair hair arrested her attention, as I had
expected.  Her expression grew softer, and she murmured, "Poor boy!"

I caught at the opportunity.  "We do but seek a passage through your
room," I said fervently.  Good heavens, what had we not at stake!  What
if she should remain obdurate?  "We are in trouble--in despair," I
panted.  "So, I believe, are you.  We will help you if you will first
save us.  We are boys, but we can fight for you."

"Whom am I to trust?"  she exclaimed, with a shudder.  "But heaven
forbid," she continued, her eyes on Croisette's face, "that, wanting
help, I should refuse to give it.  Come in, if you will."

I poured out my thanks, and had forced my head between the bars--at
imminent risk of its remaining there--before the words were well out of
her mouth.  But to enter was no easy task after all. Croisette did,
indeed, squeeze through at last, and then by force pulled first one and
then the other of us after him.  But only necessity and that chasm
behind could have nerved us, I think, to go through a process so
painful.  When I stood, at length on the floor, I seemed to be one
great abrasion from head to foot.  And before a lady, too!

But what a joy I felt, nevertheless.  A fig for Bezers now.  He had
called us boys; and we were boys.  But he should yet find that we could
thwart him.  It could be scarcely half-an-hour after midnight; we might
still be in time.  I stretched myself and trod the level door
jubilantly, and then noticed, while doing so, that our hostess had
retreated to the door and was eyeing us timidly--half-scared.

I advanced to her with my lowest bow--sadly missing my sword. "Madame,"
I said, "I am M. Anne de Caylus, and these are my brothers.  And we are
at your service."

"And I," she replied, smiling faintly--I do not know why--"am Madame de
Pavannes, I gratefully accept your offers of service."

"De Pavannes?"  I exclaimed, amazed and overjoyed.  Madame de Pavannes!
Why, she must be Louis' kinswoman!  No doubt she could tell us where he
was lodged, and so rid our task of half its difficulty.  Could anything
have fallen out more happily?  "You know then M. Louis de Pavannes?"  I
continued eagerly.

"Certainly," she answered, smiling with a rare shy sweetness this time.
"Very well indeed.  He is my husband."



CHAPTER V.

A PRIEST AND A WOMAN.

"He is my husband!"

The statement was made in the purest innocence; yet never, as may well
be imagined, did words fall with more stunning force.  Not one of us
answered or, I believe, moved so much as a limb or an eyelid.  We only
stared, wanting time to take in the astonishing meaning of the words,
and then more time to think what they meant to us in particular.

Louis de Pavannes' wife!  Louis de Pavannes married!  If the statement
were true--and we could not doubt, looking in her face, that at least
she thought she was telling the truth--it meant that we had been fooled
indeed!  That we had had this journey for nothing, and run this risk
for a villain.  It meant that the Louis de Pavannes who had won our
boyish admiration was the meanest, the vilest of court-gallants.  That
Mademoiselle de Caylus had been his sport and plaything.  And that we
in trying to be beforehand with Bezers had been striving to save a
scoundrel from his due.  It meant all that, as soon as we grasped it in
the least.

"Madame," said Croisette gravely, after a pause so prolonged that her
smile faded pitifully from her face, scared by our strange looks.
"Your husband has been some time away from you?  He only returned, I
think, a week or two ago?"

"That is so," she answered, naively, and our last hope vanished. "But
what of that?  He was back with me again, and only yesterday--only
yesterday!"  she continued, clasping her hands, "we were so happy."

"And now, madame?"

She looked at me, not comprehending.

"I mean," I hastened to explain, "we do not understand how you come to
be here.  And a prisoner."  I was really thinking that her story might
throw some light upon ours.

"I do not know, myself," she said.  "Yesterday, in the afternoon, I
paid a visit to the Abbess of the Ursulines."

"Pardon me," Croisette interposed quickly, "but are you not of the new
faith?  A Huguenot?"

"Oh, yes," she answered eagerly.  "But the Abbess is a very dear friend
of mine, and no bigot.  Oh, nothing of that kind, I assure you.  When I
am in Paris I visit her once a week.  Yesterday, when I left her, she
begged me to call here and deliver a message."

"Then," I said, "you know this house?"

"Very well, indeed," she replied.  "It is the sign of the 'Hand and
Glove,' one door out of the Rue Platriere.  I have been in Master
Mirepoix's shop more than once before.  I came here yesterday to
deliver the message, leaving my maid in the street, and I was asked to
come up stairs, and still up until I reached this room.  Asked to wait
a moment, I began to think it strange that I should be brought to so
wretched a place, when I had merely a message for Mirepoix's ear about
some gauntlets.  I tried the door; I found it locked.  Then I was
terrified, and made a noise."

We all nodded.  We were busy building up theories--or it might be one
and the same theory--to explain this.  "Yes," I said, eagerly.

"Mirepoix came to me then.  'What does this mean?' I demanded. He
looked ashamed of himself, but he barred my way.  'Only this,' he said
at last, 'that your ladyship must remain here a few hours--two days at
most.  No harm whatever is intended to you. My wife will wait upon you,
and when you leave us, all shall be explained.' He would say no more,
and it was in vain I asked him if he did not take me for some one else;
if he thought I was mad. To all he answered, No.  And when I dared him
to detain me he threatened force.  Then I succumbed.  I have been here
since, suspecting I know not what, but fearing everything."

"That is ended, madame," I answered, my hand on my breast, my soul in
arms for her.  Here, unless I was mistaken, was one more unhappy and
more deeply wronged even than Kit; one too who owed her misery to the
same villain.  "Were there nine glovers on the stairs," I declared
roundly, "we would take you out and take you home!  Where are your
husband's apartments?"

"In the Rue de Saint Merri, close to the church.  We have a house
there."

"M. de Pavannes," I suggested cunningly, "is doubtless distracted by
your disappearance."

"Oh, surely," she answered with earnest simplicity, while the tears
sprang to her eyes.  Her innocence--she had not the germ of a
suspicion--made me grind my teeth with wrath.  Oh, the base wretch!
The miserable rascal!  What did the women see, I wondered--what had we
all seen in this man, this Pavannes, that won for him our hearts, when
he had only a stone to give in return?

I drew Croisette and Marie aside, apparently to consider how we might
force the door.  "What is the meaning of this?"  I said softly,
glancing at the unfortunate lady.  "What do you think, Croisette?"

I knew well what the answer would be.

"Think!"  he cried with fiery impatience.  "What can any one think
except that that villain Pavannes has himself planned his wife's
abduction?  Of course it is so!  His wife out of the way he is free to
follow up his intrigues at Caylus.  He may then marry Kit or--Curse
him!"

"No," I said sternly, "cursing is no good.  We must do something more.
And yet--we have promised Kit, you see, that we would save him--we must
keep our word.  We must save him from Bezers at least."

Marie groaned.

But Croisette took up the thought with ardour.  "From Bezers?" he
cried, his face aglow.  "Ay, true!  So we must!  But then we will draw
lots, who shall fight him and kill him."

I extinguished him by a look.  "We shall fight him in turn," I said,
"until one of us kill him.  There you are right.  But your turn comes
last.  Lots indeed!  We have no need of lots to learn which is the
eldest."

I was turning from him--having very properly crushed him--to look for
something which we could use to force the door, when he held up his
hand to arrest my attention.  We listened, looking at one another.
Through the window came unmistakeable sounds of voices. "They have
discovered our flight," I said, my heart sinking.

Luckily we had had the forethought to draw the curtain across the
casement.  Bezers' people could therefore, from their window, see no
more than ours, dimly lighted and indistinct.  Yet they would no doubt
guess the way we had escaped, and hasten to cut off our retreat below.
For a moment I looked at the door of our room, half-minded to attack
it, and fight our way out, taking the chance of reaching the street
before Bezers' folk should have recovered from their surprise and gone
down.  But then I looked at Madame.  How could we ensure her safety in
the struggle? While I hesitated the choice was taken from us.  We heard
voices in the house below, and heavy feet on the stairs.

We were between two fires.  I glanced irresolutely round the bare
garret, with its sloping roof, searching for a better weapon.  I had
only my dagger.  But in vain.  I saw nothing that would serve.  "What
will you do?"  Madame de Pavannes murmured, standing pale and trembling
by the hearth, and looking from one to another.  Croisette plucked my
sleeve before I could answer, and pointed to the box-bed with its
scanty curtains.  "If they see us in the room," he urged softly, "while
they are half in and half out, they will give the alarm.  Let us hide
ourselves yonder. When they are inside--you understand?"

He laid his hand on his dagger.  The muscles of the lad's face grew
tense.  I did understand him.  "Madame," I said quickly, "you will not
betray us?"

She shook her head.  The colour returned to her cheek, and the
brightness to her eyes.  She was a true woman.  The sense that she was
protecting others deprived her of fear for herself.

The footsteps were on the topmost stair now, and a key was thrust with
a rasping sound into the lock.  But before it could be turned--it
fortunately fitted ill--we three had jumped on the bed and were
crouching in a row at the head of it, where the curtains of the alcove
concealed, and only just concealed us, from any one standing at the end
of the room near the door.

I was the outermost, and through a chink could see what passed. One,
two, three people came in, and the door was closed behind them.  Three
people, and one of them a woman!  My heart--which had been in my
mouth--returned to its place, for the Vidame was not one.  I breathed
freely; only I dared not communicate my relief to the others, lest my
voice should be heard.  The first to come in was the woman closely
cloaked and hooded.  Madame de Pavannes cast on her a single doubtful
glance, and then to my astonishment threw herself into her arms,
mingling her sobs with little joyous cries of "Oh, Diane!  oh, Diane!"

"My poor little one!"  the newcomer exclaimed, soothing her with tender
touches on hair and shoulder.  "You are safe now.  Quite safe!"

"You have come to take me away?"

"Of course we have!"  Diane answered cheerfully, still caressing her.
"We have come to take you to your husband.  He has been searching for
you everywhere.  He is distracted with grief, little one."

"Poor Louis!"  ejaculated the wife.

"Poor Louis, indeed!"  the rescuer answered.  "But you will see him
soon.  We only learned at midnight where you were.  You have to thank
M. le Coadjuteur here for that.  He brought me the news, and at once
escorted me here to fetch you."

"And to restore one sister to another," said the priest silkily, as he
advanced a step.  He was the very same priest whom I had seen two hours
before with Bezers, and had so greatly disliked! I hated his pale face
as much now as I had then.  Even the errand of good on which he had
come could not blind me to his thin-lipped mouth, to his mock humility
and crafty eyes.  "I have had no task so pleasant for many days," added
he, with every appearance of a desire to propitiate.

But, seemingly, Madame de Pavannes had something of the same feeling
towards him which I had myself; for she started at the sound of his
voice, and disengaging herself from her sister's arms--it seemed it was
her sister--shrank back from the pair. She bowed indeed in
acknowledgment of his words.  But there was little gratitude in the
movement, and less warmth.  I saw the sister's face--a brilliantly
beautiful face it was--brighter eyes and lips and more lovely auburn
hair I have never seen--even Kit would have been plain and dowdy beside
her--I saw it harden strangely.  A moment before, the two had been in
one another's arms.  Now they stood apart, somehow chilled and
disillusionised. The shadow of the priest had fallen upon them--had
come between them.

At this crisis the fourth person present asserted himself. Hitherto he
had stood silent just within the door:  a plain man, plainly dressed,
somewhat over sixty and grey-haired.  He looked disconcerted and
embarrassed, and I took him for Mirepoix--rightly as it turned out.

"I am sure," he now exclaimed, his voice trembling with anxiety, or it
might be with fear, "your ladyship will regret leaving here!  You will
indeed!  No harm would have happened to you. Madame d'O does not know
what she is doing, or she would not take you away.  She does not know
what she is doing!"  he repeated earnestly.

"Madame d'O!"  cried the beautiful Diane, her brown eyes darting fire
at the unlucky culprit, her voice full of angry disdain. "How dare
you--such as you--mention my name?  Wretch!"

She flung the last word at him, and the priest took it up.  "Ay,
wretch!  Wretched man indeed!"  he repeated slowly, stretching out his
long thin hand and laying it like the claw of some bird of prey on the
tradesman's shoulder, which flinched, I saw, under the touch.  "How
dare you--such as you--meddle with matters of the nobility?  Matters
that do not concern you?  Trouble!  I see trouble hanging over this
house, Mirepoix!  Much trouble!"

The miserable fellow trembled visibly under the covert threat. His face
grew pale.  His lips quivered.  He seemed fascinated by the priest's
gaze.  "I am a faithful son of the church," he muttered; but his voice
shook so that the words were scarcely audible.  "I am known to be such!
None better known in Paris, M. le Coadjuteur."

"Men are known by their works!"  the priest retorted.  "Now, now," he
continued, abruptly raising his voice, and lifting his hand in a kind
of exaltation, real or feigned, "is the appointed time! And now is the
day of salvation!  and woe, Mirepoix, woe! woe!  to the backslider, and
to him that putteth his hand to the plough and looketh back to-night!"

The layman cowered and shrank before his fierce denunciation; while
Madame de Pavannes gazed from one to the other as if her dislike for
the priest were so great that seeing the two thus quarrelling, she
almost forgave Mirepoix his offence.  "Mirepoix said he could explain,"
she murmured irresolutely.

The Coadjutor fixed his baleful eyes on him.  "Mirepoix," he said
grimly, "can explain nothing!  Nothing!  I dare him to explain!"

And certainly Mirepoix thus challenged was silent.  "Come," the priest
continued peremptorily, turning to the lady who had entered with him,
"your sister must leave with us at once.  We have no time to lose."

"But what what does it mean!"  Madame de Pavannes said, as though she
hesitated even now.  "Is there danger still?"

"Danger!"  the priest exclaimed, his form seeming to swell, and the
exaltation I had before read in his voice and manner again asserting
itself.  "I put myself at your service, Madame, and danger disappears!
I am as God to-night with powers of life and death!  You do not
understand me?  Presently you shall.  But you are ready.  We will go
then.  Out of the way, fellow!"  he thundered, advancing upon the door.

But Mirepoix, who had placed himself with his back to it, to my
astonishment did not give way.  His full bourgeois face was pale; yet
peeping through my chink, I read in it a desperate resolution.  And
oddly--very oddly, because I knew that, in keeping Madame de Pavannes a
prisoner, he must be in the wrong--I sympathised with him.  Low-bred
trader, tool of Pavannes though he was, I sympathised with him, when he
said firmly:

"She shall not go!"

"I say she shall!"  the priest shrieked, losing all control over
himself.  "Fool!  Madman!  You know not what you do!"  As the words
passed his lips, he made an adroit forward movement, surprised the
other, clutched him by the arms, and with a strength I should never
have thought lay in his meagre frame, flung him some paces into the
room.  "Fool!"  he hissed, shaking his crooked fingers at him in
malignant triumph.  "There is no man in Paris, do you hear--or woman
either--shall thwart me to-night!"

"Is that so?  Indeed?"

The words, and the cold, cynical voice, were not those of Mirepoix;
they came from behind.  The priest wheeled round, as if he had been
stabbed in the back.  I clutched Croisette, and arrested the cramped
limb I was moving under cover of the noise. The speaker was Bezers!  He
stood in the open door-way, his great form filling it from post to
post, the old gibing smile on his face.  We had been so taken up,
actors and audience alike, with the altercation, that no one had heard
him ascend the stairs.  He still wore the black and silver suit, but it
was half hidden now under a dark riding cloak which just disclosed the
glitter of his weapons.  He was booted and spurred and gloved as for a
journey.

"Is that so?"  he repeated mockingly, as his gaze rested in turn on
each of the four, and then travelled sharply round the room. "So you
will not be thwarted by any man in Paris, to-night, eh? Have you
considered, my dear Coadjutor, what a large number of people there are
in Paris?  It would amuse me very greatly now--and I'm sure it would
the ladies too, who must pardon my abrupt entrance--to see you put to
the test; pitted against--shall we say the Duke of Anjou?  Or M. de
Guise, our great man?  Or the Admiral?  Say the Admiral foot to foot?"

Rage and fear--rage at the intrusion, fear of the intruder--struggled
in the priest's face.  "How do you come here, and what do you want?"
he inquired hoarsely.  If looks and tones could kill, we three,
trembling behind our flimsy screen, had been freed at that moment from
our enemy.

"I have come in search of the young birds whose necks you were for
stretching, my friend!"  was Bezers' answer.  "They have vanished.
Birds they must be, for unless they have come into this house by that
window, they have flown away with wings."

"They have not passed this way," the priest declared stoutly, eager
only to get rid of the other and I blessed him for the words!  "I have
been here since I left you."

But the Vidame was not one to accept any man's statement.  "Thank you;
I think I will see for myself," he answered coolly. "Madame," he
continued, speaking to Madame de Pavannes as he passed her, "permit me."

He did not look at her, or see her emotion, or I think he must have
divined our presence.  And happily the others did not suspect her of
knowing more than they did.  He crossed the floor at his leisure, and
sauntered to the window, watched by them with impatience.  He drew
aside the curtain, and tried each of the bars, and peered through the
opening both up and down, An oath and an expression of wonder escaped
him.  The bars were standing, and firm and strong; and it did not occur
to him that we could have passed between them.  I am afraid to say how
few inches they were apart.

As he turned, he cast a casual glance at the bed--at us; and hesitated.
He had the candle in his hand, having taken it to the window the better
to examine the bars; and it obscured his sight. He did not see us.  The
three crouching forms, the strained white faces, the starting eyes,
that lurked in the shadow of the curtain escaped him.  The wild beating
of our hearts did not reach his ears.  And it was well for him that it
was so.  If he had come up to the bed I think that we should have
killed him, I know that we should have tried.  All the blood in me had
gone to my head, and I saw him through a haze--larger than life.  The
exact spot near the buckle of his cloak where I would strike him,
downwards and inwards, an inch above the collar-bone,--this only I saw
clearly.  I could not have missed it.  But he turned away, his face
darkening, and went back to the group near the door, and never knew the
risk he had run.



CHAPTER VI.

MADAME'S FRIGHT.

And we breathed again.  The agony of suspense, which Bezers' pause had
created, passed away.  But the night already seemed to us as a week of
nights.  An age of experience, an aeon of adventures cut us off--as we
lay shaking behind the curtain--from Caylus and its life.  Paris had
proved itself more treacherous than we had even expected to find it.
Everything and everyone shifted, and wore one face one minute, and one
another.  We had come to save Pavannes' life at the risk of our own; we
found him to be a villain!  Here was Mirepoix owning himself a
treacherous wretch, a conspirator against a woman; we sympathised with
him. The priest had come upon a work of charity and rescue; we loathed
the sound of his voice, and shrank from him, we knew not why, seeming
only to read a dark secret, a gloomy threat in each doubtful word he
uttered.  He was the strangest enigma of all. Why did we fear him?  Why
did Madame de Pavannes, who apparently had known him before, shudder at
the touch of his hand?  Why did his shadow come even between her and
her sister, and estrange them?  so that from the moment Pavannes' wife
saw him standing by Diane's side, she forgot that the latter had come
to save, and looked on her in doubt and sorrow, almost with repugnance.

We left the Vidame going back to the fireplace.  He stooped to set down
the candle by the hearth.  "They are not here," he said, as he
straightened himself again, and looked curiously at his companions.  He
had apparently been too much taken up with the pursuit to notice them
before.  "That is certain, so I have the less time to lose," he
continued.  "But I would--yes, my dear Coadjutor, I certainly would
like to know before I go, what you are doing here.  Mirepoix--Mirepoix
is an honest man.  I did not expect to find you in HIS house.  And two
ladies?  Two!  Fie, Coadjutor.  Ha!  Madame d'O, is it?  My dear lady,"
he continued, addressing her in a whimsical tone, "do not start at the
sound of your own name!  It would take a hundred hoods to hide your
eyes, or bleach your lips to the common colour; I should have known you
at once, had I looked at you.  And your companion?  Pheugh!"

He broke off, whistling softly.  It was clear that he recognised Madame
de Pavannes, and recognised her with astonishment.  The bed creaked as
I craned my neck to see what would follow.  Even the priest seemed to
think that some explanation was necessary, for he did not wait to be
questioned.

"Madame de Pavannes," he said in a dry, husky voice, and without
looking up, "was spirited hither yesterday; and detained against her
will by this good man, who will have to answer for it. Madame d'O
discovered her whereabouts, and asked me to escort her here without
loss of time to enforce her sister's release."

"And her restoration to her distracted husband?"

"Just so," the priest assented, acquiring confidence, I thought.

"And Madame desires to go?"

"Surely!  Why not?"

"Well," the Vidame drawled, his manner such as to bring the blood to
Madame de Pavannes' cheek, "it depends on the person who--to use your
phrase, M. le Coadjuteur--spirited her hither."

"And that," Madame herself retorted, raising her head, while her voice
quivered with indignation and anger, "was the Abbess of the Ursulines.
Your suspicions are base, worthy of you and unworthy of me, M. le
Vidame!  Diane!"  she continued sharply, taking her sister's arm, and
casting a disdainful glance at Bezers, "let us go.  I want to be with
my husband.  I am stifled in this room."

"We are going, little one," Diane murmured reassuringly.  But I noticed
that the speaker's animation, which had been as a soul to her beauty
when she entered the room, was gone.  A strange stillness was it fear
of the Vidame?  had taken its place.

"The Abbess of the Ursulines?"  Bezers continued thoughtfully. "SHE
brought you here, did she?"  There was surprise, genuine surprise, in
his voice.  "A good soul, and, I think I have heard, a friend of yours.
Umph!"

"A very dear friend," Madame answered stiffly.  "Now, Diane!"

"A dear friend!  And she spirited you hither yesterday!" commented the
Vidame, with the air of one solving an anagram. "And Mirepoix detained
you; respectable Mirepoix, who is said to have a well-filled stocking
under his pallet, and stands well with the bourgeoisie.  He is in the
plot.  Then at a very late hour, your affectionate sister, and my good
friend the Coadjutor, enter to save you.  From what?"

No one spoke.  The priest looked down, his cheeks livid with anger.

"From what?"  Bezers continued with grim playfulness.  "There is the
mystery.  From the clutches of this profligate Mirepoix, I suppose.
From the dangerous Mirepoix.  Upon my honour," with a sudden ring of
resolution in his tone, "I think you are safer here; I think you had
better stay where you are, Madame, until morning!  And risk Mirepoix!"

"Oh, no!  no!"  Madame cried vehemently.

"Oh, yes!  yes!"  he replied.  "What do you say, Coadjutor?  Do you not
think so?"

The priest looked down sullenly.  His voice shook as he murmured in
answer, "Madame will please herself.  She has a character, M. le
Vidame.  But if she prefer to stay here--well!"

"Oh, she has a character, has she?"  rejoined the giant, his eyes
twinkling with evil mirth, "and she should go home with you, and my old
friend Madame d'O, to save it!  That is it, is it?  No, no," he
continued when he had had his silent laugh out, "Madame de Pavannes
will do very well here--very well here until morning. We have work to
do.  Come.  Let us go and do it."

"Do you mean it?"  said the priest, starting and looking up with a
subtle challenge--almost a threat--in his tone.

"Yes, I do."

Their eyes met: and seeing their looks, I chuckled, nudging Croisette.
No fear of their discovering us now.  I recalled the old proverb which
says that when thieves fall out, honest men come by their own, and
speculated on the chance of the priest freeing us once for all from M.
de Bezers.

But the two were ill-matched.  The Vidame could have taken up the other
with one hand and dashed his head on the floor.  And it did not end
there.  I doubt if in craft the priest was his equal. Behind a frank
brutality Bezers--unless his reputation belied him--concealed an
Italian intellect.  Under a cynical recklessness he veiled a rare
cunning and a constant suspicion; enjoying in that respect a
combination of apparently opposite qualities, which I have known no
other man to possess in an equal degree, unless it might be his late
majesty, Henry the Great.  A child would have suspected the priest; a
veteran might have been taken in by the Vidame.

And indeed the priest's eyes presently sank.  "Our bargain is to go for
nothing?"  he muttered sullenly.

"I know of no bargain," quoth the Vidame.  "And I have no time to lose,
splitting hairs here.  Set it down to what you like.  Say it is a whim
of mine, a fad, a caprice.  Only understand that Madame de Pavannes
stays.  We go.  And--" he added this, as a sudden thought seemed to
strike him, "though I would not willingly use compulsion to a lady, I
think Madame d'O had better come too."

"You speak masterfully," the priest said with a sneer, forgetting the
tone he had himself used a few minutes before to Mirepoix.

"Just so.  I have forty horsemen over the way," was the dry answer.
"For the moment, I am master of the legions, Coadjutor."

"That is true," Madame d'O said; so softly that I started.  She had
scarcely spoken since Bezers' entrance.  As she spoke now, she shook
back the hood from her face and disclosed the chestnut hair clinging
about her temples--deep blots of colour on the abnormal whiteness of
her skin, "That is true, M. de Bezers," she said.  "You have the
legions.  You have the power.  But you will not use it, I think,
against an old friend.  You will not do us this hurt when I--But
listen."

He would not.  In the very middle of her appeal he cut her short--brute
that he was!  "No Madame!"  he burst out violently, disregarding the
beautiful face, the supplicating glance, that might have moved a stone,
"that is just what I will not do.  I will not listen!  We know one
another.  Is not that enough?"

She looked at him fixedly.  He returned her gaze, not smiling now, but
eyeing her with a curious watchfulness.

And after a long pause she turned from him.  "Very well," she said
softly, and drew a deep, quivering breath, the sound of which reached
us.  "Then let us go."  And without--strangest thing of all--bestowing
a word or look on her sister, who was weeping bitterly in a chair, she
turned to the door and led the way out, a shrug of her shoulders the
last thing I marked.

The poor lady heard her departing step however, and sprang up.  It
dawned upon her that she was being deserted. "Diane!  Diane!"  she
cried distractedly--and I had to put my hand on Croisette to keep him
quiet, there was such fear and pain in her tone--"I will go!  I will
not be left behind in this dreadful place!  Do you hear?  Come back to
me, Diane!"

It made my blood run wildly.  But Diane did not come back. Strange!
And Bezers too was unmoved.  He stood between the poor woman and the
door, and by a gesture bid Mirepoix and the priest pass out before him.
"Madame," he said--and his voice, stern and hard as ever, expressed no
jot of compassion for her, rather such an impatient contempt as a
puling child might elicit--"you are safe here.  And here you will stop!
Weep if you please," he added cynically, "you will have fewer tears to
shed to-morrow."

His last words--they certainly were odd ones--arrested her attention.
She checked her sobs, being frightened I think, and looked up at him.
Perhaps he had spoken with this in view, for while she still stood at
gaze, her hands pressed to her bosom, he slipped quickly out and closed
the door behind him.  I heard a muttering for an instant outside, and
then the tramp of feet descending the stairs.  They were gone, and we
were still undiscovered.

For Madame, she had clean forgotten our presence--of that I am
sure--and the chance of escape we might afford.  On finding herself
alone she gazed a short time in alarmed silence at the door, and then
ran to the window and peered out, still trembling, terrified, silent.
So she remained a while.

She had not noticed that Bezers on going out had omitted to lock the
door behind him.  I had.  But I was unwilling to move hastily.  Some
one might return to see to it before the Vidame left the house.  And
besides the door was not over strong, and if locked would be no
obstacle to the three of us when we had only Mirepoix to deal with.  So
I kept the others where they were by a nudge and a pinch, and held my
breath a moment, straining my ears to catch the closing of the door
below.  I did not hear that. But I did catch a sound that otherwise
might have escaped me, but which now riveted my eyes to the door of our
room.  Some one in the silence, which followed the trampling on the
stairs, had cautiously laid a hand on the latch.

The light in the room was dim.  Mirepoix had taken one of the candles
with him, and the other wanted snuffing.  I could not see whether the
latch moved; whether or no it was rising.  But watching intently, I
made out that the door was being opened--slowly, noiselessly.  I saw
someone enter--a furtive gliding shadow.

For a moment I felt nervous--then I recognised the dark hooded figure.
It was only Madame d'O.  Brave woman!  She had evaded the Vidame and
slipped back to the rescue.  Ha, ha!  We would defeat the Vidame yet!
Things were going better!

But then something in her manner--as she stood holding the door and
peering into the room--something in her bearing startled and frightened
me.  As she came forward her movements were so stealthy that her
footsteps made no sound.  Her dark shadow, moving ahead of her across
the floor, was not more silent than she.  An undefined desire to make a
noise, to give the alarm, seized me.

Half-way across the room she stopped to listen, and looked round,
startled herself, I think, by the silence.  She could not see her
sister, whose figure was blurred by the outlines of the curtain; and no
doubt she was puzzled to think what had become of her. The suspense
which I felt, but did not understand, was so great that at last I
moved, and the bed creaked.

In a moment her face was turned our way, and she glided forwards, her
features still hidden by the hood of her cloak.  She was close to us
now, bending over us.  She raised her hand to her head--to shade her
eyes, as she looked more closely, I supposed, and I was wondering
whether she saw us--whether she took the shapelessness in the shadow of
the curtain for her sister, or could not make it out--I was thinking
how we could best apprise her of our presence without alarming
her--when Croisette dashed my thoughts to the winds!  Croisette, with a
tremendous whoop and a crash, bounded over me on to the floor!

She uttered a gasping cry--a cry of intense, awful fear.  I have the
sound in my ears even now.  With that she staggered back, clutching the
air.  I heard the metallic clang and ring of something falling on the
floor.  I heard an answering cry of alarm from the window; and then
Madame de Pavannes ran forward and caught her in her arms.

It was strange to find the room lately so silent become at once alive
with whispering forms, as we came hastily to light.  I cursed Croisette
for his folly, and was immeasurably angry with him, but I had no time
to waste words on him then.  I hurried to the door to guard it.  I
opened it a hand's breadth and listened. All was quiet below; the house
still.  I took the key out of the lock and put it in my pocket and went
back.  Marie and Croisette were standing a little apart from Madame de
Pavannes, who, hanging over her sister, was by turns bathing her face
and explaining our presence.

In a very few minutes Madame d'O seemed to recover, and sat up. The
first shock of deadly terror had passed, but she was still pale.  She
still trembled, and shrank from meeting our eyes, though I saw her,
when our attention was apparently directed elsewhere, glance at one and
another of us with a strange intentness, a shuddering curiosity.  No
wonder, I thought.  She must have had a terrible fright--one that might
have killed a more timid woman!

"What on earth did you do that for!"  I asked Croisette presently, my
anger certainly not decreasing the more I looked at her beautiful face.
"You might have killed her!"

In charity I supposed his nerves had failed him, for he could not even
now give me a straightforward answer.  His only reply was, "Let us get
away!  Let us get away from this horrible house!" and this he kept
repeating with a shudder as he moved restlessly to and fro.

"With all my heart!"  I answered, looking at him with some contempt.
"That is exactly what we are going to do!"

But all the same his words reminded me of something which in the
excitement of the scene I had momentarily forgotten, and that was our
duty.  Pavannes must still be saved, though not for Kit; rather to
answer to us for his sins.  But he must be saved!  And now that the
road was open, every minute lost was reproach to us. "Yes," I added
roughly, my thoughts turned into a more rugged channel, "you are right.
This is no time for nursing.  We must be going.  Madame de Pavannes," I
went on, addressing myself to her, "you know the way home from here--to
your house!"  "Oh, yes," she cried.

"That is well," I answered.  "Then we will start.  Your sister is
sufficiently recovered now, I think.  And we will not risk any further
delay."

I did not tell her of her husband's danger, or that we suspected him of
wronging her, and being in fact the cause of her detention.  I wanted
her services as a guide.  That was the main point, though I was glad to
be able to put her in a place of safety at the same time that we
fulfilled our own mission.

She rose eagerly.  "You are sure that we can get out?"  she said.

"Sure," I replied with a brevity worthy of Bezers himself.

And I was right.  We trooped down stairs, making as little noise as
possible; with the result that Mirepoix only took the alarm, and came
upon us when we were at the outer door, bungling with the lock.  Then I
made short work of him, checking his scared words of remonstrance by
flashing my dagger before his eyes.  I induced him in the same
fashion--he was fairly taken by surprise--to undo the fastenings
himself; and so, bidding him follow us at his peril, we slipped out one
by one.  We softly closed the door behind us.  And lo!  we were at last
free--free and in the streets of Paris, with the cool night air fanning
our brows.  A church hard by tolled the hour of two; and the strokes
were echoed, before we had gone many steps along the ill-paved way, by
the solemn tones of the bell of Notre Dame.

We were free and in the streets, with a guide who knew the way. If
Bezers had not gone straight from us to his vengeance, we might thwart
him yet.  I strode along quickly, Madame d'O by my side the others a
little way in front.  Here and there an oil-lamp, swinging from a
pulley in the middle of the road, enabled us to avoid some obstacle
more foul than usual, or to leap over a pool which had formed in the
kennel.  Even in my excitement, my country-bred senses rebelled against
the sights, and smells, the noisome air and oppressive closeness of the
streets.

The town was quiet, and very dark where the smoky lamps were not
hanging.  Yet I wondered if it ever slept, for more than once we had to
stand aside to give passage to a party of men, hurrying along with
links and arms.  Several times too, especially towards the end of our
walk, I was surprised by the flashing of bright lights in a courtyard,
the door of which stood half open to right or left.  Once I saw the
glow of torches reflected ruddily in the windows of a tall and splendid
mansion, a little withdrawn from the street.  The source of the light
was in the fore-court, hidden from us by a low wall, but I caught the
murmur of voices and stir of many feet.  Once a gate was stealthily
opened and two armed men looked out, the act and their manner of doing
it, reminding me on the instant of those who had peeped out to inspect
us some hours before in Bezers' house.  And once, nay twice, in the
mouth of a narrow alley I discerned a knot of men standing motionless
in the gloom.  There was an air of mystery abroad, a feeling as of
solemn stir and preparation going on under cover of the darkness, which
awed and unnerved me.

But I said nothing of this, and Madame d'O was equally silent. Like
most countrymen I was ready to believe in any exaggeration of the
city's late hours, the more as she made no remark.  I supposed--shaking
off the momentary impression--that what I saw was innocent and normal.
Besides, I was thinking what I should say to Pavannes when I saw
him--in what terms I should warn him of his peril, and cast his perfidy
in his teeth.  We had hurried along in this way--and in absolute
silence, save when some obstacle or pitfall drew from us an
exclamation--for about a quarter of a mile, when my companion, turning
into a slightly wider street, slackened her speed, and indicated by a
gesture that we had arrived.  A lamp hung over the porch, to which she
pointed, and showed the small side gate half open.  We were close
behind the other three now.  I saw Croisette stoop to enter and as
quickly fall back a pace.  Why?

In a moment it flashed across my mind that we were too late that the
Vidame had been before us.

And yet how quiet it all was.

Then I breathed freely again.  I saw that Croisette had only stepped
back to avoid some one who was coming out--the Coadjutor in fact.  The
moment the entrance was clear, the lad shot in, and the others after
him, the priest taking no notice of them, nor they of him.

I was for going in too, when I felt Madame d'O's hand tighten suddenly
on my arm, and then fall from it.  Apprised of something by this, I
glanced at the priest's face, catching sight of it by chance just as
his eyes met hers.  His face was white--nay it was ugly with
disappointment and rage, bitter snarling rage, that was hardly human.
He grasped her by the arm roughly and twisted her round without
ceremony, so as to draw her a few paces aside; yet not so far that I
could not hear what they said.

"He is not here!"  he hissed.  "Do you understand?  He crossed the
river to the Faubourg St. Germain at nightfall--searching for her.  And
he has not come back!  He is on the other side of the water, and
midnight has struck this hour past!"

She stood silent for a moment as if she had received a blow--silent and
dismayed.  Something serious had happened.  I could see that.

"He cannot recross the river now?"  she said after a time.  "The
gates--"

"Shut!"  he replied briefly.  "The keys are at the Louvre."

"And the boats are on this side?"

"Every boat!"  he answered, striking his one hand on the other with
violence.  "Every boat!  No one may cross until it is over."

"And the Faubourg St. Germain?"  she said in a lower voice.

"There will be nothing done there.  Nothing!"



CHAPTER VII

A YOUNG KNIGHT-ERRANT.

I would gladly have left the two together, and gone straight into the
house.  I was eager now to discharge the errand on which I had come so
far; and apart from this I had no liking for the priest or wish to
overhear his talk.  His anger, however, was so patent, and the rudeness
with which he treated Madame d'O so pronounced that I felt I could not
leave her with him unless she should dismiss me.  So I stood patiently
enough--and awkwardly enough too, I daresay--by the door while they
talked on in subdued tones.  Nevertheless, I felt heartily glad when at
length, the discussion ending Madame came back to me.  I offered her my
arm to help her over the wooden foot of the side gate. She laid her
hand on it, but she stood still.

"M. de Caylus," she said; and at that stopped.  Naturally I looked at
her, and our eyes met.  Hers brown and beautiful, shining in the light
of the lamp overhead looked into mine.  Her lips were half parted, and
one fair tress of hair had escaped from her hood.  "M. de Caylus, will
you do me a favour," she resumed, softly, "a favour for which I shall
always be grateful?"

I sighed.  "Madame," I said earnestly, for I felt the solemnity of the
occasion, "I swear that in ten minutes, if the task I now have in hand
be finished I will devote my life to your service. For the present--"

"Well, for the present?  But it is the present I want, Master
Discretion."

"I must see M. de Pavannes!  I am pledged to it," I ejaculated.

"To see M. de Pavannes?"

"Yes."

I was conscious that she was looking at me with eyes of doubt, almost
of suspicion.

"Why?  Why?"  she asked with evident surprise.  "You have restored--and
nearly frightened me to death in doing it--his wife to her home; what
more do you want with him, most valiant knight-errant?"

"I must see him," I said firmly.  I would have told her all and been
thankful, but the priest was within hearing--or barely out of it; and I
had seen too much pass between him and Bezers to be willing to say
anything before him.

"You must see M. de Pavannes?"  she repeated, gazing at me.

"I must," I replied with decision.

"Then you shall.  That is exactly what I am going to help you to do,"
she exclaimed.  "He is not here.  That is what is the matter.  He went
out at nightfall seeking news of his wife, and crossed the river, the
Coadjutor says, to the Faubourg St. Germain.  Now it is of the utmost
importance that he should return before morning--return here."

"But is he not here?"  I said, finding all my calculations at fault.
"You are sure of it, Madame?"

"Quite sure," she answered rapidly.  "Your brothers will have by this
time discovered the fact.  Now, M. de Caylus, Pavannes must be brought
here before morning, not only for his wife's sake--though she will be
wild with anxiety--but also--"

"I know," I said, eagerly interrupting her, "for his own too! There is
a danger threatening him."

She turned swiftly, as if startled, and I turned, and we looked at the
priest.  I thought we understood one another.  "There is," she answered
softly, "and I would save him from that danger; but he will only be
safe, as I happen to know, here!  Here, you understand!  He must be
brought here before daybreak, M. de Caylus.  He must!  He must!"  she
exclaimed, her beautiful features hardening with the earnestness of her
feelings.  "And the Coadjutor cannot go.  I cannot go.  There is only
one man who can save him, and that is yourself.  There is, above all,
not a moment to be lost."

My thoughts were in a whirl.  Even as she spoke she began to walk back
the way we had come, her hand on my arm; and I, doubtful, and in a
confused way unwilling, went with her.  I did not clearly understand
the position.  I would have wished to go in and confer with Marie and
Croisette; but the juncture had occurred so quickly, and it might be
that time was as valuable as she said, and--well, it was hard for me, a
lad, to refuse her anything when she looked at me with appeal in her
eyes.  I did manage to stammer, "But I do not know Paris.  I could not
find my way, I am afraid, and it is night, Madame."

She released my arm and stopped.  "Night!"  she cried, with a scornful
ring in her voice.  "Night!  I thought you were a man, not a boy!  You
are afraid!"

"Afraid," I said hotly; "we Cayluses are never afraid."

"Then I can tell you the way, if that be your only difficulty. We turn
here.  Now, come in with me a moment," she continued, "and I will give
you something you will need--and your directions."

She had stopped at the door of a tall, narrow house, standing between
larger ones in a street which appeared to me to be more airy and
important than any I had yet seen.  As she spoke, she rang the bell
once, twice, thrice.  The silvery tinkle had scarcely died away the
third time before the door opened silently; I saw no one, but she drew
me into a narrow hall or passage.  A taper in an embossed holder was
burning on a chest. She took it up, and telling me to follow her led
the way lightly up the stairs, and into a room, half-parlour,
half-bedroom--such a room as I had never seen before.  It was richly
hung from ceiling to floor with blue silk, and lighted by the soft rays
of lamps shaded by Venetian globes of delicate hues.  The scent of
cedar wood was in the air, and on the hearth in a velvet tray were some
tiny puppies.  A dainty disorder reigned everywhere. On one table a
jewel-case stood open, on another lay some lace garments, two or three
masks and a fan.  A gemmed riding-whip and a silver-hilted poniard hung
on the same peg.  And, strangest of all, huddled away behind the door,
I espied a plain, black-sheathed sword, and a man's gauntlets.

She did not wait a moment, but went at once to the jewel-case. She took
from it a gold ring--a heavy seal ring.  She held this out to me in the
most matter-of-fact way--scarcely turning, in fact.  "Put it on your
finger," she said hurriedly.  "If you are stopped by soldiers, or if
they will not give you a boat to cross the river, say boldly that you
are on the king's service.  Call for the officer and show that ring.
Play the man.  Bid him stop you at his peril!"

I hastily muttered my thanks, and she as hastily took something from a
drawer, and tore it into strips.  Before I knew what she was doing she
was on her knees by me, fastening a white band of linen round my left
sleeve.  Then she took my cap, and with the same precipitation fixed a
fragment of the stuff in it, in the form of a rough cross.

"There," she said.  "Now, listen, M. de Caylus.  There is more afoot
to-night than you know of.  Those badges will help you across to St.
Germain, but the moment you land tear them off: Tear them off,
remember.  They will help you no longer.  You will come back by the
same boat, and will not need them.  If you are seen to wear them as you
return, they will command no respect, but on the contrary will bring
you--and perhaps me into trouble."

"I understand," I said, "but--"

"You must ask no questions," she retorted, waving one snowy finger
before my eyes.  "My knight-errant must have faith in me, as I have in
him; or he would not be here at this time of night, and alone with me.
But remember this also.  When you meet Pavannes do not say you come
from me.  Keep that in your mind; I will explain the reason afterwards.
Say merely that his wife is found, and is wild with anxiety about him.
If you say anything as to his danger he may refuse to come.  Men are
obstinate."

I nodded a smiling assent, thinking I understood.  At the same time I
permitted myself in my own mind a little discretion. Pavannes was not a
fool, and the name of the Vidame--but, however, I should see.  I had
more to say to him than she knew of.  Meanwhile she explained very
carefully the three turnings I had to take to reach the river, and the
wharf where boats most commonly lay, and the name of the house in which
I should find M. de Pavannes.

"He is at the Hotel de Bailli," she said.  "And there, I think that is
all."

"No, not all," I said hardily.  "There is one thing I have not got.
And that is a sword!"

She followed the direction of my eyes, started, and laughed--a little
oddly.  But she fetched the weapon.  "Take it, and do not," she urged,
"do not lose time.  Do not mention me to Pavannes.  Do not let the
white badges be seen as you return. That is really all.  And now good
luck!"  She gave me her hand to kiss.  "Good luck, my knight-errant,
good luck--and come back to me soon!"

She smiled divinely, as it seemed to me, as she said these last words,
and the same smile followed me down stairs:  for she leaned over the
stair-head with one of the lamps in her hand, and directed me how to
draw the bolts.  I took one backward glance as I did so at the fair
stooping figure above me, the shining eyes, and tiny outstretched hand,
and then darting into the gloom I hurried on my way.

I was in a strange mood.  A few minutes before I had been at Pavannes'
door, at the end of our journey; on the verge of success.  I had been
within an ace, as I supposed at least, of executing my errand.  I had
held the cup of success in my hand. And it had slipped.  Now the
conflict had to be fought over again; the danger to be faced.  It would
have been no more than natural if I had felt the disappointment keenly:
if I had almost despaired.

But it was otherwise--far otherwise.  Never had my heart beat higher or
more proudly than as I now hurried through the streets, avoiding such
groups as were abroad in them, and intent only on observing the proper
turnings.  Never in any moment of triumph in after days, in love or
war, did anything like the exhilaration, the energy, the spirit, of
those minutes come back to me.  I had a woman's badge in my cap--for
the first time--the music of her voice in my ears.  I had a magic ring
on my finger:  a talisman on my arm.  My sword was at my side again.
All round me lay a misty city of adventures, of danger and romance,
full of the richest and most beautiful possibilities; a city of real
witchery, such as I had read of in stories, through which those fairy
gifts and my right hand should guide me safely.  I did not even regret
my brothers, or our separation.  I was the eldest. It was fitting that
the cream of the enterprise should be reserved for me, Anne de Caylus.
And to what might it not lead? In fancy I saw myself already a duke and
peer of France--already I held the baton.

Yet while I exulted boyishly, I did not forget what I was about. I kept
my eyes open, and soon remarked that the number of people passing to
and fro in the dark streets had much increased within the last half
hour.  The silence in which in groups or singly these figures stole by
me was very striking.  I heard no brawling, fighting or singing; yet if
it were too late for these things, why were so many people up and
about?  I began to count presently, and found that at least half of
those I met wore badges in their hats and on their arms, similar to
mine, and that they all moved with a businesslike air, as if bound for
some rendezvous.

I was not a fool, though I was young, and in some matters less quick
than Croisette.  The hints which had been dropped by so many had not
been lost on me.  "There is more afoot to-night than you know of!"
Madame d'O had said.  And having eyes as well as ears I fully believed
it.  Something was afoot.  Something was going to happen in Paris
before morning.  But what, I wondered. Could it be that a rebellion was
about to break out?  If so I was on the king's service, and all was
well.  I might even be going--and only eighteen--to make history!  Or
was it only a brawl on a great scale between two parties of nobles?  I
had heard of such things happening in Paris.  Then--well I did not see
how I could act in that case.  I must be guided by events.

I did not imagine anything else which it could be.  That is the truth,
though it may need explanation.  I was accustomed only to the milder
religious differences, the more evenly balanced parties of Quercy,
where the peace between the Catholics and Huguenots had been welcome to
all save a very few.  I could not gauge therefore the fanaticism of the
Parisian populace, and lost count of the factor, which made possible
that which was going to happen--was going to happen in Paris before
daylight as surely as the sun was going to rise!  I knew that the
Huguenot nobles were present in the city in great numbers, but it did
not occur to me that they could as a body be in danger.  They were many
and powerful, and as was said, in favour with the king.  They were
under the protection of the King of Navarre--France's brother-in-law of
a week, and the Prince of Conde; and though these princes were young,
Coligny the sagacious admiral was old, and not much the worse I had
learned for his wound.  He at least was high in royal favour, a trusted
counsellor.  Had not the king visited him on his sick-bed and sat by
him for an hour together?

Surely, I thought, if there were danger, these men would know of it.
And then the Huguenots' main enemy, Henri le Balafre, the splendid Duke
of Guise, "our great man," and "Lorraine," as the crowd called him--he,
it was rumoured, was in disgrace at court. In a word these things, to
say nothing of the peaceful and joyous occasion which had brought the
Huguenots to Paris, and which seemed to put treachery out of the
question, were more than enough to prevent me forecasting the event.

If for a moment, indeed, as I hurried along towards the river, anything
like the truth occurred to me, I put it from me.  I say with pride I
put it from me as a thing impossible.  For God forbid--one may speak
out the truth these forty years back--God forbid, say I, that all
Frenchmen should bear the blood guiltiness which came of other than
French brains, though French were the hands that did the work.

I was not greatly troubled by my forebodings therefore:  and the state
of exaltation to which Madame d'O's confidence had raised my spirits
lasted until one of the narrow streets by the Louvre brought me
suddenly within sight of the river.  Here faint moonlight bursting
momentarily through the clouds was shining on the placid surface of the
water.  The fresh air played upon, and cooled my temples.  And this
with the quiet scene so abruptly presented to me, gave check to my
thoughts, and somewhat sobered me.

At some distance to my left I could distinguish in the middle of the
river the pile of buildings which crowd the Ile de la Cite, and could
follow the nearer arm of the stream as it swept landwards of these,
closely hemmed in by houses, but unbroken as yet by the arches of the
Pont Neuf which I have lived to see built.  Not far from me on my
right--indeed within a stone's throw--the bulky mass of the Louvre rose
dark and shapeless against the sky.  Only a narrow open space--the
foreshore--separated me from the water; beyond which I could see an
irregular line of buildings, that no doubt formed the Faubourg St.
Germain.

I had been told that I should find stairs leading down to the water,
and boats moored at the foot of them, at this point. Accordingly I
walked quickly across the open space to a spot, where I made out a
couple of posts set up on the brink--doubtless to mark the landing
place.

I had not gone ten paces, however, out of the shadow, before I chanced
to look round, and discerned with an unpleasant eerie feeling three
figures detach themselves from it, and advance in a row behind me, so
as the better to cut off my retreat.  I was not to succeed in my
enterprise too easily then.  That was clear. Still I thought it better
to act as if I had not seen my followers, and collecting myself, I
walked as quickly as I could down to the steps.  The three were by that
time close upon me--within striking distance almost.  I turned abruptly
and confronted them.

"Who are you, and what do you want?"  I said, eyeing them warily, my
hand on my sword.

They did not answer, but separated more widely so as to form a
half-circle:  and one of them whistled.  On the instant a knot of men
started out of the line of houses, and came quickly across the strip of
light towards us.

The position seemed serious.  If I could have run indeed--but I glanced
round, and found escape in that fashion impossible. There were men
crouching on the steps behind me, between me and the river.  I had
fallen into a trap.  Indeed, there was nothing for it now but to do as
Madame had bidden me, and play the man boldly.  I had the words still
ringing in my ears.  I had enough of the excitement I had lately felt
still bounding in my veins to give nerve and daring.  I folded my arms
and drew myself up.

"Knaves!"  I said, with as much quiet contempt as I could muster, "you
mistake me.  You do not know whom you have to deal with. Get me a boat,
and let two of you row me across.  Hinder me, and your necks shall
answer for it--or your backs!"

A laugh and an oath of derision formed the only response, and before I
could add more, the larger group arrived, and joined the three.

"Who is it, Pierre?"  asked one of these in a matter-of-fact way, which
showed I had not fallen amongst mere thieves.

The speaker seemed to be the leader of the band.  He had a feather in
his bonnet, and I saw a steel corslet gleam under his cloak, when some
one held up a lanthorn to examine me the better. His trunk-hose were
striped with black, white, and green--the livery as I learned
afterwards of Monsieur the King's brother, the Duke of Anjou,
afterwards Henry the Third; then a close friend of the Duke of Guise,
and later his murderer.  The captain spoke with a foreign accent, and
his complexion was dark to swarthiness.  His eyes sparkled and flashed
like black beads.  It was easy to see that he was an Italian.

"A gallant young cock enough," the soldier who had whistled answered;
"and not quite of the breed we expected."  He held his lanthorn towards
me and pointed to the white badge on my sleeve. "It strikes me we have
caught a crow instead of a pigeon!"

"How comes this?"  the Italian asked harshly, addressing me. "Who are
you?  And why do you wish to cross the river at this time of night,
young sir?"

I acted on the inspiration of the moment.  "Play the man boldly!"
Madame had said.  I would:  and I did with a vengeance.  I sprang
forward and seizing the captain by the clasp of his cloak, shook him
violently, and flung him off with all my force, so that he reeled.
"Dog!"  I exclaimed, advancing, as if I would seize him again.  "Learn
how to speak to your betters!  Am I to be stopped by such sweepings as
you?  Hark ye, I am on the King's service!"

He fairly spluttered with rage.  "More like the devil's!"  he
exclaimed, pronouncing his words abominably, and fumbling vainly for
his weapon.  "King's service or no service you do not insult Andrea
Pallavicini!"

I could only vindicate my daring by greater daring, and I saw this even
as, death staring me in the face, my heart seemed to stop.  The man had
his mouth open and his hand raised to give an order which would
certainly have sent Anne de Caylus from the world, when I cried
passionately--it was my last chance, and I never wished to live more
strongly than at that moment--I cried passionately, "Andrea
Pallavicini, if such be your name, look at that!  Look at that!"  I
repeated, shaking my open hand with the ring on it before his face,
"and then hinder me if you dare! To-morrow if you have quarterings
enough, I will see to your quarrel!  Now send me on my way, or your
fate be on your own head!  Disobey--ay, do but hesitate--and I will
call on these very men of yours to cut you down!"

It was a bold throw, for I staked all on a talisman of which I did not
know the value!  To me it was the turn of a die, for I had had no
leisure to look at the ring, and knew no more than a babe whose it was.
But the venture was as happy as desperate.

Andrea Pallavicini's expression--no pleasant one at the best of
times--changed on the instant.  His face fell as he seized my hand, and
peered at the ring long and intently.  Then he cast a quick glance of
suspicion at his men, of hatred at me.  But I cared nothing for his
glance, or his hatred.  I saw already that he had made up his mind to
obey the charm:  and that for me was everything.  "If you had shown
that to me a little earlier, young sir, it would, maybe, have been
better for both of us," he said, a surly menace in his voice.  And
cursing his men for their stupidity he ordered two of them to unmoor a
boat.

Apparently the craft had been secured with more care than skill, for to
loosen it seemed to be a work of time.  Meanwhile I stood waiting in
the midst of the group, anxious and yet exultant; an object of
curiosity, and yet curious myself.  I heard the guards whisper
together, and caught such phrases as "It is the Duc d'Aumale."

"No, it is not D'Aumale.  It is nothing like him."

"Well, he has the Duke's ring, fool!"

"The Duke's?"

"Ay."

"Then it is all right, God bless him!"  This last was uttered with
extreme fervour.

I was conscious too of being the object of many respectful glances; and
had just bidden the men on the steps below me to be quick, when I
discovered with alarm three figures moving across the open space
towards us, and coming apparently from the same point from which
Pallavicini and his men had emerged.

In a moment I foresaw danger.  "Now be quick there!"  I cried again.
But scarcely had I spoken before I saw that it was impossible to get
afloat before these others came up, and I prepared to stand my ground
resolutely.

The first words, however, with which Pallavicini saluted the new-comers
scattered my fears.  "Well, what the foul fiend do you want?"  he
exclaimed rudely; and he rapped out half-a-dozen CORPOS before they
could answer him.  "What have you brought him here for, when I left him
in the guard-house?  Imbeciles!"

"Captain Pallavicini," interposed the midmost of the three, speaking
with patience--he was a man of about thirty, dressed with some
richness, though his clothes were now disordered as though by a
struggle--"I have induced these good men to bring me down--"

"Then," cried the captain, brutally interrupting him, "you have lost
your labour, Monsieur."

"You do not know me," replied the prisoner with sternness--a prisoner
he seemed to be.  "You do not understand that I am a friend of the
Prince of Conde, and that--"

He would have said more, but the Italian again cut him short.  "A fig
for the Prince of Conde!"  he cried; "I understand my duty. You may as
well take things easily.  You cannot cross, and you cannot go home, and
you cannot have any explanation; except that it is the King's will!
Explanation?"  he grumbled, in a lower tone, "you will get it soon
enough, I warrant!  Before you want it!"

"But there is a boat going to cross," said the other, controlling his
temper by an effort and speaking with dignity.  "You told me that by
the King's order no one could cross; and you arrested me because,
having urgent need to visit St. Germain, I persisted. Now what does
this mean, Captain Pallavicini?  Others are crossing.  I ask what this
means?"

"Whatever you please, M. de Pavannes," the Italian retorted
contemptuously.  "Explain it for yourself!"

I started as the name struck my ear, and at once cried out in surprise,
"M. de Pavannes!"  Had I heard aright?

Apparently I had, for the prisoner turned to me with a bow. "Yes, sir,"
he said with dignity, "I am M. de Pavannes.  I have not the honour of
knowing you, but you seem to be a gentleman." He cast a withering
glance at the captain as he said this. "Perhaps you will explain to me
why this violence has been done to me.  If you can, I shall consider it
a favour; if not, pardon me."

I did not answer him at once, for a good reason--that every faculty I
had was bent on a close scrutiny of the man himself. He was fair, and
of a ruddy complexion.  His beard was cut in the short pointed fashion
of the court; and in these respects he bore a kind of likeness, a
curious likeness, to Louis de Pavannes. But his figure was shorter and
stouter.  He was less martial in bearing, with more of the air of a
scholar than a soldier.  "You are related to M. Louis de Pavannes?"  I
said, my heart beginning to beat with an odd excitement.  I think I
foresaw already what was coming.

"I am Louis de Pavannes," he replied with impatience.

I stared at him in silence:  thinking--thinking--thinking.  And then I
said slowly, "You have a cousin of the same name?"

"I have."

"He fell prisoner to the Vicomte de Caylus at Moncontour?"

"He did," he answered curtly.  "But what of that, sir?"

Again I did not answer--at once.  The murder was out.  I remembered, in
the dim fashion in which one remembers such things after the event,
that I had heard Louis de Pavannes, when we first became acquainted
with him, mention this cousin of the same name; the head of a younger
branch.  But our Louis living in Provence and the other in Normandy,
the distance between their homes, and the troubles of the times had
loosened a tie which their common religion might have strengthened.
They had scarcely ever seen one another.  As Louis had spoken of his
namesake but once during his long stay with us, and I had not then
foreseen the connection to be formed between our families, it was no
wonder that in the course of months the chance word had passed out of
my head, and I had clean forgotten the subject of it. Here however, he
was before my eyes, and seeing him; I saw too what the discovery meant.
It meant a most joyful thing!  a most wonderful thing which I longed to
tell Croisette and Marie.  It meant that our Louis de Pavannes--my
cheek burned for my want of faith in him--was no villain after all, but
such a noble gentleman as we had always till this day thought him!  It
meant that he was no court gallant bent on breaking a country heart for
sport, but Kit's own true lover!  And--and it meant more--it meant that
he was yet in danger, and still ignorant of the vow that unchained
fiend Bezers had taken to have his life!  In pursuing his namesake we
had been led astray, how sadly I only knew now!  And had indeed lost
most precious time.

"Your wife, M. de Pavannes"--I began in haste, seeing the necessity of
explaining matters with the utmost quickness.  "Your wife is--"

"Ah, my wife!"  he cried interrupting me, with anxiety in his tone.
"What of her?  You have seen her!"

"I have.  She is safe at your house in the Rue de St. Merri."

"Thank Heaven for that!"  he replied fervently.  Before he could say
more Captain Andrea interrupted us.  I could see that his suspicions
were aroused afresh.  He pushed rudely between us, and addressing me
said, "Now, young sir, your boat is ready."

"My boat?"  I answered, while I rapidly considered the situation. Of
course I did not want to cross the river now.  No doubt Pavannes--this
Pavannes--could guide me to Louis' address.  "My boat?"

"Yes, it is waiting," the Italian replied, his black eyes roving from
one to the other of us.

"Then let it wait!"  I answered haughtily, speaking with an assumption
of anger.  "Plague upon you for interrupting us!  I shall not cross the
river now.  This gentleman can give me the information I want.  I shall
take him back with me."

"To whom?"

"To whom?  To those who sent me, sirrah!"

I thundered.  "You do not seem to be much in the Duke's confidence,
captain," I went on; "now take a word of advice from me!  There is
nothing:  so easily cast off as an over-officious servant!  He goes too
far--and he goes like an old glove!  An old glove," I repeated grimly,
sneering in his face, "which saves the hand and suffers itself.  Beware
of too much zeal, Captain Pallavicini!  It is a dangerous thing!"

He turned pale with anger at being thus treated by a beardless boy.
But he faltered all the same.  What I said was unpleasant, but the
bravo knew it was true.

I saw the impression I had made, and I turned to the soldiers standing
round.

"Bring here, my friends," I said, "M. de Pavannes' sword!"

One ran up to the guard house and brought it at once.  They were
townsfolk, burgher guards or such like, and for some reason betrayed so
evident a respect for me, that I soberly believe they would have turned
on their temporary leader at my bidding. Pavannes took his sword, and
placed it under his arm.  We both bowed ceremoniously to Pallavicini,
who scowled in response; and slowly, for I was afraid to show any signs
of haste, we walked across the moonlit space to the bottom of the
street by which I had come.  There the gloom swallowed us up at once.
Pavannes touched my sleeve and stopped in the darkness.

"I beg to be allowed to thank you for your aid," he said with emotion,
turning and facing me.  "Whom have I the honour of addressing?"

"M. Anne de Caylus, a friend of your cousin," I replied.

"Indeed?"  he said "well, I thank you most heartily," and we embraced
with warmth.

"But I could have done little," I answered modestly, "on your behalf,
if it had not been for this ring."

"And the virtue of the ring lies in--"

"In--I am sure I cannot say in what!"  I confessed.  And then, in the
sympathy which the scene had naturally created between us, I forgot one
portion of my lady's commands and I added impulsively, "All I know is
that Madame d'O gave it me; and that it has done all, and more than all
she said it would."

"Who gave it to you?"  he asked, grasping my arm so tightly as to hurt
me.

"Madame d'O," I repeated.  It was too late to draw back now.

"That woman!"  he ejaculated in a strange low whisper.  "Is it
possible?  That woman gave it you?"

I wandered what on earth he meant, surprise, scorn and dislike were so
blended in his tone.  It even seemed to me that he drew off from me
somewhat.  "Yes, M. de Pavannes," I replied, offended and indignant,
"It is so far possible that it is the truth; and more, I think you
would not so speak of this lady if you knew all; and that it was
through her your wife was to-day freed from those who were detaining
her, and taken safely home!"

"Ha!"  he cried eagerly.  "Then where has my wife been?"

"At the house of Mirepoix, the glover," I answered coldly, "in the Rue
Platriere.  Do you know him?  You do.  Well, she was kept there a
prisoner, until we helped her to escape an hour or so ago."

He did not seem to comprehend even then.  I could see little of his
face, but there was doubt and wonder in his tone when he spoke.
"Mirepoix the glover," he murmured.  "He is an honest man enough,
though a Catholic.  She was kept there!  Who kept her there?"

"The Abbess of the Ursulines seems to have been at the bottom of it," I
explained, fretting with impatience.  This wonder was misplaced, I
thought; and time was passing.  "Madame d'O found out where she was," I
continued, "and took her home, and then sent me to fetch you, hearing
you had crossed the river.  That is the story in brief."

"That woman sent you to fetch me?"  he repeated again.

"Yes," I answered angrily.  "She did, M. de Pavannes."

"Then," he said slowly, and with an air of solemn conviction which
could not but impress me, "there is a trap laid for me! She is the
worst, the most wicked, the vilest of women!  If she sent you, this is
a trap!  And my wife has fallen into it already!  Heaven help her--and
me--if it be so!"



CHAPTER VIII.

THE PARISIAN MATINS.

There are some statements for which it is impossible to be prepared;
statements so strong and so startling that it is impossible to answer
them except by action--by a blow.  And this of M. de Pavannes was one
of these.  If there had been any one present, I think I should have
given him the lie and drawn upon him.  But alone with him at midnight
in the shadow near the bottom of the Rue des Fosses, with no witnesses,
with every reason to feel friendly towards him, what was I to do?

As a fact, I did nothing.  I stood, silent and stupefied, waiting to
hear more.  He did not keep me long.

"She is my wife's sister," he continued grimly.  "But I have no reason
to shield her on that account!  Shield her?  Had you lived at court
only a month I might shield her all I could, M. de Caylus, it would
avail nothing.  Not Madame de Sauves is better known.  And I would not
if I could!  I know well, though my wife will not believe it, that
there is nothing so near Madame d'O's heart as to get rid of her sister
and me--of both of us--that she may succeed to Madeleine's inheritance!
Oh, yes, I had good grounds for being nervous yesterday, when my wife
did not return," he added excitedly.

"But there at least you wrong Madame d'O!"  I cried, shocked and
horrified by an accusation, which seemed so much more dreadful in the
silence and gloom--and withal so much less preposterous than it might
have seemed in the daylight.  "There you certainly wrong her!  For
shame!  M. de Pavannes."

He came a step nearer, and laying a hand on my sleeve peered into my
face.  "Did you see a priest with her?"  he asked slowly.  "A man
called the Coadjutor--a down-looking dog?"

I said--with a shiver of dread, a sudden revulsion of feeling, born of
his manner--that I had.  And I explained the part the priest had taken.

"Then," Pavannes rejoined, "I am right There IS a trap laid for me.
The Abbess of the Ursulines!  She abduct my wife?  Why, she is her
dearest friend, believe me.  It is impossible.  She would be more
likely to save her from danger than to--umph!  wait a minute."  I did:
I waited, dreading what he might discover, until he muttered, checking
himself--"Can that be it?  Can it be that the Abbess did know of some
danger threatening us, and would have put Madeleine in a safe retreat?
I wonder!"

And I wondered; and then--well, thoughts are like gunpowder.  The least
spark will fire a train.  His words were few, but they formed spark
enough to raise such a flare in my brain as for a moment blinded me,
and shook me so that I trembled.  The shock over, I was left face to
face with a possibility of wickedness such as I could never have
suspected of myself.  I remembered Mirepoix's distress and the priest's
eagerness.  I re-called the gruff warning Bezers--even Bezers, and
there was something very odd in Bezers giving a warning!--had given
Madame de Pavannes when he told her that she would be better where she
was.  I thought of the wakefulness which I had marked in the streets,
the silent hurrying to and fro, the signs of coming strife, and
contrasted these with the quietude and seeming safety of Mirepoix's
house; and I hastily asked Pavannes at what time he had been arrested.

"About an hour before midnight," he answered.

"Then you know nothing of what is happening?"  I replied quickly. "Why,
even while we are loitering here--but listen!"

And with all speed, stammering indeed in my haste and anxiety, I told
him what I had noticed in the streets, and the hints I had heard, and I
showed him the badges with which Madame had furnished me.

His manner when he had heard me out frightened me still more.  He drew
me on in a kind of fury to a house in the windows of which some lighted
candles had appeared not a minute before.

"The ring!"  he cried, "let me see the ring!  Whose is it?"

He held up my hand to this chance light and we looked at the ring.  It
was a heavy gold signet, with one curious characteristic:  it had two
facets.  On one of these was engraved the letter "H," and above it a
crown.  On the other was an eagle with outstretched wings.

Pavannes let my hand drop and leaned against the wall in sudden
despair.  "It is the Duke of Guise's," he muttered.  "It is the eagle
of Lorraine."

"Ha!"  said I softly, seeing light.  The Duke was the idol then, as
later, of the Parisian populace, and I understood now why the citizen
soldiers had shown me such respect.  They had taken me for the Duke's
envoy and confidant.

But I saw no farther.  Pavannes did, and murmured bitterly, "We may say
our prayers, we Huguenots.  That is our death-warrant. To-morrow night
there will not be one left in Paris, lad.  Guise has his father's death
to avenge, and these cursed Parisians will do his bidding like the
wolves they are!  The Baron de Rosny warned us of this, word for word.
I would to Heaven we had taken his advice!"

"Stay!"  I cried--he was going too fast for me--"stay!"  His monstrous
conception, though it marched some way with my own suspicions, outran
them far!  I saw no sufficient grounds for it. "The King--the king
would not permit such a thing, M. de Pavannes," I argued.

"Boy, you are blind!"  he rejoined impatiently, for now he saw all and
I nothing.  "Yonder was the Duke of Anjou's captain--Monsieur's
officer, the follower of France's brother, mark you! And HE--he obeyed
the Duke's ring!  The Duke has a free hand to-night, and he hates us.
And the river.  Why are we not to cross the river?  The King indeed!
The King has undone us.  He has sold us to his brother and the Guises.
VA CHASSER L'IDOLE" for the second time I heard the quaint phrase,
which I learned afterwards was an anagram of the King's name, Charles
de Valois, used by the Protestants as a password--"VA CHASSER L'IDOLE
has betrayed us!  I remember the very words he used to the Admiral,
'Now we have got you here we shall not let you go so easily!' Oh, the
traitor!  The wretched traitor!"

He leaned against the wall overcome by the horror of the conviction
which had burst upon him, and unnerved by the imminence of the peril.
At all times he was an unready man, I fancy, more fit, courage apart,
for the college than the field; and now he gave way to despair.
Perhaps the thought of his wife unmanned him.  Perhaps the excitement
through which he had already gone tended to stupefy him, or the
suddenness of the discovery.

At any rate, I was the first to gather my wits together, and my
earliest impulse was to tear into two parts a white handkerchief I had
in my pouch, and fasten one to his sleeve, the other in his hat, in
rough imitation of the badges I wore myself.

It will appear from this that I no longer trusted Madame d'O.  I was
not convinced, it is true, of her conscious guilt, still I did not
trust her entirely.  "Do not wear them on your return," she had said
and that was odd; although I could not yet believe that she was such a
siren as Father Pierre had warned us of, telling tales from old poets.
Yet I doubted, shuddering as I did so.  Her companionship with that
vile priest, her strange eagerness to secure Pavannes' return, her
mysterious directions to me, her anxiety to take her sister home--home,
where she would be exposed to danger, as being in a known Huguenot's
house--these things pointed to but one conclusion; still that one was
so horrible that I would not, even while I doubted and distrusted her,
I would not, I could not accept it.  I put it from me, and refused to
believe it, although during the rest of that night it kept coming back
to me and knocking for admission at my brain.

All this flashed through my mind while I was fixing on Pavannes'
badges.  Not that I lost time about it, for from the moment I grasped
the position as he conceived it, every minute we had wasted on
explanations seemed to me an hour.  I reproached myself for having
forgotten even for an instant that which had brought us to town--the
rescue of Kit's lover.  We had small chance now of reaching him in
time, misled as we had been by this miserable mistake in identity.  If
my companion's fears were well founded, Louis would fall in the general
massacre of the Huguenots, probably before we could reach him.  If
ill-founded, still we had small reason to hope.  Bezers' vengeance
would not wait.  I knew him too well to think it.  A Guise might spare
his foe, but the Vidame--the Vidame never!  We had warned Madame de
Pavannes it was true; but that abnormal exercise of benevolence could
only, I cynically thought, have the more exasperated the devil within
him, which now would be ravening like a dog disappointed of its
victuals.

I glanced up at the line of sky visible between the tall houses, and
lo!  the dawn was coming.  It wanted scarcely half-an-hour of daylight,
though down in the dark streets about us the night still reigned.  Yes,
the morning was coming, bright and hopeful, and the city was quiet.
There were no signs, no sounds of riot or disorder.  Surely, I thought,
surely Pavannes must be mistaken.  Either the plot had never existed,
that was most likely, or it had been abandoned, or perhaps--Crack!

A pistol shot!  Short, sharp, ominous it rang out on the instant, a
solitary sound in the night!  It was somewhere near us, and I stopped.
I had been speaking to my companion at the moment. "Where was it?"  I
cried, looking behind me.

"Close to us.  Near the Louvre," he answered, listening intently. "See!
See!  Ah, heavens!"  he continued in a voice of despair, "it was a
signal!"

It was.  One, two, three!  Before I could count so far, lights sprang
into brightness in the windows of nine out of ten houses in the short
street where we stood, as if lighted by a single hand.  Before too I
could count as many more, or ask him what this meant, before indeed, we
could speak or stir from the spot, or think what we should do, with a
hurried clang and clash, as if brought into motion by furious frenzied
hands, a great bell just above our heads began to boom and whirr!  It
hurled its notes into space, it suddenly filled all the silence.  It
dashed its harsh sounds down upon the trembling city, till the air
heaved, and the houses about us rocked.  It made in an instant a
pandemonium of the quiet night.

We turned and hurried instinctively from the place, crouching and
amazed, looking upwards with bent shoulders and scared faces. "What is
it?  What is it?"  I cried, half in resentment; half in terror.  It
deafened me.

"The bell of St. Germain l'Auxerrois!"  he shouted in answer. "The
Church of the Louvre.  It is as I said.  We are doomed!"

"Doomed?  No!"  I replied fiercely, for my courage seemed to rise again
on the wave of sound and excitement as if rebounding from the momentary
shock.  "Never!  We wear the devil's livery, and he will look after his
own.  Draw, man, and let him that stops us look to himself.  You know
the way.  Lead on!"  I cried savagely.

He caught the infection and drew his sword.  So we started boldly, and
the result justified my confidence.  We looked, no doubt, as like
murderers as any who were abroad that night. Moving in this desperate
guise we hastened up that street and into another--still pursued by the
din and clangour of the bell--and then a short distance along a third.
We were not stopped or addressed by anyone, though numbers, increasing
each moment as door after door opened, and we drew nearer to the heart
of the commotion, were hurrying in the same direction, side by side
with us; and though in front, where now and again lights gleamed on a
mass of weapons, or on white eager faces, filling some alley from wall
to wall, we heard the roar of voices rising and falling like the murmur
of an angry sea.

All was blur, hurry, confusion, tumult.  Yet I remember, as we pressed
onwards with the stream and part of it, certain sharp outlines.  I
caught here and there a glimpse of a pale scared face at a window, a
half-clad form at a door, of the big, wondering eyes of a child held up
to see us pass, of a Christ at a corner ruddy in the smoky glare of a
link, of a woman armed, and in man's clothes, who walked some distance
side by side with us, and led off a ribald song.  I retain a memory of
these things:  of brief bursts of light and long intervals of darkness,
and always, as we tramped forwards, my hand on Pavannes' sleeve, of an
ever-growing tumult in front--an ever-rising flood of noise.

At last we came to a standstill where a side street ran out of ours.
Into this the hurrying throng tried to wheel, and, unable to do so,
halted, and pressed about the head of the street, which was already
full to overflowing; and so sought with hungry eyes for places whence
they might look down it.  Pavannes and I struggled only to get through
the crowd--to get on; but the efforts of those behind partly aiding and
partly thwarting our own, presently forced us to a position whence we
could not avoid seeing what was afoot.

The street--this side street was ablaze with light.  From end to end
every gable, every hatchment was glowing, every window was flickering
in the glare of torches.  It was paved too with faces--human faces, yet
scarcely human--all looking one way, all looking upward; and the noise,
as from time to time this immense crowd groaned or howled in unison,
like a wild beast in its fury, was so appalling, that I clutched
Pavannes' arm and clung to him in momentary terror.  I do not wonder
now that I quailed, though sometimes I have heard that sound since.
For there is nothing in the world so dreadful as that brute beast we
call the CANAILLE, when the chain is off and its cowardly soul is
roused.

Near our end of the street a group of horsemen rising island-like from
the sea of heads, sat motionless in their saddles about a gateway.
They were silent, taking no notice of the rioting fiends shouting at
their girths, but watching in grim quiet what was passing within the
gates.  They were handsomely dressed, although some wore corslets over
their satin coats or lace above buff jerkins.  I could even at that
distance see the jewels gleam in the bonnet of one who seemed to be
their leader.  He was in the centre of the band, a very young man,
perhaps twenty or twenty-one, of most splendid presence, sitting his
horse superbly.  He wore a grey riding-coat, and was a head taller than
any of his companions.  There was pride in the very air with which his
horse bore him.

I did not need to ask Pavannes who he was.  I KNEW that he was the Duke
of Guise, and that the house before which he stood was Coligny's.  I
knew what was being done there.  And in the same moment I sickened with
horror and rage.  I had a vision of grey hairs and blood and fury
scarcely human, And I rebelled.  I battled with the rabble about me.  I
forced my way through them tooth and nail after Pavannes, intent only
on escaping, only on getting away from there.  And so we neither halted
nor looked back until we were clear of the crowd and had left the blaze
of light and the work doing by it some way behind us.

We found ourselves then in the mouth of an obscure alley which my
companion whispered would bring us to his house; and here we paused to
take breath and look back.  The sky was red behind us, the air full of
the clash and din of the tocsin, and the flood of sounds which poured
from every tower and steeple.  From the eastward came the rattle of
drums and random shots, and shrieks of "A BAS COLIGNY!"  "A BAS LES
HUGUENOTS!"  Meanwhile the city was rising as one man, pale at this
dread awakening.  From every window men and women, frightened by the
uproar, were craning their necks, asking or answering questions or
hurriedly calling for and kindling tapers.  But as yet the general
populace seemed to be taking no active part in the disorder.

Pavannes raised his hat an instant as we stood in the shadow of the
houses.  "The noblest man in France is dead," he said, softly and
reverently.  "God rest his soul!  They have had their way with him and
killed him like a dog.  He was an old man and they did not spare him!
A noble, and they have called in the CANAILLE to tear him.  But be
sure, my friend"--and as the speaker's tone changed and grew full and
proud, his form seemed to swell with it--"be sure the cruel shall not
live out half their days!  No. He that takes the knife shall perish by
the knife!  And go to his own place!  I shall not see it, but you will!"

His words made no great impression on me then.  My hardihood was
returning.  I was throbbing with fierce excitement, and tingling for
the fight.  But years afterwards, when the two who stood highest in the
group about Coligny's threshold died, the one at thirty-eight, the
other at thirty-five--when Henry of Guise and Henry of Valois died
within six months of one another by the assassin's knife--I remembered
Pavannes' augury.  And remembering it, I read the ways of Providence,
and saw that the very audacity of which Guise took advantage to entrap
Coligny led him too in his turn to trip smiling and bowing, a comfit
box in his hand and the kisses of his mistress damp on his lips, into a
king's closet--a king's closet at Blois!  Led him to lift the
curtain--ah!  to lift the curtain, what Frenchman does not know the
tale?--behind which stood the Admiral!

To return to our own fortunes; after a hurried glance we resumed our
way, and sped through the alley, holding a brief consultation as we
went.  Pavannes' first hasty instinct to seek shelter at home began to
lose its force, and he to consider whether his return would not
endanger his wife.  The mob might be expected to spare her, he argued.
Her death would not benefit any private foes if he escaped.  He was for
keeping away therefore.  But I would not agree to this.  The priest's
crew of desperadoes--assuming Pavannes' suspicions to be correct--would
wait some time, no doubt, to give the master of the house a chance to
return, but would certainly attack sooner or later out of greed, if
from no other motive.  Then the lady's fate would at the best be
uncertain.  I was anxious myself to rejoin my brothers, and take all
future chances, whether of saving our Louis, or escaping ourselves,
with them.  United we should be four good swords, and might at least
protect Madame de Pavannes to a place of safety, if no opportunity of
succouring Louis should present itself.  We had too the Duke's ring,
and this might be of service at a pinch. "No," I urged, "let us get
together.  We two will slip in at the front gate, and bolt and bar it,
and then we will all escape in a body at the back, while they are
forcing the gateway."

"There is no door at the back," he answered, shaking his head.

"There are windows?"

"They are too strongly barred.  We could not break out in the time," he
explained, with a groan.

I paused at that, crestfallen.  But danger quickened my wits.  In a
moment I had another plan, not so hopeful and more dangerous, yet worth
trying I thought, I told him of it, and he agreed to it.  As he nodded
assent we emerged into a street, and I saw--for the grey light of
morning was beginning to penetrate between the houses--that we were
only a few yards from the gateway, and the small door by which I had
seen my brothers enter.  Were they still in the house?  Were they safe?
I had been away an hour at least.

Anxious as I was about them, I looked round me very keenly as we
flitted across the road, and knocked gently at the door.  I thought it
so likely that we should be fallen upon here, that I stood on my guard
while we waited.  But we were not molested. The street, being at some
distance from the centre of the commotion, was still and empty, with no
signs of life apparent except the rows of heads poked through the
windows--all possessing eyes which watched us heedfully and in perfect
silence.  Yes, the street was quite empty:  except, ah!  except, for
that lurking figure, which, even as I espied it, shot round a distant
angle of the wall, and was lost to sight.

"There!"  I cried, reckless now who might hear me, "knock!  knock
louder!  never mind the noise.  The alarm is given.  A score of people
are watching us, and yonder spy has gone off to summon his friends."

The truth was my anger was rising.  I could bear no longer the silent
regards of all those eyes at the windows.  I writhed under them--cruel,
pitiless eyes they were.  I read in them a morbid curiosity, a patient
anticipation that drove me wild.  Those men and women gazing on us so
stonily knew my companion's rank and faith.  They had watched him
riding in and out daily, one of the sights of their street, gay and
gallant; and now with the same eyes they were watching greedily for the
butchers to come.  The very children took a fresh interest in him, as
one doomed and dying; and waited panting for the show to begin.  So I
read them.

"Knock!"  I repeated angrily, losing all patience.  Had I been foolish
in bringing him back to this part of the town where every soul knew
him?  "Knock; we must get in, whether or no.  They cannot all have left
the house!"

I kicked the door desperately, and my relief was great when it opened.
A servant with a pale face stood before me, his knees visibly shaking.
And behind him was Croisette.

I think we fell straightway into one another's arms.

"And Marie," I cried, "Marie?"

"Marie is within, and madame," he answered joyfully; "we are together
again and nothing matters, But oh, Anne, where have you been?  And what
is the matter?  Is it a great fire?  Or is the king dead?  Or what is
it?"

I told him.  I hastily poured out some of the things which had happened
to me, and some which I feared were in store for others. Naturally he
was surprised and shocked by the latter, though his fears had already
been aroused.  But his joy and relief, when he heard the mystery of
Louis de Pavannes' marriage explained, were so great that they
swallowed up all other feelings.  He could not say enough about it.  He
pictured Louis again and again as Kit's lover, as our old friend, our
companion; as true, staunch, brave without fear, without reproach:  and
it was long before his eyes ceased to sparkle, his tongue to run
merrily, the colour to mantle in his cheeks--long that is as time is
counted by minutes. But presently the remembrance of Louis' danger and
our own position returned more vividly.  Our plan for rescuing him had
failed--failed!

"No!  no!"  cried Croisette, stoutly.  He would not hear of it. He
would not have it at any price.  "No, we will not give up hope!  We
will go shoulder to shoulder and find him.  Louis is as brave as a lion
and as quick as a weasel.  We will find him in time yet.  We will go
when--I mean as soon as--"

He faltered, and paused.  His sudden silence as he looked round the
empty forecourt in which we stood was eloquent.  The cold light, faint
and uncertain yet, was stealing into the court, disclosing a row of
stables on either side, and a tiny porter's hutch by the gates, and
fronting us a noble house of four storys, tall, grey, grim-looking.

I assented; gloomily however.  "Yes," I said, "we will go when--"

And I too stopped.  The same thought was in my mind.  How could we
leave these people?  How could we leave madame in her danger and
distress?  How could we return her kindness by desertion?  We could
not.  No, not for Kit's sake.  Because after all Louis, our Louis, was
a man, and must take his chance.  He must take his chance.  But I
groaned.

So that was settled.  I had already explained our plan to Croisette:
and now as we waited he began to tell me a story, a long, confused
story about Madame d'O.  I thought he was talking for the sake of
talking--to keep up our spirits--and I did not attend much to him; so
that he had not reached the gist of it, or at least I had not grasped
it, when a noise without stayed his tongue.  It was the tramp of
footsteps, apparently of a large party in the street.  It forced him to
break off, and promptly drove us all to our posts.

But before we separated a slight figure, hardly noticeable in that dim,
uncertain light, passed me quickly, laying for an instant a soft hand
in mine as I stood waiting by the gates.  I have said I scarcely saw
the figure, though I did see the kind timid eyes, and the pale cheeks
under the hood; but I bent over the hand and kissed it, and felt, truth
to tell, no more regret nor doubt where our duty lay.  But stood,
waiting patiently.



CHAPTER IX.

THE HEAD OF ERASMUS.

Waiting, and waiting alone!  The gates were almost down now.  The gang
of ruffians without, reinforced each moment by volunteers eager for
plunder, rained blows unceasingly on hinge and socket; and still hotter
and faster through a dozen rifts in the timbers came the fire of their
threats and curses.  Many grew tired, but others replaced them.  Tools
broke, but they brought more and worked with savage energy.  They had
shown at first a measure of prudence; looking to be fired on, and to be
resisted by men, surprised, indeed, but desperate; and the bolder of
them only had advanced.  But now they pressed round unchecked, meeting
no resistance.  They would scarcely stand back to let the sledges have
swing; but hallooed and ran in on the creaking beams and beat them with
their fists, whenever the gates swayed under a blow.

One stout iron bar still held its place.  And this I watched as if
fascinated.  I was alone in the empty courtyard, standing a little
aside, sheltered by one of the stone pillars from which the gates hung.
Behind me the door of the house stood ajar. Candles, which the daylight
rendered garish, still burned in the rooms on the first floor, of which
the tall narrow windows were open.  On the wide stone sill of one of
these stood Croisette, a boyish figure, looking silently down at me,
his hand on the latticed shutter.  He looked pale, and I nodded and
smiled at him.  I felt rather anger than fear myself; remembering, as
the fiendish cries half-deafened me, old tales of the Jacquerie and its
doings, and how we had trodden it out.

Suddenly the din and tumult flashed to a louder note; as when hounds on
the scent give tongue at sight.  I turned quickly from the house,
recalled to a sense of the position and peril.  The iron bar was
yielding to the pressure.  Slowly the left wing of the gate was sinking
inwards.  Through the widening chasm I caught a glimpse of wild, grimy
faces and bloodshot eyes, and heard above the noise a sharp cry from
Croisette--a cry of terror.  Then I turned and ran, with a defiant
gesture and an answering yell, right across the forecourt and up the
steps to the door.

I ran the faster for the sharp report of a pistol behind me, and the
whirr of a ball past my ear.  But I was not scared by it: and as my
feet alighted with a bound on the topmost step, I glanced back.  The
dogs were halfway across the court.  I made a bungling attempt to shut
and lock the great door--failed in this; and heard behind me a roar of
coarse triumph.  I waited for no more. I darted up the oak staircase
four steps at a time, and rushed into the great drawing-room on my
left, banging the door behind me.

The once splendid room was in a state of strange disorder.  Some of the
rich tapestry had been hastily torn down.  One window was closed and
shuttered; no doubt Croisette had done it.  The other two were open--as
if there had not been time to close them--and the cold light which they
admitted contrasted in ghastly fashion with the yellow rays of candles
still burning in the sconces. The furniture had been huddled aside or
piled into a barricade, a CHEVAUX DE FRISE of chairs and tables
stretching across the width of the room, its interstices stuffed with,
and its weakness partly screened by, the torn-down hangings.  Behind
this frail defence their backs to a door which seemed to lead to an
inner room, stood Marie and Croisette, pale and defiant.  The former
had a long pike; the latter levelled a heavy, bell-mouthed arquebuse
across the back of a chair, and blew up his match as I entered.  Both
had in addition procured swords.  I darted like a rabbit through a
little tunnel left on purpose for me in the rampart, and took my stand
by them.

"Is all right?"  ejaculated Croisette turning to me nervously.

"All right, I think," I answered.  I was breathless.

"You are not hurt?"

"Not touched!"

I had just time then to draw my sword before the assailants streamed
into the room, a dozen ruffians, reeking and tattered, with flushed
faces and greedy, staring eyes.  Once inside, however, suddenly--so
suddenly that an idle spectator might have found the change
ludicrous--they came to a stop.  Their wild cries ceased, and tumbling
over one another with curses and oaths they halted, surveying us in
muddled surprise; seeing what was before them, and not liking it.
Their leader appeared to be a tall butcher with a pole-axe on his
half-naked shoulder; but there were among them two or three soldiers in
the royal livery and carrying pikes.  They had looked for victims only,
having met with no resistance at the gate, and the foremost recoiled
now on finding themselves confronted by the muzzle of the arquebuse and
the lighted match.

I seized the occasion.  I knew, indeed, that the pause presented our
only chance, and I sprang on a chair and waved my hand for silence.
The instinct of obedience for the moment asserted itself; there was a
stillness in the room.

"Beware!"  I cried loudly--as loudly and confidently as I could,
considering that there was a quaver at my heart as I looked on those
savage faces, which met and yet avoided my eye.  "Beware of what you
do!  We are Catholics one and all like yourselves, and good sons of the
Church.  Ay, and good subjects too!  VIVE LE ROI, gentlemen!  God save
the King!  I say."  And I struck the barricade with my sword until the
metal rang again.  "God save the King!"

"Cry VIVE LA MESSE!"  shouted one.

"Certainly, gentlemen!"  I replied, with politeness.  "With all my
heart.  VIVE LA MESSE!  VIVE LA MESSE!"

This took the butcher, who luckily was still sober, utterly aback.  He
had never thought of this.  He stared at us as if the ox he had been
about to fell had opened its mouth and spoken, and grievously at a
loss, he looked for help to his companions.

Later in the day, some Catholics were killed by the mob.  But their
deaths as far as could be learned afterwards were due to private feuds.
Save in such cases--and they were few--the cry of VIVE LA MESSE!
always obtained at least a respite:  more easily of course in the
earlier hours of the morning when the mob were scarce at ease in their
liberty to kill, while killing still seemed murder, and men were not
yet drunk with bloodshed.

I read the hesitation of the gang in their faces:  and when one asked
roughly who we were, I replied with greater boldness, "I am M. Anne de
Caylus, nephew to the Vicomte de Caylus, Governor, under the King, of
Bayonne and the Landes!"  This I said with what majesty I could.  "And
these" I continued--"are my brothers. You will harm us at your peril,
gentlemen.  The Vicomte, believe me, will avenge every hair of our
heads."

I can shut my eyes now and see the stupid wonder, the baulked ferocity
of those gaping faces.  Dull and savage as the men were they were
impressed; they saw reason indeed, and all seemed going well for us
when some one in the rear shouted, "Cursed whelps! Throw them over!"

I looked swiftly in the direction whence the voice came--the darkest
corner of the room the corner by the shuttered window.  I thought I
made out a slender figure, cloaked and masked--a woman's it might be
but I could not be certain and beside it a couple of sturdy fellows,
who kept apart from the herd and well behind their fugleman.

The speaker's courage arose no doubt from his position at the back of
the room, for the foremost of the assailants seemed less determined.
We were only three, and we must have gone down, barricade and all,
before a rush.  But three are three.  And an arquebuse--Croisette's
match burned splendidly--well loaded with slugs is an ugly weapon at
five paces, and makes nasty wounds, besides scattering its charge
famously.  This, a good many of them and the leaders in particular,
seemed to recognise.  We might certainly take two or three lives:  and
life is valuable to its owner when plunder is afoot.  Besides most of
them had common sense enough to remember that there were scores of
Huguenots--genuine heretics--to be robbed for the killing, so why go
out of the way, they reasoned, to cut a Catholic throat, and perhaps
get into trouble.  Why risk Montfaucon for a whim?  and offend a man of
influence like the Vicomte de Caylus, for nothing!

Unfortunately at this crisis their original design was recalled to
their minds by the same voice behind, crying out, "Pavannes! Where is
Pavannes?"

"Ay!"  shouted the butcher, grasping the idea, and at the same time
spitting on his hands and taking a fresh grip of the axe, "Show us the
heretic dog, and go!  Let us at him."

"M. de Pavannes," I said coolly--but I could not take my eyes off the
shining blade of that man's axe, it was so very broad and sharp--"is
not here!"

"That is a lie!  He is in that room behind you!"  the prudent gentleman
in the background called out.  "Give him up!"

"Ay, give him up!"  echoed the man of the pole-axe almost good
humouredly, "or it will be the worse for you.  Let us have at him and
get you gone!"

This with an air of much reason, while a growl as of a chained beast
ran through the crowd, mingled with cries of "A MORT LES HUGUENOTS!
VIVE LORRAINE!"--cries which seemed to show that all did not approve of
the indulgence offered us.

"Beware, gentlemen, beware," I urged, "I swear he is not here!  I swear
it, do you hear?"

A howl of impatience and then a sudden movement of the crowd as though
the rush were coming warned me to temporize no longer. "Stay!  Stay!"
I added hastily.  "One minute!  Hear me!  You are too many for us.
Will you swear to let us go safe and untouched, if we give you passage?"

A dozen voices shrieked assent.  But I looked at the butcher only.  He
seemed to be an honest man, out of his profession.

"Ay, I swear it!"  he cried with a nod.

"By the Mass?"

"By the Mass."

I twitched Croisette's sleeve, and he tore the fuse from his weapon,
and flung the gun--too heavy to be of use to us longer--to the ground.
It was done in a moment.  While the mob swept over the barricade, and
smashed the rich furniture of it in wanton malice, we filed aside, and
nimbly slipped under it one by one.  Then we hurried in single file to
the end of the room, no one taking much notice of us.  All were
pressing on, intent on their prey.  We gained the door as the butcher
struck his first blow on that which we had guarded--on that which we
had given up. We sprang down the stairs with bounding hearts, heard as
we reached the outer door the roar of many voices, but stayed not to
look behind--paused indeed for nothing.  Fear, to speak candidly, lent
us wings.  In three seconds we had leapt the prostrate gates, and were
in the street.  A cripple, two or three dogs, a knot of women looking
timidly yet curiously in, a horse tethered to the staple--we saw
nothing else.  No one stayed us.  No one raised a hand, and in another
minute we had turned a corner, and were out of sight of the house.

"They will take a gentleman's word another time," I said with a quiet
smile as I put up my sword.

"I would like to see her face at this moment," Croisette replied. "You
saw Madame d'O?"

I shook my head, not answering.  I was not sure, and I had a queer,
sickening dread of the subject.  If I had seen her, I had seen oh!  it
was too horrible, too unnatural!  Her own sister! Her own brother
in-law!

I hastened to change the subject.  "The Pavannes," I made shift to say,
"must have had five minutes' start."

"More," Croisette answered, "if Madame and he got away at once. If all
has gone well with them, and they have not been stopped in the streets
they should be at Mirepoix's by now.  They seemed to be pretty sure
that he would take them in."

"Ah!"  I sighed.  "What fools we were to bring madame from that place!
If we had not meddled with her affairs we might have reached Louis long
ago our Louis, I mean."

"True," Croisette answered softly, "but remember that then we should
not have saved the other Louis as I trust we have.  He would still be
in Pallavicini's hands.  Come, Anne, let us think it is all for the
best," he added, his face shining with a steady courage that shamed me.
"To the rescue!  Heaven will help us to be in time yet!"

"Ay, to the rescue!"  I replied, catching his spirit.  "First to the
right, I think, second to the left, first on the right again. That was
the direction given us, was it not?  The house opposite a book-shop
with the sign of the Head of Erasmus.  Forward, boys! We may do it yet."

But before I pursue our fortunes farther let me explain.  The room we
had guarded so jealously was empty!  The plan had been mine and I was
proud of it.  For once Croisette had fallen into his rightful place.
My flight from the gate, the vain attempt to close the house, the
barricade before the inner door--these were all designed to draw the
assailants to one spot.  Pavannes and his wife--the latter hastily
disguised as a boy--had hidden behind the door of the hutch by the
gates--the porter's hutch, and had slipped out and fled in the first
confusion of the attack.

Even the servants, as we learned afterwards, who had hidden themselves
in the lower parts of the house got away in the same manner, though
some of them--they were but few in all were stopped as Huguenots and
killed before the day ended.  I had the more reason to hope that
Pavannes and his wife would get clear off, inasmuch as I had given the
Duke's ring to him, thinking it might serve him in a strait, and
believing that we should have little to fear ourselves once clear of
his house; unless we should meet the Vidame indeed.

We did not meet him as it turned out; but before we had traversed a
quarter of the distance we had to go we found that fears based on
reason were not the only terrors we had to resist.  Pavannes' house,
where we had hitherto been, stood at some distance from the centre of
the blood-storm which was enwrapping unhappy Paris that morning.  It
was several hundred paces from the Rue de Bethisy where the Admiral
lived, and what with this comparative remoteness and the excitement of
our own little drama, we had not attended much to the fury of the
bells, the shots and cries and uproar which proclaimed the state of the
city.  We had not pictured the scenes which were happening so near.
Now in the streets the truth broke upon us, and drove the blood from
our cheeks.  A hundred yards, the turning of a corner, sufficed.  We
who but yesterday left the country, who only a week before were boys,
careless as other boys, not recking of death at all, were plunged now
into the midst of horrors I cannot describe.  And the awful contrast
between the sky above and the things about us! Even now the lark was
singing not far from us; the sunshine was striking the topmost storeys
of the houses; the fleecy clouds were passing overhead, the freshness
of a summer morning was--

Ah! where was it?  Not here in the narrow lanes surely, that echoed and
re-echoed with shrieks and curses and frantic prayers: in which bands
of furious men rushed up and down, and where archers of the guard and
the more cruel rabble were breaking in doors and windows, and hurrying
with bloody weapons from house to house, seeking, pursuing, and at last
killing in some horrid corner, some place of darkness--killing with
blow on blow dealt on writhing bodies!  Not here, surely, where each
minute a child, a woman died silently, a man snarling like a
wolf--happy if he had snatched his weapon and got his back to the wall:
where foul corpses dammed the very blood that ran down the kennel, and
children--little children--played with them!

I was at Cahors in 1580 in the great street fight; and there women were
killed, I was with Chatillon nine years later, when he rode through the
Faubourgs of Paris, with this very day and his father Coligny in his
mind, and gave no quarter.  I was at Courtas and Ivry, and more than
once have seen prisoners led out to be piked in batches--ay, and by
hundreds!  But war is war, and these were its victims, dying for the
most part under God's heaven with arms in their hands:  not men and
women fresh roused from their sleep.  I felt on those occasions no such
horror, I have never felt such burning pity and indignation as on the
morning I am describing, that long-past summer morning when I first saw
the sun shining on the streets of Paris.  Croisette clung to me, sick
and white, shutting his eyes and ears, and letting me guide him as I
would.  Marie strode along on the other side of him, his lips closed,
his eyes sinister.  Once a soldier of the guard whose blood-stained
hands betrayed the work he had done, came reeling--he was drunk, as
were many of the butchers--across our path, and I gave way a little.
Marie did not, but walked stolidly on as if he did not see him, as if
the way were clear, and there were no ugly thing in God's image
blocking it.

Only his hand went as if by accident to the haft of his dagger. The
archer--fortunately for himself and for us too--reeled clear of us.  We
escaped that danger.  But to see women killed and pass by--it was
horrible!  So horrible that if in those moments I had had the
wishing-cap, I would have asked but for five thousand riders, and leave
to charge with them through the streets of Paris!  I would have had the
days of the Jacquerie back again, and my men-at-arms behind me!

For ourselves, though the orgy was at its height when we passed, we
were not molested.  We were stopped indeed three times--once in each of
the streets we traversed--by different bands of murderers.  But as we
wore the same badges as themselves, and cried "VIVE LA MESSE!"  and
gave our names, we were allowed to proceed.  I can give no idea of the
confusion and uproar, and I scarcely believe myself now that we saw
some of the things we witnessed.  Once a man gaily dressed, and
splendidly mounted, dashed past us, waving his naked sword and crying
in a frenzied way "Bleed them!  Bleed them!  Bleed in May, as good
to-day!" and never ceased crying out the same words until he passed
beyond our hearing.  Once we came upon the bodies of a father and two
sons, which lay piled together in the kennel; partly stripped already.
The youngest boy could not have been more than thirteen, I mention this
group, not as surpassing others in pathos, but because it is well known
now that this boy, Jacques Nompar de Caumont, was not dead, but lives
to-day, my friend the Marshal de la Force.

This reminds me too of the single act of kindness we were able to
perform.  We found ourselves suddenly, on turning a corner, amid a gang
of seven or eight soldiers, who had stopped and surrounded a handsome
boy, apparently about fourteen.  He wore a scholar's gown, and had some
books under his arm, to which he clung firmly--though only perhaps by
instinct--notwithstanding the furious air of the men who were
threatening him with death.  They were loudly demanding his name, as we
paused opposite them.  He either could not or would not give it, but
said several times in his fright that he was going to the College of
Burgundy.  Was he a Catholic?  they cried.  He was silent.  With an
oath the man who had hold of his collar lifted up his pike, and
naturally the lad raised the books to guard his face.  A cry broke from
Croisette. We rushed forward to stay the blow.

"See!  see!"  he exclaimed loudly, his voice arresting the man's arm in
the very act of falling.  "He has a Mass Book!  He has a Mass Book!  He
is not a heretic!  He is a Catholic!"

The fellow lowered his weapon, and sullenly snatched the books. He
looked at them stupidly with bloodshot wandering eyes, the red cross on
the vellum bindings, the only thing he understood.  But it was enough
for him; he bid the boy begone, and released him with a cuff and an
oath.

Croisette was not satisfied with this, though I did not understand his
reason; only I saw him exchange a glance with the lad.  "Come, come!"
he said lightly.  "Give him his books!  You do not want them!"

But on that the men turned savagely upon us.  They did not thank us for
the part we had already taken; and this they thought was going too far.
They were half drunk and quarrelsome, and being two to one, and two
over, began to flourish their weapons in our faces.  Mischief would
certainly have been done, and very quickly, had not an unexpected ally
appeared on our side.

"Put up! put up!" this gentleman cried in a boisterous voice--he was
already in our midst.  "What is all this about?  What is the use of
fighting amongst ourselves, when there is many a bonny throat to cut,
and heaven to be gained by it!  put up, I say!"

"Who are you?"  they roared in chorus.

"The Duke of Guise!"  he answered coolly.  "Let the gentlemen go, and
be hanged to you, you rascals!"

The man's bearing was a stronger argument than his words, for I am sure
that a stouter or more reckless blade never swaggered in church or
street.  I knew him instantly, and even the crew of butchers seemed to
see in him their master.  They hung back a few curses at him, but
having nothing to gain they yielded.  They threw down the books with
contempt--showing thereby their sense of true religion; and trooped off
roaring, "TUES!  TUES!  Aux Huguenots!"  at the top of their voices.

The newcomer thus left with us was Bure--Blaise Bure--the same who only
yesterday, though it seemed months and months back, had lured us into
Bezers' power.  Since that moment we had not seen him.  Now he had
wiped off part of the debt, and we looked at him, uncertain whether to
reproach him or no.  He, however, was not one whit abashed, but
returned our regards with a not unkindly leer.

"I bear no malice, young gentlemen," he said impudently.

"No, I should think not," I answered.

"And besides, we are quits now," the knave continued.

"You are very kind," I said.

"To be sure.  You did me a good turn once," he answered, much to my
surprise.  He seemed to be in earnest now.  "You do not remember it,
young gentleman, but it was you and your brother here"--he pointed to
Croisette--"did it!  And by the Pope and the King of Spain I have not
forgotten it!"

"I have," I said.

"What!  You have forgotten spitting that fellow at Caylus ten days ago?
CA!  SA!  You remember.  And very cleanly done, too! A pretty stroke!
Well, M. Anne, that was a clever fellow, a very clever fellow.  He
thought so and I thought so, and what was more to the purpose the most
noble Raoul de Bezers thought so too. You understand!"

He leered at me and I did understand.  I understood that unwittingly I
had rid Blaise Bure of a rival.  This accounted for the respectful,
almost the kindly way in which he had--well, deceived us.

"That is all," he said.  "If you want as much done for you, let me
know.  For the present, gentlemen, farewell!"

He cocked his hat fiercely, and went off at speed the way we had
ourselves been going; humming as he went,

  "Ce petit homme tant joli,
   Qui toujours cause et toujours rit,
   Qui toujours baise sa mignonne
   Dieu gard' de mal ce petit homme!"

His reckless song came back to us on the summer breeze.  We watched him
make a playful pass at a corpse which some one had propped in ghastly
fashion against a door--and miss it--and go on whistling the same
air--and then a corner hid him from view.

We lingered only a moment ourselves; merely to speak to the boy we had
befriended.

"Show the books if anyone challenges you," said Croisette to him
shrewdly.  Croisette was so much of a boy himself, with his fair hair
like a halo about his white, excited face, that the picture of the two,
one advising the other, seemed to me a strangely pretty one.  "Show the
books and point to the cross on them.  And Heaven send you safe to your
college."

"I would like to know your name, if you please," said the boy. His
coolness and dignity struck me as admirable under the circumstances.
"I am Maximilian de Bethune, son of the Baron de Rosny."

"Then," said Croisette briskly, "one good turn has deserved another.
Your father, yesterday, at Etampes--no it was the day before, but we
have not been in bed--warned us--"

He broke off suddenly; then cried, "Run!  run!"

The boy needed no second warning indeed.  He was off like the wind down
the street, for we had seen and so had he, the stealthy approach of two
or three prowling rascals on the look out for a victim.  They caught
sight of him and were strongly inclined to follow him; but we were
their match in numbers.  The street was otherwise empty at the moment:
and we showed them three excellent reasons why they should give him a
clear start.

His after adventures are well-known:  for he, too, lives.  He was
stopped twice after he left us.  In each case he escaped by showing his
book of offices.  On reaching the college the porter refused to admit
him, and he remained for some time in the open street exposed to
constant danger of losing his life, and knowing not what to do.  At
length he induced the gatekeeper, by the present of some small pieces
of money, to call the principal of the college, and this man humanely
concealed him for three days. The massacre being then at an end, two
armed men in his father's pay sought him out and restored him to his
friends.  So near was France to losing her greatest minister, the Duke
de Sully.

To return to ourselves.  The lad out of sight, we instantly resumed our
purpose, and trying to shut our eyes and ears to the cruelty, and
ribaldry, and uproar through which we had still to pass, we counted our
turnings with a desperate exactness, intent only on one thing--to reach
Louis de Pavannes, to reach the house opposite to the Head of Erasmus,
as quickly as we could.  We presently entered a long, narrow street.
At the end of it the river was visible gleaming and sparkling in the
sunlight.  The street was quiet; quiet and empty.  There was no living
soul to be seen from end to end of it, only a prowling dog.  The noise
of the tumult raging in other parts was softened here by distance and
the intervening houses.  We seemed to be able to breathe more freely.

"This should be our street," said Croisette.

I nodded.  At the same moment I espied, half-way down it, the sign we
needed and pointed to it, But ah!  were we in time?  Or too late?  That
was the question.  By a single impulse we broke into a run, and shot
down the roadway at speed.  A few yards short of the Head of Erasmus we
came, one by one, Croisette first, to a full stop.  A full stop!

The house opposite the bookseller's was sacked!  gutted from top to
bottom.  It was a tall house, immediately fronting the street, and
every window in it was broken.  The door hung forlornly on one hinge,
glaring cracks in its surface showing where the axe had splintered it.
Fragments of glass and ware, hung out and shattered in sheer
wantonness, strewed the steps:  and down one corner of the latter a
dark red stream trickled--to curdle by and by in the gutter.  Whence
came the stream?  Alas!  there was something more to be seen yet,
something our eyes instinctively sought last of all.  The body of a man.

It lay on the threshold, the head hanging back, the wide glazed eyes
looking up to the summer sky whence the sweltering heat would soon pour
down upon it.  We looked shuddering at the face. It was that of a
servant, a valet who had been with Louis at Caylus.  We recognised him
at once for we had known and liked him.  He had carried our guns on the
hills a dozen times, and told us stories of the war.  The blood crawled
slowly from him. He was dead.

Croisette began to shake all over.  He clutched one of the pillars,
which bore up the porch, and pressed his face against its cold surface,
hiding his eyes from the sight.  The worst had come.  In our hearts I
think we had always fancied some accident would save our friend, some
stranger warn him.

"Oh, poor, poor Kit!"  Croisette cried, bursting suddenly into violent
sobs.  "Oh, Kit!  Kit!"



CHAPTER X.

HAU, HAU, HUGUENOTS!

His late Majesty, Henry the Fourth, I remember--than whom no braver man
wore sword, who loved danger indeed for its own sake, and courted it as
a mistress--could never sleep on the night before an action.  I have
heard him say himself that it was so before the fight at Arques.
Croisette partook of this nature too, being high-strung and apt to be
easily over-wrought, but never until the necessity for exertion had
passed away:  while Marie and I, though not a whit stouter at a pinch,
were slower to feel and less easy to move--more Germanic in fact.

I name this here partly lest it should be thought after what I have
just told of Croisette that there was anything of the woman about
him--save the tenderness; and partly to show that we acted at this
crisis each after his manner.  While Croisette turned pale and
trembled, and hid his eyes, I stood dazed, looking from the desolate
house to the face stiffening in the sunshine, and back again;
wondering, though I had seen scores of dead faces since daybreak, and a
plenitude of suffering in all dreadful shapes, how Providence could let
this happen to us.  To us!  In his instincts man is as selfish as any
animal that lives.

I saw nothing indeed of the dead face and dead house after the first
convincing glance.  I saw instead with hot, hot eyes the old castle at
home, the green fields about the brook, and the grey hills rising from
them; and the terrace, and Kit coming to meet us, Kit with white face
and parted lips and avid eyes that questioned us!  And we with no
comfort to give her, no lover to bring back to her!

A faint noise behind as of a sign creaking in the wind, roused me from
this most painful reverie.  I turned round, not quickly or in surprise
or fear.  Rather in the same dull wonder.  The upper part of the
bookseller's door was ajar.  It was that I had heard opened.  An old
woman was peering out at us.

As our eyes met, she made a slight movement to close the door again.
But I did not stir, and seeming to be reassured by a second glance, she
nodded to me in a stealthy fashion.  I drew a step nearer, listlessly.
"Pst!  Pst!"  she whispered.  Her wrinkled old face, which was like a
Normandy apple long kept, was soft with pity as she looked at
Croisette.  "Pst!"

"Well!"  I said, mechanically.

"Is he taken?"  she muttered.

"Who taken?"  I asked stupidly.

She nodded towards the forsaken house, and answered, "The young lord
who lodged there?  Ah!  sirs," she continued, "he looked gay and
handsome, if you'll believe me, as he came from the king's court yester
even!  As bonny a sight in his satin coat, and his ribbons, as my eyes
ever saw!  And to think that they should be hunting him like a rat
to-day!"

The woman's words were few and simple.  But what a change they made in
my world!  How my heart awoke from its stupor, and leapt up with a new
joy and a new-born hope!  "Did he get away?"  I cried eagerly.  "Did he
escape, mother, then?"

"Ay, that he did!"  she replied quickly.  "That poor fellow, yonder--he
lies quiet enough now God forgive him his heresy, say I!--kept the door
manfully while the gentleman got on the roof, and ran right down the
street on the tops of the houses, with them firing and hooting at him:
for all the world as if he had been a squirrel and they a pack of boys
with stones!"

"And he escaped?"

"Escaped!"  she answered more slowly, shaking her old head in doubt.
"I do not know about that I fear they have got him by now, gentlemen.
I have been shivering and shaking up stairs with my husband--he is in
bed, good man, and the safest place for him--the saints have mercy upon
us!  But I heard them go with their shouting and gunpowder right along
to the river, and I doubt they will take him between this and the
CHATELET!  I doubt they will."

"How long ago was it, dame?"  I cried.

"Oh!  may be half an hour.  Perhaps you are friends of his?"  she added
questioningly.

But I did not stay to answer her.  I shook Croisette, who had not heard
a word of this, by the shoulder. "There is a chance that he has
escaped!"  I cried in his ear.  "Escaped, do you hear?"  And I told him
hastily what she had said.

It was fine, indeed, and a sight, to see the blood rush to his cheeks,
and the tears dry in his eyes, and energy and decision spring to life
in every nerve and muscle of his face, "Then there is hope?"  he cried,
grasping my arm.  "Hope, Anne!  Come!  Come! Do not let us lose another
instant.  If he be alive let us join him!"

The old woman tried to detain us, but in vain.  Nay, pitying us, and
fearing, I think, that we were rushing on our deaths, she cast aside
her caution, and called after us aloud.  We took no heed, running after
Croisette, who had not waited for our answer, as fast as young limbs
could carry us down the street.  The exhaustion we had felt a moment
before when all seemed lost be it remembered that we had not been to
bed or tasted food for many hours--fell from us on the instant, and was
clean gone and forgotten in the joy of this respite.  Louis was living
and for the moment had escaped.

Escaped!  But for how long?  We soon had our answer.  The moment we
turned the corner by the river-side, the murmur of a multitude not loud
but continuous, struck our ears, even as the breeze off the water swept
our cheeks.  Across the river lay the thousand roofs of the Ile de la
Cite, all sparkling in the sunshine.  But we swept to the right,
thinking little of THAT sight, and checked our speed on finding
ourselves on the skirts of the crowd. Before us was a bridge--the Pont
au Change, I think--and at its head on our side of the water stood the
CHATELET, with its hoary turrets and battlements.  Between us and the
latter, and backed only by the river, was a great open space
half-filled with people, mostly silent and watchful, come together as
to a show, and betraying, at present at least, no desire to take an
active part in what was going on.

We hurriedly plunged into the throng, and soon caught the clue to the
quietness and the lack of movement which seemed to prevail, and which
at first sight had puzzled us.  For a moment the absence of the
dreadful symptoms we had come to know so well--the flying and pursuing,
the random blows, the shrieks and curses and batterings on doors, the
tipsy yells, had reassured us.  But the relief was short-lived.  The
people before us were under control. A tighter grip seemed to close
upon our hearts as we discerned this, for we knew that the wild fury of
the populace, like the rush of a bull, might have given some chance of
escape--in this case as in others.  But this cold-blooded ordered
search left none.

Every face about us was turned in the same direction; away from the
river and towards a block of old houses which stood opposite to it.
The space immediately in front of these was empty, the people being
kept back by a score or so of archers of the guard set at intervals,
and by as many horsemen, who kept riding up and down, belabouring the
bolder spirits with the flat of their swords, and so preserving a line.
At each extremity of this--more noticeably on our left where the line
curved round the angle of the buildings--stood a handful of riders,
seven in a group perhaps.  And alone in the middle of the space so kept
clear, walking his horse up and down and gazing at the houses rode a
man of great stature, booted and armed, the feather nodding in his
bonnet.  I could not see his face, but I had no need to see it. I knew
him, and groaned aloud.  It was Bezers!

I understood the scene better now.  The horsemen, stern, bearded
Switzers for the most part, who eyed the rabble about them with grim
disdain, and were by no means chary of their blows, were all in his
colours and armed to the teeth.  The order and discipline were of his
making:  the revenge of his seeking.  A grasp as of steel had settled
upon our friend, and I felt that his last chance was gone.  Louis de
Pavannes might as well be lying on his threshold with his dead servant
by his side, as be in hiding within that ring of ordered swords.

It was with despairing eyes we looked at the old wooden houses. They
seemed to be bowing themselves towards us, their upper stories
projected so far, they were so decrepit.  Their roofs were a wilderness
of gutters and crooked gables, of tottering chimneys and wooden
pinnacles and rotting beams, Amongst these I judged Kit's lover was
hiding.  Well, it was a good place for hide and seek--with any other
player than DEATH.  In the ground floors of the houses there were no
windows and no doors; by reason, I learned afterwards, of the frequent
flooding of the river.  But a long wooden gallery raised on struts ran
along the front, rather more than the height of a man from the ground,
and access to this was gained by a wooden staircase at each end. Above
this first gallery was a second, and above that a line of windows set
between the gables.  The block--it may have run for seventy or eighty
yards along the shore--contained four houses, each with a door opening
on to the lower gallery.  I saw indeed that but for the Vidame's
precautions Louis might well have escaped.  Had the mob once poured
helter-skelter into that labyrinth of rooms and passages he might with
luck have mingled with them, unheeded and unrecognized, and effected
his escape when they retreated.

But now there were sentries on each gallery and more on the roof.
Whenever one of the latter moved or seemed to be looking inward--where
a search party, I understood, were at work--indeed, if he did but turn
his head, a thrill ran through the crowd and a murmur arose, which once
or twice swelled to a savage roar such as earlier had made me tremble.
When this happened the impulse came, it seemed to me, from the farther
end of the line.  There the rougher elements were collected, and there
I more than once saw Bezers' troopers in conflict with the mob.  In
that quarter too a savage chant was presently struck up, the whole
gathering joining in and yelling with an indescribably appalling effect:

  "Hau!  Hau!  Huguenots!
   Faites place aux Papegots!"

in derision of the old song said to be popular amongst the Protestants.
But in the Huguenot version the last words were of course transposed.

We had worked our way by this time to the front of the line, and
looking into one another's eyes, mutely asked a question; but not even
Croisette had an answer ready.  There could be no answer but one.  What
could we do?  Nothing.  We were too late.  Too late again!  And yet how
dreadful it was to stand still among the cruel, thoughtless mob and see
our friend, the touch of whose hand we knew so well, done to death for
their sport!  Done to death as the old woman had said like any rat, not
a soul save ourselves pitying him!  Not a soul to turn sick at his cry
of agony, or shudder at the glance of his dying eyes.  It was dreadful
indeed.

"Ah, well," muttered a woman beside me to her companion--there were
many women in the crowd--"it is down with the Huguenots, say I!  It is
Lorraine is the fine man!  But after all yon is a bonny fellow and a
proper, Margot!  I saw him leap from roof to roof over Love Lane, as if
the blessed saints had carried him. And him a heretic!"

"It is the black art," the other answered, crossing herself.

"Maybe it is!  But he will need it all to give that big man the slip
to-day," replied the first speaker comfortably.

"That devil!"  Margot exclaimed, pointing with a stealthy gesture of
hate at the Vidame.  And then in a fierce whisper, with inarticulate
threats, she told a story of him, which made me shudder.  "He did!  And
she in religion too!"  she concluded. "May our Lady of Loretto reward
him."

The tale might be true for aught I knew, horrible as it was!  I had
heard similar ones attributing things almost as fiendish to him, times
and again; from that poor fellow lying dead on Pavannes' doorstep for
one, and from others besides.  As the Vidame in his pacing to and fro
turned towards us, I gazed at him fascinated by his grim visage and
that story.  His eye rested on the crowd about us, and I trembled, lest
even at that distance he should recognise us.

And he did!  I had forgotten his keenness of sight.  His face flashed
suddenly into a grim smile.  The tail of his eye resting upon us, and
seeming to forbid us to move, he gave some orders. The colour fled from
my face.  To escape indeed was impossible, for we were hemmed in by the
press and could scarcely stir a limb.  Yet I did make one effort.

"Croisette!"  I muttered he was the rearmost--"stoop down.  He may not
have seen you.  Stoop down, lad!"

But St. Croix was obstinate and would not stoop.  Nay, when one of the
mounted men came, and roughly ordered us into the open, it was
Croisette who pushing past us stepped out first with a lordly air.  I,
following him, saw that his lips were firmly compressed and that there
was an eager light in his eyes.  As we emerged, the crowd in our wake
broke the line, and tried to pursue us; either hostilely or through
eagerness to see what it meant.  But a dozen blows of the long pikes
drove them back, howling and cursing to their places.

I expected to be taken to Bezers; and what would follow I could not
tell.  But he did always it seemed what we least expected, for he only
scowled at us now, a grim mockery on his lip, and cried, "See that they
do not escape again!  But do them no harm, sirrah, until I have the
batch of them!"

He turned one way, and I another, my heart swelling with rage. Would he
dare to harm us?  Would even the Vidame dare to murder a Caylus' nephew
openly and in cold blood?  I did not think so. And yet--and yet--

Croisette interrupted the train of my thoughts.  I found that he was
not following me.  He had sprung away, and in a dozen strides reached
the Vidame's stirrup, and was clasping his knee when I turned.  I could
not hear at the distance at which I stood, what he said, and the
horseman to whom Bezers had committed us spurred between us.  But I
heard the Vidame's answer.

"No!  no!  no!"  he cried with a ring of restrained fury in his voice.
"Let my plans alone!  What do you know of them?  And if you speak to me
again, M. St. Croix--I think that is your name, boy--I will--no, I will
not kill you.  That might please you, you are stubborn, I can see.  But
I will have you stripped and lashed like the meanest of my scullions!
Now go, and take care!"

Impatience, hate and wild passion flamed in his face for the
moment--transfiguring it.  Croisette came back to us slowly,
white-lipped and quiet.  "Never mind," I said bitterly.  "The third
time may bring luck."

Not that I felt much indignation at the Vidame's insult, or any anger
with the lad for incurring it; as I had felt on that other occasion.
Life and death seemed to be everything on this morning.  Words had
ceased to please and annoy, for what are words to the sheep in the
shambles?  One man's life and one woman's happiness outside ourselves
we thought only of these now. And some day I reflected Croisette might
remember even with pleasure that he had, as a drowning man clutching at
straws, stooped to a last prayer for them.

We were placed in the middle of a knot of troopers who closed the line
to the right.  And presently Marie touched me.  He was gazing intently
at the sentry on the roof of the third house from us; the farthest but
one.  The man's back was to the parapet, and he was gesticulating
wildly.

"He sees him!"  Marie muttered.

I nodded almost in apathy.  But this passed away, and I started
involuntarily and shuddered, as a savage roar, breaking the silence,
rang along the front of the mob like a rolling volley of firearms.
What was it?  A man posted at a window on the upper gallery had dropped
his pike's point, and was levelling it at some one inside:  we could
see no more.

But those in front of the window could; they saw too much for the
Vidame's precautions, as a moment showed.  He had not laid his account
with the frenzy of a rabble, the passions of a mob which had tasted
blood.  I saw the line at its farther end waver suddenly and toss to
and fro.  Then a hundred hands went up, and confused angry cries rose
with them.  The troopers struck about them, giving back slowly as they
did so.  But their efforts were in vain.  With a scream of triumph a
wild torrent of people broke through between them, leaving them
stranded; and rushed in a headlong cataract towards the steps.  Bezers
was close to us at the time.  "S'death!"  he cried, swearing oaths
which even his sovereign could scarce have equalled.  "They will snatch
him from me yet, the hell-hounds!"

He whirled his horse round and spurred him in a dozen bounds to the
stairs at our end of the gallery.  There he leaped from him, dropping
the bridle recklessly; and bounding up three steps at a time, he ran
along the gallery.  Half-a-dozen of the troopers about us stayed only
to fling their reins to one of their number, and then followed, their
great boots clattering on the planks.

My breath came fast and short, for I felt it was a crisis.  It was a
race between the two parties, or rather between the Vidame and the
leaders of the mob.  The latter had the shorter way to go.  But on the
narrow steps they were carried off their feet by the press behind them,
and fell over and hampered one another and lost time.  The Vidame, free
from this drawback, was some way along the gallery before they had set
foot on it.

How I prayed--amid a scene of the wildest uproar and excitement--that
the mob might be first!  Let there be only a short conflict between
Bezers' men and the people, and in the confusion Pavannes might yet
escape.  Hope awoke in the turmoil.  Above the yells of the crowd a
score of deep voices about me thundered "a Wolf!  a Wolf!"  And I too,
lost my head, and drew my sword, and screamed at the top of my voice,
"a Caylus!  a Caylus!"  with the maddest.

Thousands of eyes besides mine were strained on the foremost figures on
either side.  They met as it chanced precisely at the door of the
house.  The mob leader was a slender man, I saw; a priest apparently,
though now he was girt with unpriestly weapons, his skirts were tucked
up, and his head was bare.  So much my first glance showed me.  It was
at the second look it was when I saw the blood forsake his pale
lowering face and leave it whiter than ever, when horror sprang along
with recognition to his eyes, when borne along by the crowd behind he
saw his position and who was before him--it was only then when his mean
figure shrank, and he quailed and would have turned but could not, that
I recognized the Coadjutor.

I was silent now, my mouth agape.  There are seconds which are minutes;
ay, and many minutes.  A man may die, a man may come into life in such
a second.  In one of these, it seemed to me, those two men paused, face
to face; though in fact a pause was for one of them impossible.  He was
between--and I think he knew it--the devil and the deep sea.  Yet he
seemed to pause, while all, even that yelling crowd below, held their
breath.  The next moment, glaring askance at one another like two dogs
unevenly coupled, he and Bezers shot shoulder to shoulder into the
doorway, and in another jot of time would have been out of sight. But
then, in that instant, I saw something happen.  The Vidame's hand
flashed up above the priest's head, and the cross-hilt of his sheathed
sword crashed down with awful force, and still more awful passion, on
the other's tonsure!  The wretch went down like a log, without a word,
without a cry!  Amid a roar of rage from a thousand throats, a roar
that might have shaken the stoutest heart, and blanched the swarthiest
cheek, Bezers disappeared within!

It was then I saw the power of discipline and custom.  Few as were the
troopers who had followed him--a mere handful--they fell without
hesitation on the foremost of the crowd, who were already in confusion,
stumbling and falling over their leader's body; and hurled them back
pell-mell along the gallery.  The throng below had no firearms, and
could give no aid at the moment; the stage was narrow; in two minutes
the Vidame's people had swept it clear of the crowd and were in
possession of it.  A tall fellow took up the priest's body, dead or
alive, I do not know which, and flung it as if it had been a sack of
corn over the rail.  It fell with a heavy thud on the ground.  I heard
a piercing scream that rose above that babel--one shrill scream!  and
the mob closed round and hid the thing.

If the rascals had had the wit to make at once for the right-hand
stairs, where we stood with two or three of Bezers' men who had kept
their saddles, I think they might easily have disposed of us,
encumbered as we were, by the horses; and then they could have attacked
the handful on the gallery on both flanks.  But the mob had no leaders,
and no plan of operations.  They seized indeed two or three of the
scattered troopers, and tearing them from their horses, wreaked their
passion upon them horribly.  But most of the Switzers escaped, thanks
to the attention the mob paid to the houses and what was going forward
on the galleries; and these, extricating themselves joined us one by
one, so that gradually a little ring of stern faces gathered about the
stair-foot.  A moment's hesitation, and seeing no help for it, we
ranged ourselves with them; and, unchecked as unbidden, sprang on three
of the led horses.

All this passed more quickly than I can relate it:  so that before our
feet were well in the stirrups a partial silence, then a mightier roar
of anger at once proclaimed and hailed the re-appearance of the Vidame.
Bigoted beyond belief were the mob of Paris of that day, cruel,
vengeful, and always athirst for blood; and this man had killed not
only their leader but a priest.  He had committed sacrilege!  What
would they do?  I could just, by stooping forward, command a side view
of the gallery, and the scene passing there was such that I forgot in
it our own peril.

For surely in all his reckless life Bezers had never been so
emphatically the man for the situation--had never shown to such
advantage as at this moment when he stood confronting the sea of faces,
the sneer on his lip, a smile in his eyes; and looked down unblenching,
a figure of scorn, on the men who were literally agape for his life.
The calm defiance of his steadfast look fascinated even me.  Wonder and
admiration for the time took the place of dislike.  I could scarcely
believe that there was not some atom of good in this man so fearless.
And no face but one no face I think in the world, but one--could have
drawn my eyes from him.  But that one face was beside him.  I clutched
Marie's arm, and pointed to the bareheaded figure at Bezers' right hand.

It was Louis himself:  our Louis de Pavannes, But he was changed indeed
from the gay cavalier I remembered, and whom I had last seen riding
down the street at Caylus, smiling back at us, and waving his adieux to
his mistress!  Beside the Vidame he had the air of being slight, even
short.  The face which I had known so bright and winning, was now white
and set.  His fair, curling hair--scarce darker than Croisette's--hung
dank, bedabbled with blood which flowed from a wound in his head.  His
sword was gone; his dress was torn and disordered and covered with
dust.  His lips moved.  But he held up his head, he bore himself
bravely with it all; so bravely, that I choked, and my heart seemed
bursting as I looked at him standing there forlorn and now unarmed.  I
knew that Kit seeing him thus would gladly have died with him; and I
thanked God she did not see him.  Yet there was a quietness in his
fortitude which made a great difference between his air and that of
Bezers.  He lacked, as became one looking unarmed on certain death, the
sneer and smile of the giant beside him.

What was the Vidame about to do?  I shuddered as I asked myself. Not
surrender him, not fling him bodily to the people?  No not that:  I
felt sure he would let no others share his vengeance that his pride
would not suffer that.  And even while I wondered the doubt was solved.
I saw Bezers raise his hand in a peculiar fashion.  Simultaneously a
cry rang sharply out above the tumult, and down in headlong charge
towards the farther steps came the band of horsemen, who had got clear
of the crowd on that side. They were but ten or twelve, but under his
eye they charged, as if they had been a thousand.  The rabble shrank
from the collision, and fled aside.  Quick as thought the riders
swerved; and changing their course, galloped through the looser part of
the throng, and in a trice drew rein side by side with us, a laugh and
a jeer on their reckless lips.

It was neatly done:  and while it was being done the Vidame and his
knot of men, with those who had been searching the building, hurried
down the gallery towards us, their rear cleared for the moment by the
troopers' feint.  The dismounted men came bundling down the steps,
their eyes aglow with the war-fire, and got horses as they could.
Among them I lost sight of Louis, but perceived him presently, pale and
bewildered, mounted behind a trooper.  A man sprang up before each of
us too, greeting our appearance merely by a grunt of surprise.  For it
was no time to ask or answer.  The mob was recovering itself, and each
moment brought it reinforcements, while its fury was augmented by the
trick we had played it, and the prospect of our escape.

We were under forty, all told; and some men were riding double. Bezers'
eye glanced hastily over his array, and lit on us three. He turned and
gave some order to his lieutenant.  The fellow spurred his horse, a
splendid grey, as powerful as his master's, alongside of Croisette,
threw his arm round the lad, and dragged him dexterously on to his own
crupper.  I did not understand the action, but I saw Croisette settle
himself behind Blaise Bure--for he it was--and supposed no harm was
intended.  The next moment we had surged forward, and were swaying to
and fro in the midst of the crowd.

What ensued I cannot tell.  The outlook, so far as I was concerned, was
limited to wildly plunging horses--we were in the centre of the band
and riders swaying in the saddle--with a glimpse here and there of a
fringe of white scowling faces and tossing arms.  Once, a lane opening,
I saw the Vidame's charger--he was in the van--stumble and fall among
the crowd and heard a great shout go up.  But Bezers by a mighty effort
lifted it to its legs again.  And once too, a minute later, those
riding on my right, swerved outwards, and I saw something I never
afterwards forgot.

It was the body of the Coadjutor, lying face upwards, the eyes open and
the teeth bared in a last spasm.  Prostrate on it lay a woman, a young
woman, with hair like red gold falling about her neck, and skin like
milk.  I did not know whether she was alive or dead; but I noticed that
one arm stuck out stiffly and the crowd flying before the sudden impact
of the horses must have passed over her, even if she had escaped the
iron hoofs which followed.  Still in the fleeting glance I had of her
as my horse bounded aside, I saw no wound or disfigurement.  Her one
arm was cast about the priest's breast; her face was hidden on it.  But
for all that, I knew her--knew her, shuddering for the woman whose
badges I was even now wearing, whose gift I bore at my side; and I
remembered the priest's vaunt of a few hours before, made in her
presence, "There is no man in Paris shall thwart me to-night!"

It had been a vain boast indeed!  No hand in all that host of thousands
was more feeble than his now:  for good or ill!  No brain more dull, no
voice less heeded.  A righteous retribution indeed had overtaken him.
He had died by the sword he had drawn--died, a priest, by violence!
The cross he had renounced had crushed him.  And all his schemes and
thoughts, and no doubt they had been many, had perished with him.  It
had come to this, only this, the sum of the whole matter, that there
was one wicked man the less in Paris--one lump of breathless clay the
more.

For her--the woman on his breast--what man can judge a woman, knowing
her?  And not knowing her, how much less?  For the present I put her
out of my mind, feeling for the moment faint and cold.

We were clear of the crowd, and clattering unmolested down a paved
street before I fully recovered from the shock which this sight had
caused me.  Wonder whither we were going took its place.  To Bezers'
house?  My heart sank at the prospect if that were so.  Before I
thought of an alternative, a gateway flanked by huge round towers
appeared before us, and we pulled up suddenly, a confused jostling mass
in the narrow way; while some words passed between the Vidame and the
Captain of the Guard.  A pause of several minutes followed; and then
the gates rolled slowly open, and two by two we passed under the arch.
Those gates might have belonged to a fortress or a prison, a dungeon or
a palace, for all I knew.

They led, however, to none of these, but to an open space, dirty and
littered with rubbish, marked by a hundred ruts and tracks, and fringed
with disorderly cabins and make-shift booths.  And beyond this--oh, ye
gods!  the joy of it--beyond this, which we crossed at a rapid trot,
lay the open country!

The transition and relief were so wonderful that I shall never forget
them.  I gazed on the wide landscape before me, lying quiet and
peaceful in the sunlight, and could scarce believe in my happiness.  I
drew the fresh air into my lungs, I threw up my sheathed sword and
caught it again in a frenzy of delight, while the gloomy men about me
smiled at my enthusiasm.  I felt the horse beneath me move once more
like a thing of life.  No enchanter with his wand, not Merlin nor
Virgil, could have made a greater change in my world, than had the
captain of the gate with his simple key!  Or so it seemed to me in the
first moments of freedom, and escape--of removal from those loathsome
streets.

I looked back at Paris--at the cloud of smoke which hung over the
towers and roofs; and it seemed to me the canopy of hell itself. I
fancied that my head still rang with the cries and screams and curses,
the sounds of death.  In very fact, I could hear the dull reports of
firearms near the Louvre, and the jangle of the bells. Country-folk
were congregated at the cross-roads, and in the villages, listening and
gazing; asking timid questions of the more good-natured among us, and
showing that the rumour of the dreadful work doing in the town had
somehow spread abroad.  And this though I learned afterwards that the
keys of the city had been taken the night before to the king, and that,
except a party with the Duke of Guise, who had left at eight in pursuit
of Montgomery and some of the Protestants--lodgers, happily for
themselves, in the Faubourg St. Germain--no one had left the town
before ourselves.

While I am speaking of our departure from Paris, I may say what I have
to say of the dreadful excesses of those days, ay, and of the following
days; excesses of which France is now ashamed, and for which she
blushed even before the accession of his late Majesty.  I am sometimes
asked, as one who witnessed them, what I think, and I answer that it
was not our country which was to blame.  A something besides Queen
Catharine de' Medici had been brought from Italy forty years before, a
something invisible but very powerful; a spirit of cruelty and
treachery.  In Italy it had done small harm.  But grafted on French
daring and recklessness, and the rougher and more soldierly manners of
the north, this spirit of intrigue proved capable of very dreadful
things.  For a time, until it wore itself out, it was the curse of
France.  Two Dukes of Guise, Francis and Henry, a cardinal of Guise,
the Prince of Conde, Admiral Coligny, King Henry the Third all these
the foremost men of their day--died by assassination within little more
than a quarter of a century, to say nothing of the Prince of Orange,
and King Henry the Great.

Then mark--a most curious thing--the extreme youth of those who were in
this business.  France, subject to the Queen-Mother, of course, was
ruled at the time by boys scarce out of their tutors' hands.  They were
mere lads, hot-blooded, reckless nobles, ready for any wild brawl,
without forethought or prudence.  Of the four Frenchmen who it is
thought took the leading parts, one, the king, was twenty-two;
Monsieur, his brother, was only twenty; the Duke of Guise was
twenty-one.  Only the Marshal de Tavannes was of mature age.  For the
other conspirators, for the Queen-Mother, for her advisers Retz and
Nevers and Birague, they were Italians; and Italy may answer for them
if Florence, Mantua and Milan care to raise the glove.

To return to our journey.  A league from the town we halted at a large
inn, and some of us dismounted.  Horses were brought out to fill the
places of those lost or left behind, and Bure had food served to us.
We were famished and exhausted, and ate it ravenously, as if we could
never have enough.

The Vidame sat his horse apart, served by his page, I stole a glance at
him, and it struck me that even on his iron nature the events of the
night had made some impression.  I read, or thought I read, in his
countenance, signs of emotions not quite in accordance with what I knew
of him--emotions strange and varied. I could almost have sworn that as
he looked at us a flicker of kindliness lit up his stern and cruel
gloom; I could almost have sworn he smiled with a curious sadness.  As
for Louis, riding with a squad who stood in a different part of the
yard, he did not see us; had not yet seen us at all.  His side face,
turned towards me, was pale and sad, his manner preoccupied, his mien
rather sorrowful than downcast.  He was thinking, I judged, as much of
the many brave men who had yesterday been his friends--companions at
board and play-table--as of his own fate.  When we presently, at a
signal from Bure, took to the road again, I asked no permission, but
thrusting my horse forward, rode to his side as he passed through the
gateway.



CHAPTER XI.

A NIGHT OF SORROW.

"Louis!  Louis!"

He turned with a start at the sound of my voice, joy and
bewilderment--and no wonder--in his countenance.  He had not supposed
us to be within a hundred leagues of him.  And lo!  here we were, knee
to knee, hand meeting hand in a long grasp, while his eyes, to which
tears sprang unbidden, dwelt on my face as though they could read in it
the features of his sweetheart. Some one had furnished him with a hat,
and enabled him to put his dress in order, and wash his wound, which
was very slight, and these changes had improved his appearance; so that
the shadow of grief and despondency passing for a moment from him in
the joy of seeing me, he looked once more his former self:  as he had
looked in the old days at Caylus on his return from hawking, or from
some boyish escapade among the hills.  Only, alas!  he wore no sword.

"And now tell me all," he cried, after his first exclamation of wonder
had found vent.  "How on earth do you come here?  Here, of all places,
and by my side?  Is all well at Caylus?  Surely Mademoiselle is not--"

"Mademoiselle is well!  perfectly well!  And thinking of you, I swear!"
I answered passionately.  "For us," I went on, eager for the moment to
escape that subject--how could I talk of it in the daylight and under
strange eyes?--"Marie and Croisette are behind.  We left Caylus eight
days ago.  We reached Paris yesterday evening.  We have not been to
bed!  We have passed, Louis, such a night as I never--"

He stopped me with a gesture.  "Hush!"  he said, raising his hand.
"Don't speak of it, Anne!"  and I saw that the fate of his friends was
still too recent, the horror of his awakening to those dreadful sights
and sounds was still too vivid for him to bear reference to them.  Yet
after riding for a time in silence--though his lips moved--he asked me
again what had brought us up.

"We came to warn you--of him," I answered, pointing to the solitary,
moody figure of the Vidame, who was riding ahead of the party.  "He--he
said that Kit should never marry you, and boasted of what he would do
to you, and frightened her.  So, learning he was going to Paris, we
followed him--to put you on your guard, you know."  And I briefly
sketched our adventures, and the strange circumstances and mistakes
which had delayed us hour after hour, through all that strange night,
until the time had gone by when we could do good.

His eyes glistened and his colour rose as I told the story.  He wrung
my hand warmly, and looked back to smile at Marie and Croisette.  "It
was like you!"  he ejaculated with emotion.  "It was like her cousins!
Brave, brave lads!  The Vicomte will live to be proud of you!  Some day
you will all do great things!  I say it!"

"But oh, Louis!"  I exclaimed sorrowfully, though my heart was bounding
with pride at his words, "if we had only been in time! If we had only
come to you two hours earlier!"

"You would have spoken to little purpose then, I fear," he replied,
shaking his head.  "We were given over as a prey to the enemy.
Warnings?  We had warnings in plenty.  De Rosny warned us, and we
scoffed at him.  The king's eye warned us, and we trusted him.  But--"
and Louis' form dilated and his hand rose as he went on, and I thought
of his cousin's prediction--"it will never be so again in France, Anne!
Never!  No man will after this trust another!  There will be no honour,
no faith, no quarter, and no peace!  And for the Valois who has done
this, the sword will never depart from his house!  I believe it!  I do
believe it!"

How truly he spoke we know now.  For two-and-twenty years after that
twenty-fourth of August, 1572, the sword was scarcely laid aside in
France for a single month.  In the streets of Paris, at Arques, and
Coutras, and Ivry, blood flowed like water that the blood of the St.
Bartholomew might be forgotten--that blood which, by the grace of God,
Navarre saw fall from the dice box on the eve of the massacre.  The
last of the Valois passed to the vaults of St. Denis:  and a greater
king, the first of all Frenchmen, alive or dead, the bravest, gayest,
wisest of the land, succeeded him:  yet even he had to fall by the
knife, in a moment most unhappy for his country, before France,
horror-stricken, put away the treachery and evil from her.

Talking with Louis as we rode, it was not unnatural--nay, it was the
natural result of the situation--that I should avoid one subject.  Yet
that subject was the uppermost in my thoughts. What were the Vidame's
intentions?  What was the meaning of this strange journey?  What was to
be Louis' fate?  I shrank with good reason from asking him these
questions.  There could be so little room for hope, even after that
smile which I had seen Bezers smile, that I dared not dwell upon them.
I should but torture him and myself.

So it was he who first spoke about it.  Not at that time, but after
sunset, when the dusk had fallen upon us, and found us still plodding
southward with tired horses; a link outwardly like other links in the
long chain of riders, toiling onwards.  Then he said suddenly, "Do you
know whither we are going, Anne?"

I started, and found myself struggling with a strange confusion before
I could reply.  "Home," I suggested at random.

"Home?  No.  And yet nearly home.  To Cahors," he answered with an odd
quietude.  "Your home, my boy, I shall never see again, Nor Kit!  Nor
my own Kit!"  It was the first time I had heard him call her by the
fond name we used ourselves.  And the pathos in his tone as of the
past, not the present, as of pure memory--I was very thankful that I
could not in the dusk see his face--shook my self-control.  I wept.
"Nay, my lad," he went on, speaking softly and leaning from his saddle
so that he could lay his hand on my shoulder "we are all men together.
We must be brave.  Tears cannot help us, so we should leave them to
the--women."

I cried more passionately at that.  Indeed his own voice quavered over
the last word.  But in a moment he was talking to me coolly and
quietly.  I had muttered something to the effect that the Vidame would
not dare--it would be too public.

"There is no question of daring in it," he replied.  "And the more
public it is, the better he will like it.  They have dared to take
thousands of lives since yesterday.  There is no one to call him to
account since the king--our king forsooth!--has declared every Huguenot
an outlaw, to be killed wherever he be met with.  No, when Bezers
disarmed me yonder," he pointed as he spoke to his wound, "I looked of
course for instant death.  Anne! I saw blood in his eyes!  But he did
not strike."

"Why not?"  I asked in suspense.

"I can only guess," Louis answered with a sigh.  "He told me that my
life was in his hands, but that he should take it at his own time.
Further that if I would not give my word to go with him without trying
to escape, he would throw me to those howling dogs outside.  I gave my
word.  We are on the road together.  And oh, Anne!  yesterday, only
yesterday, at this time I was riding home with Teligny from the Louvre,
where we had been playing at paume with the king!  And the world--the
world was very fair."

"I saw you, or rather Croisette did," I muttered as his sorrow--not for
himself, but his friends--forced him to stop.  "Yet how, Louis, do you
know that we are going to Cahors?"

"He told me, as we passed through the gates, that he was appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of Quercy to carry out the edict against the
religion.  Do you not see, Anne?"  my companion added bitterly, "to
kill me at once were too small a revenge for him! He must torture
me--or rather he would if he could--by the pains of anticipation.

"Besides, my execution will so finely open his bed of justice. Bah!"
and Pavannes raised his head proudly, "I fear him not!  I fear him not
a jot!"

For a moment he forgot Kit, the loss of his friends, his own doom.  He
snapped his fingers in derision of his foe.

But my heart sank miserably.  The Vidame's rage I remembered had been
directed rather against my cousin than her lover; and now by the light
of his threats I read Bezers' purpose more clearly than Louis could.
His aim was to punish the woman who had played with him.  To do so he
was bringing her lover from Paris that he might execute him--AFTER
GIVING HER NOTICE!  That was it:  after giving her notice, it might be
in her very presence!  He would lure her to Cahors, and then--

I shuddered.  I well might feel that a precipice was opening at my
feet.  There was something in the plan so devilish, yet so accordant
with those stories I had heard of the Wolf, that I felt no doubt of my
insight.  I read his evil mind, and saw in a moment why he had troubled
himself with us.  He hoped to draw Mademoiselle to Cahors by our means.

Of course I said nothing of this to Louis.  I hid my feelings as well
as I could.  But I vowed a great vow that at the eleventh hour we would
baulk the Vidame.  Surely if all else failed we could kill him, and,
though we died ourselves, spare Kit this ordeal.  My tears were dried
up as by a fire.  My heart burned with a great and noble rage:  or so
it seemed to me!

I do not think that there was ever any journey so strange as this one
of ours.  We met with the same incidents which had pleased us on the
road to Paris.  But their novelty was gone.  Gone too were the cosy
chats with old rogues of landlords and good-natured dames.  We were
travelling now in such force that our coming was rather a terror to the
innkeeper than a boon.  How much the Lieutenant-Governor of Quercy,
going down to his province, requisitioned in the king's name; and for
how much he paid, we could only judge from the gloomy looks which
followed us as we rode away each morning.  Such looks were not solely
due I fear to the news from Paris, although for some time we were the
first bearers of the tidings.

Presently, on the third day of our journey I think, couriers from the
Court passed us:  and henceforth forestalled us.  One of these
messengers--who I learned from the talk about me was bound for Cahors
with letters for the Lieutenant-Governor and the Count-Bishop--the
Vidame interviewed and stopped.  How it was managed I do not know, but
I fear the Count-Bishop never got his letters, which I fancy would have
given him some joint authority. Certainly we left the messenger--a
prudent fellow with a care for his skin--in comfortable quarters at
Limoges, whence I do not doubt he presently returned to Paris at his
leisure.

The strangeness of the journey however arose from none of these things,
but from the relations of our party to one another. After the first day
we four rode together, unmolested, so long as we kept near the centre
of the straggling cavalcade.  The Vidame always rode alone, and in
front, brooding with bent head and sombre face over his revenge, as I
supposed.  He would ride in this fashion, speaking to no one and giving
no orders, for a day together.  At times I came near to pitying him.
He had loved Kit in his masterful way, the way of one not wont to be
thwarted, and he had lost her--lost her, whatever might happen.  He
would get nothing after all by his revenge.  Nothing but ashes in the
mouth.  And so I saw in softer moments something inexpressibly
melancholy in that solitary giant-figure pacing always alone.

He seldom spoke to us.  More rarely to Louis.  When he did, the
harshness of his voice and his cruel eyes betrayed the gloomy hatred in
which he held him.  At meals he ate at one end of the table:  we four
at the other, as three of us had done on that first evening in Paris.
And sometimes the covert looks, the grim sneer he shot at his
rival--his prisoner--made me shiver even in the sunshine.  Sometimes,
on the other hand, when I took him unawares, I found an expression on
his face I could not read.

I told Croisette, but warily, my suspicions of his purpose.  He heard
me, less astounded to all appearance than I had expected. Presently I
learned the reason.  He had his own view.  "Do you not think it
possible, Anne?"  he suggested timidly--we were of course alone at the
time--"that he thinks to make Louis resign Mademoiselle?"

"Resign her!"  I exclaimed obtusely.  "How?"

"By giving him a choice--you understand?"

I did understand I saw it in a moment.  I had been dull not to see it
before.  Bezers might put it in this way:  let M. de Pavannes resign
his mistress and live, or die and lose her.

"I see," I answered.  "But Louis would not give her up.  Not to him!"

"He would lose her either way," Croisette answered in a low tone. "That
is not however the worst of it.  Louis is in his power. Suppose he
thinks to make Kit the arbiter, Anne, and puts Louis up to ransom,
setting Kit for the price?  And gives her the option of accepting
himself, and saving Louis' life; or refusing, and leaving Louis to die?"

"St. Croix!"  I exclaimed fiercely.  "He would not be so base!" And yet
was not even this better than the blind vengeance I had myself
attributed to him?

"Perhaps not," Croisette answered, while he gazed onwards through the
twilight.  We were at the time the foremost of the party save the
Vidame; and there was nothing to interrupt our view of his gigantic
figure as he moved on alone before us with bowed shoulders.  "Perhaps
not," Croisette repeated thoughtfully. "Sometimes I think we do not
understand him; and that after all there may be worse people in the
world than Bezers."

I looked hard at the lad, for that was not what I had meant. "Worse?"
I said.  "I do not think so.  Hardly!"

"Yes, worse," he replied, shaking his head.  "Do you remember lying
under the curtain in the box-bed at Mirepoix's?"

"Of course I do!  Do you think I shall ever forget it?"

"And Madame d'O coming in?"

"With the Coadjutor?"  I said with a shudder.  "Yes."

"No, the second time," he answered, "when she came back alone. It was
pretty dark, you remember, and Madame de Pavannes was at the window,
and her sister did not see her?"

"Well, well, I remember," I said impatiently.  I knew from the tone of
his voice that he had something to tell me about Madame d'O, and I was
not anxious to hear it.  I shrank, as a wounded man shrinks from the
cautery, from hearing anything about that woman; herself so beautiful,
yet moving in an atmosphere of suspicion and horror.  Was it shame, or
fear, or some chivalrous feeling having its origin in that moment when
I had fancied myself her knight?  I am not sure, for I had not made up
my mind even now whether I ought to pity or detest her; whether she had
made a tool of me, or I had been false to her.

"She came up to the bed, you remember, Anne?"  Croisette went on. "You
were next to her.  She saw you indistinctly, and took you for her
sister.  And then I sprang from the bed."

"I know you did!"  I exclaimed sharply.  All this time I had forgotten
that grievance.  "You nearly frightened her out of her wits, St. Croix.
I cannot think what possessed you--why you did it?"

"To save your life, Anne," he answered solemnly, "and her from a crime!
an unutterable, an unnatural crime.  She had come back to I can hardly
tell it you--to murder her sister.  You start.  You do not believe me.
It sounds too horrible.  But I could see better than you could.  She
was exactly between you and the light.  I saw the knife raised.  I saw
her wicked face!  If I had not startled her as I did, she would have
stabbed you.  She dropped the knife on the floor, and I picked it up
and have it. See!"

I looked furtively, and turned away again, shivering.  "Why," I
muttered, "why did she do it?"

"She had failed you know to get her sister back to Pavannes' house,
where she would have fallen an easy victim.  Bezers, who knew Madame
d'O, prevented that.  Then that fiend slipped back with her knife;
thinking that in the common butchery the crime would be overlooked, and
never investigated, and that Mirepoix would be silent!"

I said nothing.  I was stunned.  Yet I believed the story.  When I went
over the facts in my mind I found that a dozen things, overlooked at
the time and almost forgotten in the hurry of events, sprang up to
confirm it.  M. de Pavannes'--the other M. de Pavannes'--suspicions had
been well founded.  Worse than Bezers was she?  Ay!  worse a hundred
times.  As much worse as treachery ever is than violence; as the
pitiless fraud of the serpent is baser than the rage of the wolf.

"I thought," Croisette added softly, not looking at me, "when I
discovered that you had gone off with her, that I should never see you
again, Anne.  I gave you up for lost.  The happiest moment of my life I
think was when I saw you come back."

"Croisette," I whispered piteously, my cheeks burning, "let us never
speak of her again."

And we never did--for years.  But how strange is life.  She and the
wicked man with whom her fate seemed bound up had just crossed our
lives when their own were at the darkest.  They clashed with us, and,
strangers and boys as we were, we ruined them.  I have often asked
myself what would have happened to me had I met her at some earlier and
less stormy period--in the brilliance of her beauty.  And I find but
one answer.  I should bitterly have rued the day.  Providence was good
to me.  Such men and such women, we may believe have ceased to exist
now.  They flourished in those miserable days of war and divisions, and
passed away with them like the foul night-birds of the battle-field.

To return to our journey.  In the morning sunshine one could not but be
cheerful, and think good things possible.  The worst trial I had came
with each sunset.  For then--we generally rode late into the
evening--Louis sought my side to talk to me of his sweetheart.  And how
he would talk of her!  How many thousand messages he gave me for her!
How often he recalled old days among the hills, with each laugh and
jest and incident, when we five had been as children!  Until I would
wonder passionately, the tears running down my face in the darkness,
how he could--how he could talk of her in that quiet voice which
betrayed no rebellion against fate, no cursing of Providence!  How he
could plan for her and think of her when she should be alone!

Now I understand it.  He was still labouring under the shock of his
friends' murder.  He was still partially stunned.  Death seemed natural
and familiar to him, as to one who had seen his allies and companions
perish without warning or preparation. Death had come to be normal to
him, life the exception; as I have known it seem to a child brought
face to face with a corpse for the first time.

One afternoon a strange thing happened.  We could see the Auvergne
hills at no great distance on our left--the Puy de Dome above them--and
we four were riding together.  We had fallen--an unusual thing--to the
rear of the party.  Our road at the moment was a mere track running
across moorland, sprinkled here and there with gorse and brushwood.
The main company had straggled on out of sight.  There were but half a
dozen riders to be seen an eighth of a league before us, a couple
almost as far behind. I looked every way with a sudden surging of the
heart.  For the first time the possibility of flight occurred to me.
The rough Auvergne hills were within reach.  Supposing we could get a
lead of a quarter of a league, we could hardly be caught before
darkness came and covered us.  Why should we not put spurs to our
horses and ride off?

"Impossible!"  said Pavannes quietly, when I spoke.

"Why?"  I asked with warmth.

"Firstly," he replied, "because I have given my word to go with the
Vidame to Cahors."

My face flushed hotly.  But I cried, "What of that?  You were taken by
treachery!  Your safe conduct was disregarded.  Why should you be
scrupulous?  Your enemies are not.  This is folly?"

"I think not.  Nay," Louis answered, shaking his head, "you would not
do it yourself in my place."

"I think I should," I stammered awkwardly.

"No, you would not, lad," he said smiling.  "I know you too well. But
if I would do it, it is impossible."  He turned in the saddle and,
shading his eyes with his hand from the level rays of the sun, looked
back intently.  "It is as I thought," he continued. "One of those men
is riding grey Margot, which Bure said yesterday was the fastest mare
in the troop.  And the man on her is a light weight.  The other fellow
has that Norman bay horse we were looking at this morning.  It is a
trap laid by Bezers, Anne. If we turned aside a dozen yards, those two
would be after us like the wind."

"Do you mean," I cried, "that Bezers has drawn his men forward on
purpose?"

"Precisely;" was Louis's answer.  "That is the fact.  Nothing would
please him better than to take my honour first, and my life afterwards.
But, thank God, only the one is in his power."

And when I came to look at the horsemen, immediately before us, they
confirmed Louis's view.  They were the best mounted of the party:  all
men of light weight too.  One or other of them was constantly looking
back.  As night fell they closed in upon us with their usual care.
When Bure joined us there was a gleam of intelligence in his bold eyes,
a flash of conscious trickery.  He knew that we had found him out, and
cared nothing for it.

And the others cared nothing.  But the thought that if left to myself I
should have fallen into the Vidame's cunning trap filled me with new
hatred towards him; such hatred and such fear--for there was
humiliation mingled with them--as I had scarcely felt before.  I
brooded over this, barely noticing what passed in our company for
hours--nay, not until the next day when, towards evening, the cry arose
round me that we were within sight of Cahors.  Yes, there it lay below
us, in its shallow basin, surrounded by gentle hills.  The domes of the
cathedral, the towers of the Vallandre Bridge, the bend of the Lot,
where its stream embraces the town--I knew them all.  Our long journey
was over.

And I had but one idea.  I had some time before communicated to
Croisette the desperate design I had formed--to fall upon Bezers and
kill him in the midst of his men in the last resort.  Now the time had
come if the thing was ever to be done:  if we had not left it too long
already.  And I looked about me.  There was some confusion and jostling
as we halted on the brow of the hill, while two men were despatched
ahead to announce the governor's arrival, and Bure, with half a dozen
spears, rode out as an advanced guard.

The road where we stood was narrow, a shallow cutting winding down the
declivity of the hills.  The horses were tired, It was a bad time and
place for my design, and only the coming night was in my favour.  But I
was desperate.

Yet before I moved or gave a signal which nothing could recall, I
scanned the landscape eagerly, scrutinizing in turn the small, rich
plain below us, warmed by the last rays of the sun, the bare hills here
glowing, there dark, the scattered wood-clumps and spinneys that filled
the angles of the river, even the dusky line of helm-oaks that crowned
the ridge beyond--Caylus way.  So near our own country there might be
help!  If the messenger whom we had despatched to the Vicomte before
leaving home had reached him, our uncle might have returned, and even
be in Cahors to meet us.

But no party appeared in sight:  and I saw no place where an ambush
could be lying.  I remembered that no tidings of our present plight or
of what had happened could have reached the Vicomte.  The hope faded
out of life as soon as despair had given it birth.  We must fend for
ourselves and for Kit.

That was my justification.  I leaned from my saddle towards
Croisette--I was riding by his side--and muttered, as I felt my horse's
head and settled myself firmly in the stirrups, "You remember what I
said?  Are you ready?"

He looked at me in a startled way, with a face showing white in the
shadow:  and from me to the one solitary figure seated like a pillar a
score of paces in front with no one between us and it. "There need be
but two of us," I muttered, loosening my sword. "Shall it be you or
Marie?  The others must leap their horses out of the road in the
confusion, cross the river at the Arembal Ford if they are not
overtaken, and make for Caylus."

He hesitated.  I do not know whether it had anything to do with his
hesitation that at that moment the cathedral bell in the town below us
began to ring slowly for Vespers.  Yes, he hesitated. He--a Caylus.
Turning to him again, I repeated my question impatiently.  "Which shall
it be?  A moment, and we shall be moving on, and it will be too late."

He laid his hand hurriedly on my bridle, and began a rambling answer.
Rambling as it was I gathered his meaning.  It was enough for me!  I
cut him short with one word of fiery indignation, and turned to Marie
and spoke quickly.  "Will you, then?"  I said.

But Marie shook his head in perplexity, and answering little, said the
same.  So it happened a second time.

Strange!  Yet strange as it seemed, I was not greatly surprised. Under
other circumstances I should have been beside myself with anger at the
defection.  Now I felt as if I had half expected it, and without
further words of reproach I dropped my head and gave it up.  I passed
again into the stupor of endurance.  The Vidame was too strong for me.
It was useless to fight against him.  We were under the spell.  When
the troop moved forward, I went with them, silent and apathetic.

We passed through the gate of Cahors, and no doubt the scene was worthy
of note; but I had only a listless eye for it--much such an eye as a
man about to be broken on the wheel must have for that curious
instrument, supposing him never to have seen it before.  The whole
population had come out to line the streets through which we rode, and
stood gazing, with scarcely veiled looks of apprehension, at the
procession of troopers and the stern face of the new governor.

We dismounted passively in the courtyard of the castle, and were for
going in together, when Bure intervened.  "M. de Pavannes," he said,
pushing rather rudely between us, "will sup alone to-night.  For you,
gentlemen, this way, if you please."

I went without remonstrance.  What was the use?  I was conscious that
the Vidame from the top of the stairs leading to the grand entrance was
watching us with a wolfish glare in his eyes.  I went quietly.  But I
heard Croisette urging something with passionate energy.

We were led through a low doorway to a room on the ground floor; a
place very like a cell.  Were we took our meal in silence. When it was
over I flung myself on one of the beds prepared for us, shrinking from
my companions rather in misery than in resentment.

No explanation had passed between us.  Still I knew that the other two
from time to time eyed me doubtfully.  I feigned therefore to be
asleep, but I heard Bure enter to bid us good-night--and see that we
had not escaped.  And I was conscious too of the question Croisette put
to him, "Does M. de Pavannes lie alone to-night, Bure?"

"Not entirely," the captain answered with gloomy meaning.  Indeed he
seemed in bad spirits himself, or tired.  "The Vidame is anxious for
his soul's welfare, and sends a priest to him."

They sprang to their feet at that.  But the light and its bearer, who
so far recovered himself as to chuckle at his master's pious thought,
had disappeared.  They were left to pace the room, and reproach
themselves and curse the Vidame in an agony of late repentance.  Not
even Marie could find a loop-hole of escape from here.  The door was
double-locked; the windows so barred that a cat could scarcely pass
through them; the walls were of solid masonry.

Meanwhile I lay and feigned to sleep, and lay feigning through long,
long hours; though my heart like theirs throbbed in response to the
dull hammering that presently began without, and not far from us, and
lasted until daybreak.  From our windows, set low and facing a wall, we
could see nothing.  But we could guess what the noise meant, the dull,
earthy thuds when posts were set in the ground, the brisk, wooden
clattering when one plank was laid to another.  We could not see the
progress of the work, or hear the voices of the workmen, or catch the
glare of their lights.  But we knew what they were doing.  They were
raising the scaffold.



CHAPTER XII.

JOY IN THE MORNING.

I was too weary with riding to go entirely without sleep.  And moreover
it is anxiety and the tremor of excitement which make the pillow
sleepless, not, heaven be thanked, sorrow.  God made man to lie awake
and hope:  but never to lie awake and grieve. An hour or two before
daybreak I fell asleep, utterly worn out. When I awoke, the sun was
high, and shining slantwise on our window.  The room was gay with the
morning rays, and soft with the morning freshness, and I lay a while,
my cheek on my hand, drinking in the cheerful influence as I had done
many and many a day in our room at Caylus.  It was the touch of Marie's
hand, laid timidly on my arm, which roused me with a shock to
consciousness.  The truth broke upon me.  I remembered where we were,
and what was before us.  "Will you get up, Anne?" Croisette said.  "The
Vidame has sent for us."

I got to my feet, and buckled on my sword.  Croisette was leaning
against the wall, pale and downcast.  Bure filled the open doorway, his
feathered cap in his hand, a queer smile on his face.  "You are a good
sleeper, young gentleman," he said.  "You should have a good
conscience."

"Better than yours, no doubt!"  I retorted, "or your master's."

He shrugged his shoulders, and, bidding us by a sign to follow him, led
the way through several gloomy passages.  At the end of these, a flight
of stone steps leading upwards seemed to promise something better; and
true enough, the door at the top being opened, the murmur of a crowd
reached our ears, with a burst of sunlight and warmth.  We were in a
lofty room, with walls in some places painted, and elsewhere hung with
tapestry; well lighted by three old pointed windows reaching to the
rush-covered floor. The room was large, set here and there with stands
of arms, and had a dais with a raised carved chair at one end.  The
ceiling was of blue, with gold stars set about it.  Seeing this, I
remembered the place.  I had been in it once, years ago, when I had
attended the Vicomte on a state visit to the governor.  Ah! that the
Vicomte were here now!

I advanced to the middle window, which was open.  Then I started back,
for outside was the scaffold built level with the floor, and
rush-covered like it!  Two or three people were lounging on it.  My
eyes sought Louis among the group, but in vain.  He was not there:  and
while I looked for him, I heard a noise behind me, and he came in,
guarded by four soldiers with pikes.

His face was pale and grave, but perfectly composed.  There was a
wistful look in his eyes indeed, as if he were thinking of something or
some one far away--Kit's face on the sunny hills of Quercy where he had
ridden with her, perhaps; a look which seemed to say that the doings
here were nothing to him, and the parting was yonder where she was.
But his bearing was calm and collected, his step firm and fearless.
When he saw us, indeed his face lightened a moment and he greeted us
cheerfully, even acknowledging Bure's salutation with dignity and good
temper. Croisette sprang towards him impulsively, and cried his
name--Croisette ever the first to speak.  But before Louis could grasp
his hand, the door at the bottom of the hall was swung open, and the
Vidame came hurriedly in.

He was alone.  He glanced round, his forbidding face, which was
somewhat flushed as if by haste, wearing a scowl.  Then he saw us, and,
nodding haughtily, strode up the floor, his spurs clanking heavily on
the boards.  We gave us no greeting, but by a short word dismissed Bure
and the soldiers to the lower end of the room.  And then he stood and
looked at us four, but principally at his rival; and looked, and looked
with eyes of smouldering hate.  And there was a silence, a long
silence, while the murmur of the crowd came almost cheerfully through
the window, and the sparrows under the eaves chirped and twittered, and
the heart that throbbed least painfully was, I do believe, Louis de
Pavannes'!

At last Bezers broke the silence.

"M. de Pavannes!"  he began, speaking hoarsely, yet concealing all
passion under a cynical smile and a mock politeness, "M. de Pavannes, I
hold the king's commission to put to death all the Huguenots within my
province of Quercy.  Have you anything to say, I beg, why I should not
begin with you?  Or do you wish to return to the Church?"

Louis shrugged his shoulders as in contempt, and held his peace, I saw
his captor's great hands twitch convulsively at this, but still the
Vidame mastered himself, and when he spoke again he spoke slowly.
"Very well," he continued, taking no heed of us, the silent witnesses
of this strange struggle between the two men, but eyeing Louis only.
"You have wronged me more than any man alive.  Alive or dead!  or dead!
You have thwarted me, M. de Pavannes, and taken from me the woman I
loved.  Six days ago I might have killed you.  I had it in my power.  I
had but to leave you to the rabble, remember, and you would have been
rotting at Montfaucon to-day, M. de Pavannes."

"That is true," said Louis quietly.  "Why so many words?"

But the Vidame went on as if he had not heard.  "I did not leave you to
them," he resumed, "and yet I hate you--more than I ever hated any man
yet, and I am not apt to forgive.  But now the time has come, sir, for
my revenge!  The oath I swore to your mistress a fortnight ago I will
keep to the letter.  I--Silence, babe!" he thundered, turning suddenly,
"or I will keep my word with you too!"

Croisette had muttered something, and this had drawn on him the glare
of Bezers' eyes.  But the threat was effectual.  Croisette was silent.
The two were left henceforth to one another.

Yet the Vidame seemed to be put out by the interruption. Muttering a
string of oaths he strode from us to the window and back again.  The
cool cynicism, with which he was wont to veil his anger and impose on
other men, while it heightened the effect of his ruthless deeds, in
part fell from him.  He showed himself as he was--masterful, and
violent, hating, with all the strength of a turbulent nature which had
never known a check.  I quailed before him myself.  I confess it.

"Listen!"  he continued harshly, coming back and taking his place in
front of us at last, his manner more violent than before the
interruption.  "I might have left you to die in that hell yonder! And I
did not leave you.  I had but to hold my hand and you would have been
torn to pieces!  The wolf, however, does not hunt with the rats, and a
Bezers wants no help in his vengeance from king or CANAILLE!  When I
hunt my enemy down I will hunt him alone, do you hear?  And as there is
a heaven above me"--he paused a moment--"if I ever meet you face to
face again, M. de Pavannes, I will kill you where you stand!"

He paused, and the murmur of the crowd without came to my ears; but
mingled with and heightened by some confusion in my thoughts. I
struggled feebly with this, seeing a rush of colour to Croisette's
face, a lightening in his eyes as if a veil had been raised from before
them.  Some confusion--for I thought I grasped the Vidame's meaning;
yet there he was still glowering on his victim with the same grim
visage, still speaking in the same rough tone.  "Listen, M. de
Pavannes," he continued, rising to his full height and waving his hand
with a certain majesty towards the window--no one had spoken.  "The
doors are open! Your mistress is at Caylus.  The road is clear, go to
her; go to her, and tell her that I have saved your life, and that I
give it to you not out of love, but out of hate!  If you had flinched I
would have killed you, for so you would have suffered most, M. de
Pavannes.  As it is, take your life--a gift!  and suffer as I should if
I were saved and spared by my enemy!"

Slowly the full sense of his words came home to me.  Slowly; not in its
full completeness indeed until I heard Louis in broken phrases, phrases
half proud and half humble, thanking him for his generosity.  Even then
I almost lost the true and wondrous meaning of the thing when I heard
his answer.  For he cut Pavannes short with bitter caustic gibes,
spurned his proffered gratitude with insults, and replied to his
acknowledgments with threats.

"Go!  go!"  he continued to cry violently.  "Have I brought you so far
safely that you will cheat me of my vengeance at the last, and provoke
me to kill you?  Away!  and take these blind puppies with you!  Reckon
me as much your enemy now as ever!  And if I meet you, be sure you will
meet a foe!  Begone, M. de Pavannes, begone!"

"But, M. de Bezers," Louis persisted, "hear me.  It takes two to--"

"Begone!  begone!  before we do one another a mischief!"  cried the
Vidame furiously.  "Every word you say in that strain is an injury to
me.  It robs me of my vengeance.  Go!  in God's name!"

And we went; for there was no change, no promise of softening in his
malignant aspect as he spoke; nor any as he stood and watched us draw
off slowly from him.  We went one by one, each lingering after the
other, striving, out of a natural desire to thank him, to break through
that stern reserve.  But grim and unrelenting, a picture of scorn to
the last, he saw us go.

My latest memory of that strange man--still fresh after a lapse of two
and fifty years--is of a huge form towering in the gloom below the
state canopy, the sunlight which poured in through the windows and
flooded us, falling short of him; of a pair of fierce cross eyes, that
seemed to glow as they covered us; of a lip that curled as in the
enjoyment of some cruel jest.  And so I--and I think each of us four
saw the last of Raoul de Mar, Vidame de Bezers, in this life.

He was a man whom we cannot judge by to-day's standard; for he was such
an one in his vices and his virtues as the present day does not know;
one who in his time did immense evil--and if his friends be believed,
little good.  But the evil is forgotten; the good lives.  And if all
that good save one act were buried with him, this one act alone, the
act of a French gentleman, would be told of him--ay!  and will be
told--as long as the kingdom of France, and the gracious memory of the
late king, shall endure.

*      *      *      *      *

I see again by the simple process of shutting my eyes, the little party
of five--for Jean, our servant, had rejoined us--who on that summer day
rode over the hills to Caylus, threading the mazes of the holm-oaks,
and galloping down the rides, and hallooing the hare from her form, but
never pursuing her; arousing the nestling farmhouses from their sleepy
stillness by joyous shout and laugh, and sniffing, as we climbed the
hill-side again, the scent of the ferns that died crushed under our
horses' hoofs--died only that they might add one little pleasure more
to the happiness God had given us.  Rare and sweet indeed are those few
days in life, when it seems that all creation lives only that we may
have pleasure in it, and thank God for it.  It is well that we should
make the most of them, as we surely did of that day.

It was nightfall when we reached the edge of the uplands, and looked
down on Caylus.  The last rays of the sun lingered with us, but the
valley below was dark; so dark that even the rock about which our homes
clustered would have been invisible save for the half-dozen lights that
were beginning to twinkle into being on its summit.  A silence fell
upon us as we slowly wended our way down the well-known path.

All day long we had ridden in great joy; if thoughtless, yet innocent;
if selfish, yet thankful; and always blithely, with a great exultation
and relief at heart, a great rejoicing for our own sakes and for Kit's.

Now with the nightfall and the darkness, now when we were near our
home, and on the eve of giving joy to another, we grew silent.  There
arose other thoughts--thoughts of all that had happened since we had
last ascended that track; and so our minds turned naturally back to him
to whom we owed our happiness--to the giant left behind in his pride
and power and his loneliness. The others could think of him with full
hearts, yet without shame.  But I reddened, reflecting how it would
have been with us if I had had my way; if I had resorted in my
shortsightedness to one last violent, cowardly deed, and killed him, as
I had twice wished to do.

Pavannes would then have been lost almost certainly.  Only the Vidame
with his powerful troop--we never knew whether he had gathered them for
that purpose or merely with an eye to his government--could have saved
him.  And few men however powerful--perhaps Bezers only of all men in
Paris would have dared to snatch him from the mob when once it had
sighted him.  I dwell on this now that my grandchildren may take
warning by it, though never will they see such days as I have seen.

And so we clattered up the steep street of Caylus with a pleasant
melancholy upon us, and passed, not without a more serious thought, the
gloomy, frowning portals, all barred and shuttered, of the House of the
Wolf, and under the very window, sombre and vacant, from which Bezers
had incited the rabble in their attack on Pavannes' courier.  We had
gone by day, and we came back by night.  But we had gone trembling, and
we came back in joy.

We did not need to ring the great bell.  Jean's cry, "Ho!  Gate there!
Open for my lords!"  had scarcely passed his lips before we were
admitted.  And ere we could mount the ramp, one person outran those who
came forth to see what the matter was; one outran Madame Claude, outran
old Gil, outran the hurrying servants, and the welcome of the house.  I
saw a slender figure all in white break away from the little crowd and
dart towards us, disclosing as it reached me a face that seemed still
whiter than its robes, and yet a face that seemed all eyes--eyes that
asked the question the lips could not frame.

I stood aside with a low bow, my hat in my hand; and said simply--it
was the great effect of my life--"VOILA Monsieur!"

And then I saw the sun rise in a woman's face.

*      *      *      *      *

The Vidame de Bezers died as he had lived.  He was still Governor of
Cahors when Henry the Great attacked it on the night of the 17th of
June, 1580.  Taken by surprise and wounded in the first confusion of
the assault, he still defended himself and his charge with desperate
courage, fighting from street to street, and house to house for five
nights and as many days.  While he lived Henry's destiny and the fate
of France trembled in the balance.  But he fell at length, his brain
pierced by the ball of an arquebuse, and died an hour before sunset on
the 22nd of June. The garrison immediately surrendered.

Marie and I were present in this action on the side of the King of
Navarre, and at the request of that prince hastened to pay such honours
to the body of the Vidame as were due to his renown and might serve to
evince our gratitude.  A year later his remains were removed from
Cahors, and laid where they now rest in his own Abbey Church of Bezers,
under a monument which very briefly tells of his stormy life and his
valour.  No matter.  He has small need of a monument whose name lives
in the history of his country, and whose epitaph is written in the
lives of men.

NOTE.--THE CHARACTER AND CONDUCT OF VIDAME DE BEZERS, AS THEY APPEAR IN
THE ABOVE MEMOIR FIND A PARALLEL IN AN ACCOUNT GIVEN BY DE THOU OF ONE
OF THE MOST REMARKABLE INCIDENTS IN THE MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW:
"AMID SUCH EXAMPLES," HE WRITES, "OF THE FEROCITY OF THE CITY, A THING
HAPPENED WORTHY TO BE RELATED, AND WHICH MAY PERHAPS IN SOME DEGREE
WEIGH AGAINST THESE ATROCITIES. THERE WAS A DEADLY HATRED, WHICH UP TO
THIS TIME THE INTERVENTION OF THEIR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBOURS HAD FAILED
TO APPEASE, BETWEEN TWO MEN--VEZINS, THE LIEUTENANT OF HONORATUS OF
SAVOY, MARSHAL VILLARS, A MAN NOTABLE AMONG THE NOBILITY OF THE
PROVINCE FOR HIS VALOUR, BUT OBNOXIOUS TO MANY OWING TO HIS BRUTAL
DISPOSITION (ferina natura), AND REGNIER, A YOUNG MAN OF LIKE RANK AND
VIGOUR, BUT OF MILDER CHARACTER.  WHEN REGNIER THEN, IN THE MIDDLE OF
THAT GREAT UPROAR, DEATH MEETING HIS EYE EVERYWHERE, WAS MAKING UP HIS
MIND TO THE WORST, HIS DOOR WAS SUDDENLY BURST OPEN, AND VEZINS, WITH
TWO OTHER MEN, STOOD BEFORE HIM SWORD IN HAND.  UPON THIS REGNIER,
ASSURED OF DEATH, KNELT DOWN AND ASKED MERCY OF HEAVEN:  BUT VEZINS IN
A HARSH VOICE BID HIM RISE FROM HIS PRAYERS AND MOUNT A PALFREY ALREADY
STANDING READY IN THE STREET FOR HIM.  SO HE LED REGNIER--UNCERTAIN FOR
THE TIME WHITHER HE WAS BEING TAKEN--OUT OF THE CITY, AND PUT HIM ON
HIS HONOUR TO GO WITH HIM WITHOUT TRYING TO ESCAPE.  AND TOGETHER,
WITHOUT PAUSING IN THEIR JOURNEY, THE TWO TRAVELLED ALL THE WAY TO
GUIENNE.  DURING THIS TIME VEZINS HONOURED REGNIER WITH VERY LITTLE
CONVERSATION; BUT SO FAR CARED FOR HIM THAT FOOD WAS PREPARED FOR HIM
AT THE INNS BY HIS SERVANTS:  AND SO THEY CAME TO QUERCY AND THE CASTLE
OF REGNIER.  THERE VEZINS TURNED TO HIM AND SAID, "YOU KNOW HOW I HAVE
FOR A LONG TIME BACK SOUGHT TO AVENGE MYSELF ON YOU, AND HOW EASILY I
MIGHT NOW HAVE DONE IT TO THE FULL, HAD I BEEN WILLING TO USE THIS
OPPORTUNITY.  BUT SHAME WOULD NOT SUFFER IT; AND BESIDES, YOUR COURAGE
SEEMED WORTHY TO BE SET AGAINST MINE ON EVEN TERMS.  TAKE THEREFORE THE
LIFE WHICH YOU OWE TO MY KINDNESS."  WITH MUCH MORE WHICH THE CURIOUS
WILL FIND IN THE 2ND (FOLIO) VOLUME OF DE THOU.

========================================
========================================

A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE

BEING THE MEMOIRS OF GASTON DE BONNE SIEUR DE MARSAC

By Stanley Weyman


Transcriber's Note:

In this Etext, text in italics has been written in capital letters.

Many French words in the text have accents, etc. which have been
omitted.



CONTENTS.

     CHAPTER I.        THE SPORT OF FOOLS
     CHAPTER II.       THE KING OF NAVARRE
     CHAPTER III.      BOOT AND SADDLE
     CHAPTER IV.       MADEMOISELLE DE LA VIRE
     CHAPTER V.        THE ROAD TO BLOIS
     CHAPTER VI.       MY MOTHER'S LODGING
     CHAPTER VII.      SIMON FLEIX
     CHAPTER VIII.     AN EMPTY ROOM
     CHAPTER IX.       THE HOUSE IN THE RUELLE D'ARCY
     CHAPTER X.        THE FIGHT ON THE STAIRS
     CHAPTER XI.       THE MAN AT THE DOOR
     CHAPTER XII.      MAXIMILIAN DE BETHUNE, BARON DE ROSNY
     CHAPTER XIII.     AT ROSNY
     CHAPTER XIV.      M. DE RAMBOUILLET
     CHAPTER XV.       VILAIN HERODES
     CHAPTER XVI.      IN THE KING'S CHAMBER
     CHAPTER XVII.     THE JACOBIN MONK
     CHAPTER XVIII.    THE OFFER OF THE LEAGUE
     CHAPTER XIX.      MEN CALL IT CHANCE
     CHAPTER XX.       THE KING'S FACE
     CHAPTER XXI.      TWO WOMEN
     CHAPTER XXII.     'LA FEMME DISPOSE'
     CHAPTER XXIII.    THE LAST VALOIS
     CHAPTER XXIV.     A ROYAL PERIL
     CHAPTER XXV.      TERMS OF SURRENDER
     CHAPTER XXVI.     MEDITATIONS
     CHAPTER XXVII.    TO ME, MY FRIENDS!
     CHAPTER XXVIII.   THE CASTLE ON THE HILL
     CHAPTER XXIX.     PESTILENCE AND FAMINE
     CHAPTER XXX.      STRICKEN
     CHAPTER XXXI.     UNDER THE GREENWOOD
     CHAPTER XXXII.    A TAVERN BRAWL
     CHAPTER XXXIII.   AT MEUDON
     CHAPTER XXXIV.    ''TIS AN ILL WIND'
     CHAPTER XXXV.     'LE ROI EST MORT'
     CHAPTER XXXVI.    'VIVE LE ROI!'




A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE.




CHAPTER I. THE SPORT OF FOOLS.

The death of the Prince of Conde, which occurred in the spring of 1588,
by depriving me of my only patron, reduced me to such straits that the
winter of that year, which saw the King of Navarre come to spend his
Christmas at St. Jean d'Angely, saw also the nadir of my fortunes. I did
not know at this time--I may confess it to-day without shame--wither to
turn for a gold crown or a new scabbard, and neither had nor discerned
any hope of employment. The peace lately patched up at Blois between the
King of France and the League persuaded many of the Huguenots that their
final ruin was at hand; but it could not fill their exhausted treasury
or enable them to put fresh troops into the field.

The death of the Prince had left the King of Navarre without a rival
in the affections of the Huguenots; the Vicomte de Turenne, whose
turbulent; ambition already began to make itself felt, and M. de
Chatillon, ranking next to him. It was my ill-fortune, however, to be
equally unknown to all three leaders, and as the month of December which
saw me thus miserably straitened saw me reach the age of forty, which I
regard, differing in that from many, as the grand climacteric of a
man's life, it will be believed that I had need of all the courage which
religion and a campaigner's life could supply.

I had been compelled some time before to sell all my horses except the
black Sardinian with the white spot on its forehead; and I now found
myself obliged to part also with my valet de chambre and groom, whom I
dismissed on the same day, paying them their wages with the last links
of gold chain left to me. It was not without grief and dismay that I saw
myself thus stripped of the appurtenances of a man of birth, and driven
to groom my own horse under cover of night. But this was not the worst.
My dress, which suffered inevitably from this menial employment, began
in no long time to bear witness to the change in my circumstances; so
that on the day of the King of Navarre's entrance into St. Jean I dared
not face the crowd, always quick to remark the poverty of those above
them, but was fain to keep within doors and wear out my patience in the
garret of the cutler's house in the Rue de la Coutellerie, which was all
the lodging I could now afford.

Pardieu, 'tis a strange world! Strange that time seems to me; more
strange compared with this. My reflections on that day, I remember, were
of the most melancholy. Look at it how I would, I could not but see that
my life's spring was over. The crows' feet were gathering about my eyes,
and my moustachios, which seemed with each day of ill-fortune to stand
out more fiercely in proportion as my face grew leaner, were already
grey. I was out at elbows, with empty pockets, and a sword which peered
through the sheath. The meanest ruffler who, with broken feather and
tarnished lace, swaggered at the heels of Turenne, was scarcely to be
distinguished from me. I had still, it is true, a rock and a few barren
acres in Brittany, the last remains of the family property; but the
small small sums which the peasants could afford to pay were sent
annually to Paris, to my mother, who had no other dower. And this I
would not touch, being minded to die a gentleman, even if I could not
live in that estate.

Small as were my expectations of success, since I had no one at the
king's side to push my business, nor any friend at Court, I nevertheless
did all I could, in the only way that occurred to me. I drew up a
petition, and lying in wait one day for M. Forget, the King of Navarre's
secretary, placed it in his hand, begging him to lay it before that
prince. He took it, and promised to do so, smoothly, and with as much
lip-civility as I had a right to expect. But the careless manner in
which he doubled up and thrust away the paper on which I had spent so
much labour, no less than the covert sneer of his valet, who ran after
me to get the customary present--and ran, as I still blush to remember,
in vain--warned me to refrain from hope.

In this, however, having little save hope left, I failed so signally
as to spend the next day and the day after in a fever of alternate
confidence and despair, the cold fit following the hot with perfect
regularity. At length, on the morning of the third day--I remember it
lacked but three of Christmas--I heard a step on the stairs. My landlord
living in his shop, and the two intervening floors being empty, I had no
doubt the message was for me, and went outside the door to receive it,
my first glance at the messenger confirming me in my highest hopes,
as well as in all I had ever heard of the generosity of the King of
Navarre. For by chance I knew the youth to be one of the royal pages; a
saucy fellow who had a day or two before cried 'Old Clothes' after me in
the street. I was very far from resenting this now, however, nor did
he appear to recall it; so that I drew the happiest augury as to the
contents of the note he bore from the politeness with which he presented
it to me.

I would not, however, run the risk of a mistake, and before holding out
my hand, I asked him directly and with formality if it was for me.

He answered, with the utmost respect, that it was for the Sieur de
Marsac, and for me if I were he.

'There is an answer, perhaps?' I said, seeing that he lingered.

'The King of Navarre, sir,' he replied, with a low bow, 'will receive
your answer in person, I believe.' And with that, replacing the hat
which he had doffed out of respect to me, he turned and went down the
stairs.

Returning to my room, and locking the door, I hastily opened the
missive, which was sealed with a large seal, and wore every appearance
of importance. I found its contents to exceed all my expectations. The
King of Navarre desired me to wait on him at noon on the following day,
and the letter concluded with such expressions of kindness and goodwill
as left me in no doubt of the Prince's intentions. I read it, I confess,
with emotions of joy and gratitude which would better have become a
younger man, and then cheerfully sat down to spend the rest of the
day in making such improvements in my dress as seemed possible. With a
thankful heart I concluded that I had now escaped from poverty, at any
rate from such poverty as is disgraceful to a gentleman; and consoled
myself for the meanness of the appearance I must make at Court with the
reflection that a day or two would mend both habit and fortune.

Accordingly, it was with a stout heart that I left my lodgings a few
minutes before noon next morning, and walked towards the castle. It was
some time since I had made so public an appearance in the streets, which
the visit of the King of Navarre's Court; had filled with an unusual
crowd, and I could not help fancying as I passed that some of the
loiterers eyed me with a covert smile; and, indeed, I was shabby enough.
But finding that a frown more than sufficed to restore the gravity of
these gentry, I set down the appearance to my own self-consciousness,
and, stroking my moustachios, strode along boldly until I saw before me,
and coming to meet me, the same page who had delivered the note.

He stopped in front of me with an air of consequence, and making me a
low bow--whereat I saw the bystanders stare, for he was as gay a young
spark as maid-of-honour could desire--he begged me to hasten, as the
king awaited me in his closet.

'He has asked for you twice, sir,' he continued importantly, the feather
of his cap almost sweeping the ground.

'I think,' I answered, quickening my steps, 'that the king's letter says
noon, young sir. If I am late on such an occasion, he has indeed cause
to complain of me.'

'Tut, tut!' he rejoined waving his hand with a dandified 'It is no
matter. One man may steal a horse when another may not look over the
wall, you know.'

A man may be gray-haired, he may be sad-complexioned, and yet he may
retain some of the freshness of youth. On receiving this indication of a
favour exceeding all expectation, I remember I felt the blood rise to
my face, and experienced the most lively gratitude. I wondered who had
spoken in my behalf, who had befriended me; and concluding at last that
my part in the affair at Brouage had come to the king's ears, though I
could not conceive through whom, I passed through the castle gates with
an air of confidence and elation which was not unnatural, I think, under
the circumstances. Thence, following my guide, I mounted the ramp and
entered the courtyard.

A number of grooms and valets were lounging here, some leading horses
to and fro, others exchanging jokes with the wenches who leaned from
the windows, while their fellows again stamped up and down to keep
their feet warm, or played ball against the wall in imitation of their
masters. Such knaves are ever more insolent than their betters; but
I remarked that they made way for me with respect, and with rising
spirits, yet a little irony, I reminded myself as I mounted the stairs
of the words, 'whom the king delighteth to honour!'

Reaching the head of the flight, where was a soldier on guard, the page
opened the door of the antechamber, and standing aside bade me enter. I
did so, and heard the door close behind me.

For a moment I stood still, bashful and confused. It seemed to me that
there were a hundred people in the room, and that half the eyes which
met mine were women's, Though I was not altogether a stranger to such
state as the Prince of Conde had maintained, this crowded anteroom
filled me with surprise, and even with a degree of awe, of which I was
the next moment ashamed. True, the flutter of silk and gleam of jewels
surpassed anything I had then seen, for my fortunes had never led me
to the king's Court; but an instant's reflection reminded me that my
fathers had held their own in such scenes, and with a bow regulated
rather by this thought than by the shabbiness of my dress, I advanced
amid a sudden silence.

'M. de Marsac!' the page announced, in a tone which sounded a little
odd in my ears; so much so, that I turned quickly to look at him. He was
gone, however, and when I turned again the eyes which met mine were
full of smiles. A young girl who stood near me tittered. Put out of
countenance by this, I looked round in embarrassment to find someone to
whom I might apply.

The room was long and narrow, panelled in chestnut, with a row of
windows on the one hand, and two fireplaces, now heaped with glowing
logs, on the other. Between the fireplaces stood a rack of arms. Round
the nearer hearth lounged a group of pages, the exact counterparts of
the young blade who had brought me hither; and talking with these were
as many young gentlewomen. Two great hounds lay basking in the heat,
and coiled between them, with her head on the back of the larger, was a
figure so strange that at another time I should have doubted my eyes. It
wore the fool's motley and cap and bells, but a second glance showed me
the features were a woman's. A torrent of black hair flowed loose about
her neck, her eyes shone with wild merriment, and her face, keen, thin,
and hectic, glared at me from the dog's back. Beyond her, round the
farther fireplace, clustered more than a score of gallants and ladies,
of whom one presently advanced to me.

'Sir,' he said politely--and I wished I could match his bow--'you wished
to see--?'

'The King of Navarre,' I answered, doing my best.

He turned to the group behind him, and said, in a peculiarly even,
placid tone, 'He wishes to see the King of Navarre.' Then in solemn
silence he bowed to me again and went back to his fellows.

Upon the instant, and before I could make up my mind how to take this, a
second tripped forward, and saluting me, said, 'M. de Marsac, I think?'

'At your service, sir,' I rejoined. In my eagerness to escape the gaze
of all those eyes, and the tittering which was audible behind me, I took
a step forward to be in readiness to follow him. But he gave no sign.
'M. de Marsac to see the King of Navarre' was all he said, speaking as
the other had close to those behind. And with that he too wheeled round
and went back to the fire.

I stared, a first faint suspicion of the truth aroused in my mind.
Before I could act upon it, however--in such a situation it was no
easy task to decide how to act--a third advanced with the same measured
steps. 'By appointment I think, sir?' he said, bowing lower than the
others.

'Yes,' I replied sharply, beginning to grow warm, 'by appointment at
noon.'

'M. de Marsac,' he announced in a sing-song tone to those behind him,
'to see the King of Navarre by appointment at noon.' And with a second
bow--while I grew scarlet with mortification he too wheeled gravely
round and returned to the fireplace.

I saw another preparing to advance, but he came too late. Whether my
face of anger and bewilderment was too much for them, or some among
them lacked patience to see the end, a sudden uncontrollable shout of
laughter, in which all the room joined, cut short the farce. God knows
it hurt me: I winced, I looked this way and that, hoping here or there
to find sympathy and help. But it seemed to me that the place rang
with gibes, that every panel framed, however I turned myself, a cruel,
sneering face. One behind me cried 'Old Clothes,' and when I turned
the other hearth whispered the taunt. It added a thousandfold to my
embarrassment that there was in all a certain orderliness, so that while
no one moved, and none, while I looked at them, raised their voices, I
seemed the more singled out, and placed as a butt in the midst.

One face amid the pyramid of countenances which hid the farther
fireplace so burned itself into my recollection in that miserable
moment, that I never thereafter forgot it; a small, delicate woman's
face, belonging to a young girl who stood boldly in front of her
companions. It was a face full of pride, and, as I saw it then, of
scorn--scorn that scarcely deigned to laugh; while the girl's graceful
figure, slight and maidenly, yet perfectly proportioned, seemed instinct
with the same feeling of contemptuous amusement.

The play, which seemed long enough to me, might have lasted longer,
seeing that no one there had pity on me, had I not, in my desperation,
espied a door at the farther end of the room, and concluded, seeing no
other, that it was the door of the king's bedchamber. The mortification
I was suffering was so great that I did not hesitate, but advanced with
boldness towards it. On the instant there was a lull in the laughter
round me, and half a dozen voices called on me to stop.

'I have come to see the king,' I answered, turning on them fiercely, for
I was by this time in no mood for browbeating, 'and I will see him!'

'He is out hunting,' cried all with one accord; and they signed
imperiously to me to go back the way I had come.

But having the king's appointment safe in my pouch, I thought I had good
reason to disbelieve them; and taking advantage of their surprise--for
they had not expected so bold a step on my part--I was at the door
before they could prevent me. I heard Mathurine, the fool, who had
sprung to her feet, cry 'Pardieu! he will take the Kingdom of Heaven
by force!' and those were the last words I heard; for, as I lifted the
latch--there was no one on guard there--a sudden swift silence fell upon
the room behind me.

I pushed the door gently open and went in. There were two men sitting
in one of the windows, who turned and looked angrily towards me. For the
rest the room was empty. The king's walking-shoes lay by his chair, and
beside them the boot-hooks and jack. A dog before the fire got up slowly
and growled, and one of the men, rising from the trunk on which he
had been sitting, came towards me and asked me, with every sign of
irritation, what I wanted there, and who had given me leave to enter.

I was beginning to explain, with some diffidence the stillness of
the room sobering me--that I wished to see the king, when he who had
advanced took me up sharply with, 'The king? the king? He is not here,
man. He is hunting at St. Valery. Did they not tell you so outside?'

I thought I recognised the speaker, than whom I have seldom seen a man
more grave and thoughtful for his years, which were something less than
mine, more striking in presence, or more soberly dressed. And being
desirous to evade his question, I asked him if I had not the honour to
address M. du Plessis Mornay; for that wise and courtly statesman, now a
pillar of Henry's counsels, it was.

'The same, sir,' he replied, abruptly, and without taking his eyes from
me. 'I am Mornay. What of that?'

'I am M. de Marsac,' I explained. And there I stopped, supposing that,
as he was in the king's confidence, this would make my errand clear to
him.

But I was disappointed. 'Well, sir?' he said, and waited impatiently.

So cold a reception, following such treatment as I had suffered outside,
would have sufficed to have dashed my spirits utterly had I not felt
the king's letter in my pocket. Being pretty confident, however, that a
single glance at this would alter M. du Mornay's bearing for the better,
I hastened, looking on it as a kind of talisman, to draw it out and
present it to him.

He took it, and looked at it, and opened it, but with so cold and
immovable an aspect as made my heart sink more than all that had gone
before. 'What is amiss?' I cried, unable to keep silence. ''Tis from the
king, sir.'

'A king in motley!' he answered, his lip curling.

The sense of his words did not at once strike home to me, and I
murmured, in great disorder, that the king had sent for me.

'The king knows nothing of it,' was his blunt answer, bluntly given. And
he thrust the paper back into my hands. 'It is a trick,' he continued,
speaking with the same abruptness, 'for which you have doubtless
to thank some of those idle young rascals without. You had sent an
application to the king, I suppose? Just so. No doubt they got hold of
it, and this is the result. They ought to be whipped.'

It was not possible for me to doubt any longer that what he said was
true. I saw in a moment all my hopes vanish, all my plans flung to the
winds; and in the first shock of the discovery I could neither find
voice to answer him nor strength to withdraw. In a kind of vision I
seemed to see my own lean, haggard face looking at me as in a glass,
and, reading despair in my eyes, could have pitied myself.

My disorder was so great that M. du Mornay observed it. Looking more
closely at me, he two or three times muttered my name, and at last said,
'M. de Marsac? Ha! I remember. You were in the affair of Brouage, were
you not?'

I nodded my head in token of assent, being unable at the moment to
speak, and so shaken that perforce I leaned against the wall, my head
sunk on my breast. The memory of my age, my forty years, and my poverty,
pressed hard upon me, filling me with despair and bitterness. I could
have wept, but no tears came.

M. du Mornay, averting his eyes from me, took two or three short,
impatient turns up and down the chamber when he addressed me again his
tone was full of respect, mingled with such petulance as one brave man
might feel, seeing another so hard pressed. 'M. de Marsac,' he said,
'you have my sympathy. It is a shame that men who have served the
cause should be reduced to such straits. Were it, possible for me, to
increase my own train at present, I should consider it an honour to have
you with me. But I am hard put to it myself, and so are we all, and the
King of Navarre not least among us. He has lived for a month upon a wood
which M. de Rosny has cut down. I will mention your name to him, but I
should be cruel rather than kind were I not to warn you that nothing can
come of it.'

With that he offered me his hand, and, cheered as much by this mark
of consideration as by the kindness of his expressions, I rallied my
spirits. True, I wanted comfort more substantial, but it was not to be
had. I thanked him therefore as becomingly as I could, and seeing there
was no help for it, took my leave of him, and slowly and sorrowfully
withdrew from the room.

Alas! to escape I had to face the outside world, for which his kind
words were an ill preparation. I had to run the gauntlet of the
antechamber. The moment I appeared, or rather the moment the door closed
behind me, I was hailed with a shout of derision. While one cried,
'Way! way for the gentleman who has seen the king!' another hailed me
uproariously as Governor of Guyenne, and a third requested a commission
in my regiment.

I heard these taunts with a heart full almost to bursting. It seemed to
me an unworthy thing that, merely by reason of my poverty, I should be
derided by youths who had still all their battles before them; but to
stop or reproach them would only, as I well knew, make matters worse,
and, moreover, I was so sore stricken that I had little spirit left
even to speak. Accordingly, I made my way through them with what speed I
might, my head bent, and my countenance heavy with shame and depression.
In this way--I wonder there were not among them some generous enough
to pity me--I had nearly gained the door, and was beginning to breathe,
when I found my path stopped by that particular young lady of the Court
whom I have described above. Something had for the moment diverted her
attention from me, and it required a word from her companions to apprise
her of my near neighbourhood. She turned then, as one taken by surprise,
and finding me so close to her that my feet all but touched her gown,
she stepped quickly aside, and with a glance as cruel as her act, drew
her skirts away from contact with me.

The insult stung me, I know not why, more than all the gibes which
were being flung at me from every side, and moved by a sudden impulse I
stopped, and in the bitterness of my heart spoke to her. 'Mademoiselle,'
I said, bowing low--for, as I have stated, she was small, and more
like a fairy than a woman, though her face expressed both pride and
self-will--'Mademoiselle,' I said sternly, 'such as I am, I have fought
for France! Some day you may learn that there are viler things in the
world--and have to bear them--than a poor gentleman!'

The words were scarcely out of my mouth before I repented of them, for
Mathurine, the fool, who was at my elbow, was quick to turn them into
ridicule. Raising her hands above our heads, as in act to bless us,
she cried out that Monsieur, having gained so rich an office, desired
a bride to grace it; and this, bringing down upon us a coarse shout
of laughter and some coarser gibes, I saw the young girl's face flush
hotly.

The next moment a voice in the crowd cried roughly 'Out upon his wedding
suit!' and with that a sweetmeat struck me in the face. Another and
another followed, covering me with flour and comfits. This was the last
straw. For a moment, forgetting where I was, I turned upon them, red
and furious, every hair in my moustachios bristling. The next, the full
sense of my impotence and of the folly of resentment prevailed with me,
and, dropping my head upon my breast, I rushed from the room.

I believe that the younger among them followed me, and that the cry of
'Old Clothes!' pursued me even to the door of my lodgings in the Rue de
la Coutellerie. But in the misery of the moment, and my strong desire
to be within doors and alone, I barely noticed this, and am not certain
whether it was so or not.



CHAPTER II. THE KING OF NAVARRE.

I have already referred to the danger with which the alliance between
Henry the Third and the League menaced us, an alliance whereof the news,
it was said, had blanched the King of Navarre's moustache in a single
night. Notwithstanding this, the Court had never shown itself more
frolicsome or more free from care than at the time of which I am
speaking; even the lack of money seemed for the moment forgotten. One
amusement followed another, and though, without doubt, something was
doing under the surface for the wiser of his foes held our prince in
particular dread when he seemed most deeply sunk in pleasure--to the
outward eye St. Jean d'Angely appeared to be given over to enjoyment
from one end to the other.

The stir and bustle of the Court reached me even in my garret, and
contributed to make that Christmas, which fell on a Sunday, a trial
almost beyond sufferance. All day long the rattle of hoofs on the
pavement, and the laughter of riders bent on diversion, came up to
me, making the hard stool seem harder, the bare walls more bare, and
increasing a hundredfold the solitary gloom in which I sat. For as
sunshine deepens the shadows which fall athwart it, and no silence is
like that which follows the explosion of a mine, so sadness and poverty
are never more intolerable than when hope and wealth rub elbows with
them.

True, the great sermon which M. d'Amours preached in the market-house
on the morning of Christmas-day cheered me, as it cheered all the more
sober spirits. I was present myself, sitting in an obscure corner of
the building, and heard the famous prediction, which was so soon to be
fulfilled. 'Sire,' said the preacher, turning to the King of Navarre,
and referring, with the boldness that ever characterised that great
man and noble Christian, to the attempt, then being made to exclude the
prince from the succession--'Sire, what God at your birth gave you man
cannot take away. A little while, a little patience, and you shall cause
us to preach beyond the Loire! With you for our Joshua we shall cross
the Jordan, and in the Promised Land the Church shall be set up.'

Words so brave, and so well adapted to encourage the Huguenots in
the crisis through which their affairs were then passing, charmed all
hearers; save indeed, those--and they were few--who, being devoted to
the Vicomte de Turenne, disliked, though they could not controvert, this
public acknowledgment of the King of Navarre, as the Huguenot leader.
The pleasure of those present was evinced in a hundred ways, and to such
an extent that even I returned to my chamber soothed and exalted, and
found, in dreaming of the speedy triumph of the cause, some compensation
for my own ill-fortune.

As the day wore on, however, and the evening brought no change, but
presented to me the same dreary prospect with which morning had made
me familiar, I confess without shame that my heart sank once more,
particularly as I saw that I should be forced in a day or two to sell
either my remaining horse or some part of my equipment as essential;
a step which I could not contemplate without feelings of the utmost
despair. In this state of mind I was adding up by the light of a
solitary candle the few coins I had left, when I heard footsteps
ascending the stairs. I made them out to be the steps of two persons,
and was still lost in conjectures who they might be, when a hand knocked
gently at my door.

Fearing another trick, I did not at once open, the more so there was
something stealthy and insinuating in the knock. Thereupon my visitors
held a whispered consultation; then they knocked again. I asked loudly
who was there, but to this they did not choose to give any answer,
while I, on my part, determined not to open until they did. The door
was strong, and I smiled grimly at the thought that this time they would
have their trouble for their pains.

To my surprise, however, they did not desist, and go away, as I
expected, but continued to knock at intervals and whisper much between
times. More than once they called me softly by name and bade me open,
but as they steadily refrained from saying who they were, I sat still.
Occasionally I heard them laugh, but under their breath as it were;
and persuaded by this that they were bent on a frolic, I might have
persisted in my silence until midnight, which was not more than two
hours off, had not a slight sound, as of a rat gnawing behind the
wainscot, drawn my attention to the door. Raising my candle and shading
my eyes I espied something small and bright protruding beneath it, and
sprang up, thinking they were about to prise it in. To my surprise,
however, I could discover, on taking the candle to the threshold,
nothing more threatening than a couple of gold livres, which had been
thrust through the crevice between the door and the floor.

My astonishment may be conceived. I stood for full a minute staring at
the coins, the candle in my hand. Then, reflecting that the young sparks
at the Court would be very unlikely to spend such a sum on a jest, I
hesitated no longer, but putting down the candle, drew the bolt of the
door, purposing to confer with my visitors outside. In this, however, I
was disappointed, for the moment the door was open they pushed forcibly
past me and, entering the room pell-mell, bade me by signs to close the
door again.

I did so suspiciously, and without averting my eyes from my visitors.
Great were my embarrassment and confusion, therefore, when, the door
being shut, they dropped their cloaks one after the other, and I saw
before me M. du Mornay and the well-known figure of the King of Navarre.

They seemed so much diverted, looking at one another and laughing, that
for a moment I thought some chance resemblance deceived me, and that
here were my jokers again. Hence while a man might count ten I stood
staring; and the king was the first to speak. 'We have made no mistake,
Du Mornay, have we?' he said, casting a laughing glance at me.

'No, sire,' Du Mornay answered. 'This is the Sieur de Marsac, the
gentleman whom I mentioned to you.'

I hastened, confused, wondering, and with a hundred apologies, to pay my
respects to the king. He speedily cut me short, however, saying, with an
air of much kindness, 'Of Marsac, in Brittany, I think, sir?'

'The same, sire,'

'Then you are of the family of Bonne?'

'I am the last survivor of that family, sire,' I answered respectfully.

'It has played its part,' he rejoined, and therewith he took his seat
on my stool with an easy grace which charmed me. 'Your motto is "BONNE
FOI," is it not? And Marsac, if I remember rightly, is not far from
Rennes, on the Vilaine?'

I answered that it was, adding, with a full heart, that it grieved me to
be compelled to receive so great a prince in so poor a lodging.

'Well, I confess,' Du Mornay struck in, looking carelessly round him,
'you have a queer taste, M. de Marsac, in the arrangement of your
furniture. You--'

'Mornay!' the king cried sharply.

'Sire?'

'Chut! your elbow is in the candle. Beware of it!'

But I well understood him. If my heart had been full before, it
overflowed now. Poverty is not so shameful as the shifts to which it
drives men. I had been compelled some days before, in order to make as
good a show as possible--since it is the undoubted duty of a gentleman
to hide his nakedness from impertinent eyes, and especially from the
eyes of the canaille, who are wont to judge from externals--to remove
such of my furniture and equipage as remained to that side of the room,
which was visible from without when the door was open. This left the
farther side of the room vacant and bare. To anyone within doors the
artifice was, of course, apparent, and I am bound to say that M. de
Mornay's words brought the blood to my brow.

I rejoiced, however a moment later that he had uttered them; for without
them I might never have known, or known so early, the kindness of heart
and singular quickness of apprehension which ever distinguished the
king, my master. So, in my heart, I began to call him from that hour.

The King of Navarre was at this time thirty-five years old, his hair
brown, his complexion ruddy, his moustache, on one side at least,
beginning to turn grey. His features, which Nature had cast in a harsh
and imperious mould, were relieved by a constant sparkle and animation
such as I have never seen in any other man, but in him became ever more
conspicuous in gloomy and perilous times. Inured to danger from his
earliest youth, he had come to enjoy it as others a festival, hailing
its advent with a reckless gaiety which astonished even brave men, and
led others to think him the least prudent of mankind. Yet such he was
not: nay, he was the opposite of this. Never did Marshal of France
make more careful dispositions for a battle--albeit once in it he bore
himself like any captain of horse--nor ever did Du Mornay himself sit
down to a conference with a more accurate knowledge of affairs. His
prodigious wit and the affability of his manners, while they endeared
him to his servants, again and again blinded his adversaries; who,
thinking that so much brilliance could arise only from a shallow nature,
found when it was too late that they had been outwitted by him whom
they contemptuously styled the Prince of Bearn, a man a hundredfold more
astute than themselves, and master alike of pen and sword.

Much of this, which all the world now knows, I learned afterwards. At
the moment I could think of little save the king's kindness; to which
he added by insisting that I should sit on the bed while we talked. 'You
wonder, M. de Marsac,' he said, 'what brings me here, and why I have
come to you instead of sending for you? Still more, perhaps, why I have
come to you at night and with such precautions? I will tell you. But
first, that my coming may not fill you with false hopes, let me say
frankly, that though I may relieve your present necessities, whether you
fall into the plan I am going to mention, or not, I cannot take you
into my service; wherein, indeed, every post is doubly filled. Du Mornay
mentioned your name to me, but in fairness to others I had to answer
that I could do nothing.'

I am bound to confess that this strange exordium dashed hopes which had
already risen to a high pitch. Recovering myself as quickly as possible,
however, I murmured that the honour of a visit from the King of Navarre
was sufficient happiness for me.

'Nay, but that honour I must take from you' he replied, smiling; 'though
I see that you would make an excellent courtier--far better than Du
Mornay here, who never in his life made so pretty a speech. For I must
lay my commands on you to keep this visit a secret, M. de Marsac. Should
but the slightest whisper of it get abroad, your usefulness, as far as I
am concerned, would be gone, and gone for good!'

So remarkable a statement filled me with wonder I could scarcely
disguise. It was with difficulty I found words to assure the king that
his commands should be faithfully obeyed.

'Of that I am sure,' he answered with the utmost kindness. 'Where I not,
and sure, too, from what I am told of your gallantry when my cousin took
Brouage, that you are a man of deeds rather than words, I should not be
here with the proposition I am going to lay before you. It is this. I
can give you no hope of public employment, M. de Marsac, but I can offer
you an adventure if adventures be to your taste--as dangerous and as
thankless as any Amadis ever undertook.'

'As thankless, sire?' I stammered, doubting if I had heard aright, the
expression was so strange.

'As thankless,' he answered, his keen eyes seeming to read my soul.
'I am frank with you, you see, sir,' he continued, carelessly. 'I can
suggest this adventure--it is for the good of the State--I can do no
more. The King of Navarre cannot appear in it, nor can he protect you.
Succeed or fail in it, you stead alone. The only promise I make is,
that if it ever be safe for me to acknowledge the act, I will reward the
doer.'

He paused, and for a few moments I stared at him in sheer amazement.
What did he mean? Were he and the other real figures, or was I dreaming?

'Do you understand?' he asked at length, with a touch of impatience.

'Yes, sire, I think I do,' I murmured, very certain in truth and reality
that I did not.

'What do you say, then--yes or no?' he rejoined. 'Will you undertake the
adventure, or would you hear more before you make up your mind?'

I hesitated. Had I been a younger man by ten years I should doubtless
have cried assent there and then, having been all my life ready enough
to embark on such enterprises as offered a chance of distinction. But
something in the strangeness of the king's preface, although I had it in
my heart to die for him, gave me check, and I answered, with an air of
great humility, 'You will think me but a poor courtier now, sire, yet
he is a fool who jumps into a ditch without measuring the depth. I would
fain, if I may say it without disrespect, hear all that you can tell
me.'

'Then I fear,' he answered quickly, 'if you would have more light on the
matter, my friend, you must get another candle.'

I started, he spoke so abruptly; but perceiving that the candle had
indeed burned down to the socket, I rose, with many apologies, and
fetched another from the cupboard. It did not occur to me at the moment,
though it did later, that the king had purposely sought this opportunity
of consulting with his companion. I merely remarked, when I returned to
my place on the bed, that they were sitting a little nearer one another,
and that the king eyed me before he spoke--though he still swung one
foot carelessly in the air with close attention.

'I speak to you, of course, sir,' he presently went on, 'in confidence,
believing you to be an honourable as well as a brave man. That which I
wish you to do is briefly, and in a word, to carry off a lady. Nay,'
he added quickly, with a laughing grimace, 'have no fear! She is no
sweetheart of mine, nor should I go to my grave friend here did I need
assistance of that kind. Henry of Bourbon, I pray God, will always be
able to free his own lady-love. This is a State affair, and a matter of
quite another character, though we cannot at present entrust you with
the meaning of it.'

I bowed in silence, feeling somewhat chilled and perplexed, as who would
not, having such an invitation before him? I had anticipated an affair
with men only--a secret assault or a petard expedition. But seeing the
bareness of my room, and the honour the king was doing me, I felt I had
no choice, and I answered, 'That being the case, sire, I am wholly at
your service.'

'That is well,' he, answered briskly, though methought he looked at Du
Mornay reproachfully, as doubting his commendation of me. 'But will
you say the same,' he continued, removing his eyes to me, and speaking
slowly, as though he would try me, 'when I tell you that the lady to
be carried off is the ward of the Vicomte de Turenne, whose arm is
well-nigh as long as my own, and who would fain make it longer; who
never travels, as he told me yesterday, with less than fifty gentlemen,
and has a thousand arquebusiers in his pay? Is the adventure still to
your liking, M. de Marsac, now that you know that?'

'It is more to my liking, sire,' I answered stoutly.

'Understand this too,' he rejoined. 'It is essential that this lady,
who is at present confined in the Vicomte's house at Chize, should be
released; but it is equally essential that there should be no breach
between the Vicomte and myself. Therefore the affair must be the work
of an independent man, who has never been in my service, nor in any way
connected with me. If captured, you pay the penalty without recourse to
me.'

'I fully understand, sire,' I answered.

'Ventre Saint Gris!' he cried, breaking into a low laugh. I swear the
man is more afraid of the lady than he is of the Vicomte! That is not
the way of most of our Court.'

Du Mornay, who had been sitting nursing his knee in silence, pursed up
his lips, though it was easy to see that he was well content with the
king's approbation. He now intervened. 'With your permission, sire,' he
said, 'I will let this gentleman know the details.'

'Do, my friend,' the king answered. 'And be short, for if we are here
much longer I shall be missed, and in a twinkling the Court will have
found me a new mistress.'

He spoke in jest and with a laugh, but I saw Du Mornay start at
the words, as though they were little to his liking; and I learned
afterwards that the Court was really much exercised at this time with
the question who would be the next favourite, the king's passion for
the Countess de la Guiche being evidently on the wane, and that which
he presently evinced for Madame de Guercheville being as yet a matter of
conjecture.

Du Mornay took no overt notice of the king's words, however, but
proceeded to give me my directions. 'Chize, which you know by name,' he
said, 'is six leagues from here. Mademoiselle de la Vire is confined in
the north-west room, on the first-floor, overlooking the park. More I
cannot tell you, except that her woman's name is Fanchette, and that she
is to be trusted. The house is well guarded, and you will need four or
five men, There are plenty of cut-throats to be hired, only see, M.
de Marsac, that they are such as you can manage, and that Mademoiselle
takes no hurt among them. Have horses in waiting, and the moment; you
have released the lady ride north with her as fast as her strength will
permit. Indeed, you must not spare her, if Turenne be on your heels. You
should be across the Loire in sixty hours after leaving Chize.'

'Across the Loire?' I exclaimed in astonishment.

'Yes, sir, across the Loire,' he replied, with some sternness. 'Your
task, be good enough to understand, is to convoy Mademoiselle de la Vire
with all speed to Blois. There, attracting as little notice as may be,
you will inquire for the Baron de Rosny at the Bleeding Heart, in the
Rue de St. Denys. He will take charge of the lady, or direct you how to
dispose of her, and your task will then be accomplished. You follow me?'

'Perfectly,' I answered, speaking in my turn with some dryness. 'But
Mademoiselle I understand is young. What if she will not accompany me, a
stranger, entering her room at night, and by the window?'

'That has been thought of' was the answer. He turned to the King of
Navarre, who, after a moment's search, produced a small object from his
pouch. This he gave to his companion, and the latter transferred it to
me. I took it with curiosity. It was the half of a gold carolus,
the broken edge of the coin being rough and jagged. 'Show that to
Mademoiselle, my friend,' Du Mornay continued, 'and she will accompany
you. She has the other half.'

'But be careful,' Henry added eagerly, 'to make no mention, even to her,
of the King of Navarre. You mark me, M. de Marsac! If you have at any
time occasion to speak of me, you may have the honour of calling me YOUR
FRIEND, and referring to me always in the same manner.'

This he said with so gracious an air that I was charmed, and thought
myself happy indeed to be addressed in this wise by a prince whose name
was already so glorious. Nor was my satisfaction diminished when his
companion drew out a bag containing, as he told me, three hundred crowns
in gold, and placed it in my hands, bidding me defray therefrom the cost
of the journey. 'Be careful, however,' he added earnestly, 'to avoid, in
hiring your men, any appearance of wealth, lest the adventure seem to
be suggested by some outside person; instead of being dictated by the
desperate state of your own fortunes. Promise rather than give, so far
as that will avail. And for what you must give, let each livre seem to
be the last in your pouch.'

Henry nodded assent. 'Excellent advice!' he muttered, rising and
drawing on his cloak, 'such as you ever give me, Mornay, and I as seldom
take--more's the pity! But, after all, of little avail without this.' He
lifted my sword from the table as he spoke, and weighed it in his hand.
'A pretty tool,' he continued, turning suddenly and looking me very
closely in the face. 'A very pretty tool. Were I in your place, M. de
Marsac, I would see that it hung loose in the scabbard. Ay, and more,
man, use it!' he added, sinking his voice and sticking out his chin,
while his grey eyes, looking ever closer into mine, seemed to grow cold
and hard as steel. 'Use it to the last, for if you fall into Turenne's
hands, God help you! I cannot!'

'If I am taken, sire,' I answered, trembling, but not with fear, 'my
fate be on my own head.'

I saw the king's eyes soften, at that, and his face change so swiftly
that I scarce knew him for the same man. He let the weapon drop with
a clash on the table. 'Ventre Saint Gris!' he exclaimed with a strange
thrill of yearning in his tone. 'I swear by God, I would I were in your
shoes, sir. To strike a blow or two with no care what came of it. To
take the road with a good horse and a good sword, and see what fortune
would send. To be rid of all this statecraft and protocolling, and never
to issue another declaration in this world, but just to be for once a
Gentleman of France, with all to win and nothing to lose save the love
of my lady! Ah! Mornay, would it not be sweet to leave all this fret and
fume, and ride away to the green woods by Coarraze?'

'Certainly, if you prefer them to the Louvre, sire,' Du Mornay answered
drily; while I stood, silent and amazed, before this strange man, who
could so suddenly change from grave to gay, and one moment spoke so
sagely, and the next like any wild lad in his teens. 'Certainly,' he
answered, 'if that be your choice, sire; and if you think that even
there the Duke of Guise will leave you in peace. Turenne, I am sure,
will be glad to hear of your decision. Doubtless he will be elected
Protector of the Churches. Nay, sire, for shame!' Du Mornay continued
almost with sternness. 'Would you leave France, which at odd times I
have heard you say you loved, to shift for herself? Would you deprive
her of the only man who does love her for her own sake?'

'Well, well, but she is such a fickle sweetheart, my friend,' the king
answered, laughing, the side glance of his eye on me. 'Never was one so
coy or so hard to clip! And, besides, has not the Pope divorced us?'

'The Pope! A fig for the Pope!' Du Mornay rejoined with impatient heat.
'What has he to do with France? An impertinent meddler, and an Italian
to boot! I would he and all the brood of them were sunk a hundred
fathoms deep in the sea. But, meantime, I would send him a text to
digest.'

'EXEMPLUM?' said the king.

'Whom God has joined together let no man put asunder.'

'Amen! quoth Henry softly. 'And France is a fair and comely bride.'

After that he kept such a silence, falling as it seemed to me into a
brown study, that he went away without so much as bidding me farewell,
or being conscious, as far as I could tell, of my presence. Du Mornay
exchanged a few words with me, to assure himself that I understood what
I had to do, and then, with many kind expressions, which I did not fail
to treasure up and con over in the times that were coming, hastened
downstairs after his master.

My joy when I found myself alone may be conceived. Yet was it no
ecstasy, but a sober exhilaration; such as stirred my pulses indeed, and
bade me once more face the world with a firm eye and an assured brow,
but was far from holding out before me a troubadour's palace or any
dazzling prospect. The longer I dwelt on the interview, the more clearly
I saw the truth. As the glamour which Henry's presence and singular
kindness had cast over me began to lose some of its power, I recognised
more and more surely why he had come to me. It was not out of any
special favour for one whom he knew by report only, if at all by
name; but because he had need of a man poor, and therefore reckless,
middle-aged (of which comes discretion), obscure--therefore a safe
instrument; to crown all, a gentleman, seeing that both a secret and a
women were in question.

Withal I wondered too. Looking from the bag of money on the table to
the broken coin in my hand, I scarcely knew which to admire more: the
confidence which entrusted the one to a man broken and beggared, or the
courage of the gentlewoman who should accompany me on the faith of the
other.



CHAPTER III. BOOT AND SADDLE.

As was natural, I meditated deeply and far into the night on the
difficulties of the task, entrusted to me. I saw that it fell into
two parts: the release of the lady, and her safe conduct to Blois, a
distance of sixty leagues. The release I thought it probable I could
effect single-handed, or with one companion only; but in the troubled
condition of the country at this time, more particularly on both sides
of the Loire, I scarcely saw how I could ensure a lady's safety on the
road northwards unless I had with me at least five swords.

To get these together at a few hours' notice promised to be no easy
task; although the presence of the Court of Navarre had filled St. Jean
with a crowd of adventurers. Yet the king's command was urgent, and
at some sacrifice, even at some risk, must be obeyed. Pressed by these
considerations, I could think of no better man to begin with than
Fresnoy.

His character was bad, and he had long forfeited such claim as he had
ever possessed--I believe it was a misty one, on the distaff side--to
gentility. But the same cause which had rendered me destitute I mean
the death of the prince of Conde--had stripped him to the last rag; and
this, perhaps, inclining me to serve him, I was the more quick to see
his merits. I knew him already for a hardy, reckless man, very capable
of striking a shrewd blow. I gave him credit for being trusty, as long
as his duty jumped with his interest.

Accordingly, as soon as it was light, having fed and groomed the Cid,
which was always the first employment of my day, I set out in search of
Fresnoy, and was presently lucky enough to find him taking his morning
draught outside the 'Three Pigeons,' a little inn not far from the north
gate. It was more than a fortnight since I had set eyes on him, and the
lapse of time had worked so great a change for the worse in him that,
forgetting my own shabbiness, I looked at him askance, as doubting the
wisdom of enlisting one who bore so plainly the marks of poverty and
dissipation. His great face--he was a large man--had suffered recent
ill-usage, and was swollen and discoloured, one eye being as good as
closed. He was unshaven, his hair was ill-kempt, his doublet unfastened
at the throat, and torn and stained besides. Despite the cold--for the
morning was sharp and frosty, though free from wind--there were half a
dozen packmen drinking and squabbling before the inn, while the beasts
they drove quenched their thirst at the trough. But these men seemed
with one accord to leave him in possession of the bench at which he sat;
nor did I wonder much at this when I saw the morose and savage
glance which he shot at me as I approached. Whether he read my first
impressions in my face, or for some other reason felt distaste for my
company, I could not determine. But, undeterred by his behaviour, I sat
down beside him and called for wine.

He nodded sulkily in answer to my greeting, and cast a half-shamed,
half-angry look at me out of the corners of his eyes. 'You need not look
at me as though I were a dog,' he muttered presently. 'You are not so
very spruce yourself, my friend. But I suppose you have grown proud
since you got that fat appointment at Court!' And he laughed out loud,
so that I confess I was in two minds whether I should not force the jest
down his ugly throat.

However I restrained myself, though my cheeks burned. 'You have heard
about it, then,' I said, striving to speak indifferently.

'Who has not?' he said, laughing with his lips, though his eyes were far
from merry. 'The Sieur de Marsac's appointment! Ha! ha! Why, man--'

'Enough of it now!' I exclaimed. And I dare say I writhed on my seat.
'As far as I am concerned the jest is a stale one, sir, and does not
amuse me.'

'But it amuses me,' he rejoined with a grin.

'Let it be, nevertheless,' I said; and I think he read a warning in my
eyes. 'I have come to speak to you upon another matter.'

He did not refuse to listen, but threw one leg over the other, and
looking up at the inn-sign began to whistle in a rude, offensive manner.
Still, having an object in view, I controlled myself and continued. 'It
is this, my friend: money is not very plentiful at present with either
of us.'

Before I could say any more he turned on me savagely, and with a loud
oath thrust his bloated face, flushed with passion, close to mine. 'Now
look here, M. de Marsac!' he cried violently, 'once for all, it is no
good! I have not got the money, and I cannot pay it. I said a fortnight
ago, when you lent it, that you should have it this week. Well,'
slapping his hand on the bench, I have not got it, and it is no good
beginning upon me. You cannot have it, and that is flat!'

'Damn the money!' I cried.

'What?' he exclaimed, scarcely believing his ears.

'Let the money be!' I repeated fiercely. 'Do you hear? I have not come
about it, I am here to offer you work--good, well-paid work--if you will
enlist with me and play me fair, Fresnoy.'

'Play fair!' he cried with an oath.

'There, there,' I said, 'I am willing to let bygones be bygones if you
are. The point is, that I have an adventure on hand, and, wanting help,
can pay you for it.'

He looked at me cunningly, His eye travelling over each rent and darn
in my doublet. 'I will help you fast enough,' he said at last. 'But I
should like to see the money first.'

'You shall,' I answered.

'Then I am with you, my friend. Count on me till death!' he cried,
rising and laying his hand in mine with a boisterous frankness which did
not deceive me into trusting him far. 'And now, whose is the affair, and
what is it?'

'The affair is mine,' I said coldly. 'It is to carry off a lady.'

He whistled and looked me over again, an impudent leer in his eyes. 'A
lady?' he exclaimed. 'Umph! I could understand a young spark going in
for such--but that's your affair. Who is it?'

'That is my affair, too,' I answered coolly, disgusted by the man's
venality and meanness, and fully persuaded that I must trust him no
farther than the length of my sword. 'All I want you to do, M. Fresnoy,'
I continued stiffly, 'is to place yourself at my disposal and under my
orders for ten days. I will find you a horse and pay you--the enterprise
is a hazardous one, and I take that into account--two gold crowns a day,
and ten more if we succeed in reaching a place of safety.'

'Such a place as--'

'Never mind that,' I replied. 'The question is, do you accept?'

He looked down sullenly, and I could see he was greatly angered by my
determination to keep the matter to myself. 'Am I to know no more than
that?' he asked, digging the point of his scabbard again and again into
the ground.

'No more,' I answered firmly. 'I am bent on a desperate attempt to mend
my fortunes before they fall as low as yours; and that is as much as
I mean to tell living man. If you are loth to risk your life with your
eyes shut, say so, and I will go to someone else.'

But he was not in a position, as I well knew, to refuse such an offer,
and presently he accepted it with a fresh semblance of heartiness. I
told him I should want four troopers to escort us, and these he offered
to procure, saying that he knew just the knaves to suit me. I bade him
hire two only, however, being too wise, to put myself altogether in his
hands; and then, having given him money to buy himself a horse--I made
it a term that the men should bring their own--and named a rendezvous
for the first hour after noon, I parted from him and went rather sadly
away.

For I began to see that the king had not underrated the dangers of an
enterprise on which none but desperate men and such as were down in the
world could be expected to embark. Seeing this, and also a thing which
followed clearly from it--that I should have as much to fear from my
own company as from the enemy--I looked forward with little hope to a
journey during every day and every hour of which I must bear a growing
weight of fear and responsibility.

It was too late to turn back, however, and I went about my preparations,
if with little cheerfulness, at least with steadfast purpose. I had
my sword ground and my pistols put in order by the cutler over whom I
lodged, and who performed this last office for me with the same goodwill
which had characterised, all his dealings with me. I sought out and
hired a couple of stout fellows whom I believed to be indifferently
honest, but who possessed the advantage of having horses; and besides
bought two led horses myself for mademoiselle and her woman. Such other
equipments as were absolutely necessary I purchased, reducing my stock
of money in this way to two hundred and ten crowns. How to dispose of
this sum so that it might be safe and yet at my command was a question
which greatly exercised me. In the end I had recourse to my friend
the cutler, who suggested hiding a hundred crowns of it in my cap, and
deftly contrived a place for the purpose. This, the cap being lined with
steel, was a matter of no great difficulty. A second hundred I sewed
up in the stuffing of my saddle, placing the remainder in my pouch for
present necessities.

A small rain was falling in the streets when, a little after noon, I
started with my two knaves behind me and made for the north gate. So
many were moving this way and the other that we passed unnoticed, and
might have done so had we numbered six swords instead of three. When we
reached the rendezvous, a mile beyond the gate, we found Fresnoy already
there, taking shelter in the lee of a big holly-tree. He had four
horsemen with him, and on our appearance rode forward to meet us, crying
heartily, 'Welcome, M. le Capitaine!'

'Welcome, certainly,' I answered, pulling the Cid up sharply, and
holding off from him. 'But who are these, M. Fresnoy?' and I pointed
with my riding-cane to his four companions.

He tried to pass the matter off with a laugh. 'Oh! these?' he said.
'That is soon explained. The Evangelists would not be divided, so I
brought them all--Matthew Mark, Luke, and John--thinking it likely
you might fail to secure your men. And I will warrant them for four as
gallant boys as you will ever find behind you!'

They were certainly four as arrant ruffians as I had ever seen before
me, and I saw I must not hesitate. 'Two or none, M. Fresnoy,' I said
firmly. 'I gave you a commission for two, and two I will take--Matthew
and Mark, or Luke and John, as you please.'

''Tis a pity to break the party,' said he, scowling.

'If that be all,' I retorted, 'one of my men is called John. And we will
dub the other Luke, if that will mend the matter.'

'The Prince of Conde,' he muttered sullenly, 'employed these men.'

'The Prince of Conde employed some queer people sometimes, M. Fresnoy,'
I answered, looking him straight between the eyes, 'as we all must. A
truce to this, if you please. We will take Matthew and Mark. The other
two be good enough to dismiss.'

He seemed to waver for a moment, as if he had a mind to disobey, but
in the end, thinking better of it, he bade the men return; and as I
complimented each of them with a piece of silver, they went off, after
some swearing, in tolerably good humour. Thereon Fresnoy was for taking
the road at once, but having no mind to be followed, I gave the word to
wait until the two were out of sight.

I think, as we sat our horses in the rain, the holly-bush not being
large enough to shelter us all, we were as sorry a band as ever set out
to rescue a lady; nor was it without pain that I looked round and saw
myself reduced to command such people. There was scarcely one whole
unpatched garment among us, and three of my squires had but a spur
apiece. To make up for this deficiency we mustered two black eyes,
Fresnoy's included, and a broken nose. Matthew's nag lacked a tail,
and, more remarkable still, its rider, as I presently discovered, was
stone-deaf; while Mark's sword was innocent of a scabbard, and his
bridle was plain rope. One thing, indeed, I observed with pleasure. The
two men who had come with me looked askance at the two who had come with
Fresnoy, and these returned the stare with interest. On this division
and on the length of my sword I based all my hopes of safety and of
something more. On it I was about to stake, not my own life only--which
was no great thing, seeing what my prospects were--but the life and
honour of a woman, young, helpless, and as yet unknown to me.

Weighed down as I was by these considerations, I had to bear the
additional burden of hiding my fears and suspicions under a cheerful
demeanour. I made a short speech to my following, who one and all
responded by swearing to stand by me to the death. I then gave the word,
and we started, Fresnoy and I leading the way, Luke and John with the
led horses following, and the other two bringing up the rear.

The rain continuing to fall and the country in this part being dreary
and monotonous, even in fair weather, I felt my spirits sink still lower
as the day advanced. The responsibility I was going to incur assumed
more serious proportions each time I scanned my following; while
Fresnoy, plying me with perpetual questions respecting my plans, was as
uneasy a companion as my worst enemy could have wished me.

'Come!' he grumbled presently, when we had covered four leagues or
so, 'you have not told me yet, sieur, where we stay to-night. You are
travelling so slowly that--'

'I am saving the horses,' I answered shortly. 'We shall do a long day
to-morrow.'

'Yours looks fit for a week of days,' he sneered, with an evil look at
my Sardinian, which was, indeed, in better case than its master. 'It is
sleek enough, any way!'

'It is as good as it looks,' I answered, a little nettled by his tone.

'There is a better here,' he responded.

'I don't see it,' I said. I had already eyed the nags all round, and
assured myself that, ugly and blemished as they were, they were up to
their work. But I had discerned no special merit among them. I looked
them over again now, and came to the same conclusion--that, except the
led horses, which I had chosen with some care, there was nothing among
them to vie with the Cid, either in speed or looks. I told Fresnoy so.

'Would you like to try?' he said tauntingly.

I laughed, adding, 'If you think I am going to tire our horses by racing
them, with such work as we have before us, you are mistaken, Fresnoy. I
am not a boy, you know.'

'There need be no question of racing,' he answered more quietly. 'You
have only to get on that rat-tailed bay of Matthew's to feel its paces
and say I am right.'

I looked at the bay, a bald-faced, fiddle-headed horse, and saw that,
with no signs of breeding, it was still a big-boned animal with good
shoulders and powerful hips. I thought it possible Fresnoy might be
right, and if so, and the bay's manners were tolerable, it might do for
mademoiselle better than the horse I had chosen. At any rate, if we had
a fast horse among us, it was well to know the fact, so bidding Matthew
change with me, and be careful of the Cid, I mounted the bay, and
soon discovered that its paces were easy and promised speed, while its
manners seemed as good as even a timid rider could desire.

Our road at the time lay across a flat desolate heath, dotted here and
there with, thorn-bushes; the track being broken and stony, extended
more than a score of yards in width, through travellers straying to this
side and that to escape the worst places. Fresnoy and I, in making the
change, had fallen slightly behind the other three, and were riding
abreast of Matthew on the Cid.

'Well,' he said, 'was I not right?'

'In part,' I answered. 'The horse is better than its looks.'

'Like many others,' he rejoined, a spark of resentment in his tone--'men
as well as horses, M. de Marsac. But What do you say? Shall we canter on
a little and overtake the others?'

Thinking it well to do so, I assented readily, and we started together.
We had ridden, however, no more than a hundred yards, and I was only
beginning to extend the bay, when Fresnoy, slightly drawing rein, turned
in his saddle and looked back. The next moment he cried, 'Hallo! what is
this? Those fellows are not following us, are they?'

I turned sharply to look. At that moment, without falter or warning, the
bay horse went down under me as if shot dead, throwing me half a dozen
yards over its head; and that so suddenly that I had no time to raise my
arms, but, falling heavily on my head and shoulder, lost consciousness.

I have had many falls, but no other to vie with that in utter
unexpectedness. When I recovered my senses I found myself leaning, giddy
and sick, against the bole of an old thorn-tree. Fresnoy and Matthew
supported me on either side, and asked me how I found myself; while the
other three men, their forms black against the stormy evening sky, sat
their horses a few paces in front of me. I was too much dazed at first
to see more, and this only in a mechanical fashion; but gradually, my
brain grew clearer, and I advanced from wondering who the strangers
round me were to recognising them, and finally to remembering what had
happened to me.

'Is the horse hurt?' I muttered as soon as I could speak.

'Not a whit,' Fresnoy answered, chuckling, or I was much mistaken. 'I am
afraid you came off the worse of the two, captain.'

He exchanged a look with the men on horseback as he spoke, and in a dull
fashion I fancied I saw them smile. One even laughed, and another turned
in his saddle as if to hide his face. I had a vague general sense that
there was some joke on foot in which I had no part. But I was too much
shaken at the moment to be curious, and gratefully accepted the offer of
one, of the men to fetch me a little water. While he was away the rest
stood round me, the same look of ill-concealed drollery on their faces.
Fresnoy alone talked, speaking volubly of the accident, pouring out
expressions of sympathy and cursing the road, the horse, and the wintry
light until the water came; when, much refreshed by the draught, I
managed to climb to the Cid's saddle and plod slowly onwards with them.

'A bad beginning,' Fresnoy said presently, stealing a sly glance at
me as we jogged along side by side, Chize half a league before us, and
darkness not far off.

By this time, however, I was myself again, save for a little humming is
the head, and, shrugging my shoulders, I told him so. 'All's well that
ends well,' I added. 'Not that it was a pleasant fall, or that I wish to
have such another.'

'No, I should think not,' he answered. His face was turned from me, but
I fancied I heard him snigger.

Something, which may have been a vague suspicion, led me a moment later
to put my hand into my pouch. Then I understood. I understood too well.
The sharp surprise of the discovery was such that involuntarily I drove
my spurs into the Cid, and the horse sprang forward.

'What is the matter?' Fresnoy asked.

'The matter?' I echoed, my hand still at my belt, feeling--feeling
hopelessly.

'Yes, what is it?' he asked, a brazen smile on his rascally face.

I looked at him, my brow as red as fire. 'Oh! nothing--nothing,' I said.
'Let us trot on.'

In truth I had discovered that, taking advantage of my helplessness, the
scoundrels had robbed me, while I lay insensible, of every gold crown
in my purse! Nor was this all, or the worst, for I saw at once that
in doing so they had effected something which was a thousandfold more
ominous and formidable--established against me that secret understanding
which it was my especial aim to prevent, and on the absence of which I
had been counting. Nay, I saw that for my very life I had only my friend
the cutler and my own prudence to thank, seeing that these rogues would
certainly have murdered me without scruple had they succeeded in finding
the bulk of my money. Baffled in this, while still persuaded that I had
other resources, they had stopped short of that villany--or this memoir
had never been written. They had kindly permitted me to live until a
more favourable opportunity of enriching themselves at my expense should
put them in possession of my last crown!

Though I was sufficiently master of myself to refrain from complaints
which I felt must be useless, and from menaces which it has never
been my habit to utter unless I had also the power to put them into
execution, it must not be imagined that I did not, as I rode on by
Fresnoy's side, feel my position acutely or see how absurd a figure
I cut in my dual character of leader and dupe. Indeed, the reflection
that, being in this perilous position, I was about to stake another's
safety as well as my own, made me feel the need of a few minutes'
thought so urgent that I determined to gain them, even at the risk
of leaving my men at liberty to plot further mischief. Coming almost
immediately afterwards within sight, of the turrets of the Chateau of
Chize, I told Fresnoy that we should lie the night at the village;
and bade him take the men on and secure quarters at the inn. Attacked
instantly by suspicion and curiosity, he demurred stoutly to leaving me,
and might have persisted in his refusal had I not pulled up, and clearly
shown him that I would have my own way in this case or come to an open
breach. He shrank, as I expected, from the latter alternative, and,
bidding me a sullen adieu, trotted on with his troop. I waited until
they were out of sight, and then, turning the Cid's head, crossed a
small brook which divided the road from the chase, and choosing a
ride which seemed to pierce the wood in the direction of the Chateau,
proceeded down it, keeping a sharp look-out on either hand.

It was then, my thoughts turning to the lady who was now so near, and
who, noble, rich, and a stranger, seemed, as I approached her, not the
least formidable of the embarrassments before me--it was then that I
made a discovery which sent a cold shiver through my frame, and in
a moment swept all memory of my paltry ten crowns from my head.
Ten crowns! Alas! I had lost that which was worth all my crowns put
together--the broken coin which the King of Navarre had entrusted to
me, and which formed my sole credential, my only means of persuading
Mademoiselle de la Vire that I came from him. I had put it in my pouch,
and of course, though the loss of it only came home to my mind now, it
had disappeared with the rest.

I drew rein and sat for some time motionless, the image of despair.
The wind which stirred the naked boughs overhead, and whirled the
dead leaves in volleys past my feet, and died away at last among the
whispering bracken, met nowhere with wretchedness greater, I believe,
than was mine at that moment.



CHAPTER IV. MADEMOISELLE DE LA VIRE.

My first desperate impulse on discovering the magnitude of my loss was
to ride after the knaves and demand the token at the sword's point. The
certainty, however, of finding them united, and the difficulty of saying
which of the five possessed what I wanted, led me to reject this plan
as I grew cooler; and since I did not dream, even in this dilemma, of
abandoning the expedition the only alternative seemed to be to act as
if I still had the broken coin, and essay what a frank explanation might
effect when the time came.

After some wretched, very wretched, moments of debate, I resolved to
adopt this course; and, for the present, thinking I might gain
some knowledge of the surroundings while the light lasted, I pushed
cautiously forward through the trees and came in less than five minutes
within sight of a corner of the chateau, which I found to be a modern
building of the time of Henry II., raised, like the houses of that
time, for pleasure rather than defence, and decorated with many handsome
casements and tourelles. Despite this, it wore, as I saw it, a grey and
desolate air, due in part to the loneliness of the situation and the
lateness of the hour; and in part, I think, to the smallness of the
household maintained, for no one was visible on the terrace or at the
windows. The rain dripped from the trees, which on two sides pressed so
closely on the house as almost to darken the rooms, and everything I
saw encouraged me to hope that mademoiselle's wishes would second my
entreaties, and incline her to lend a ready ear to my story.

The appearance of the house, indeed, was a strong inducement to me to
proceed, for it was impossible to believe that a young lady, a kinswoman
of the gay and vivacious Turenne, and already introduced to the
pleasures of the Court, would elect of her own free will to spend the
winter in so dreary a solitude.

Taking advantage of the last moments of daylight, I rode cautiously
round the house, and, keeping in the shadow of the trees, had no
difficulty in discovering at the north-east corner the balcony of which
I had been told. It was semi-circular in shape, with a stone balustrade,
and hung some fifteen feet above a terraced walk which ran below it, and
was separated from the chase by a low sunk fence.

I was surprised to observe that, notwithstanding the rain and the
coldness of the evening, the window which gave upon this balcony was
open. Nor was this all. Luck was in store for me at last. I had not
gazed at the window more than a minute, calculating its height and other
particulars, when, to my great joy, a female figure, closely hooded,
stepped out and stood looking up at the sky. I was too far off to be
able to discern by that uncertain light whether this was Mademoiselle de
la Vire or her woman; but the attitude was so clearly one of dejection
and despondency, that I felt sure it was either one or the other.
Determined not to let the opportunity slip, I dismounted hastily
and, leaving the Cid loose, advanced on foot until I stood within
half-a-dozen paces of the window.

At that point the watcher became aware of me. She started back, but did
not withdraw. Still peering down at me, she called softly to some one
inside the chamber, and immediately a second figure, taller and stouter,
appeared. I had already doffed my cap, and I now, in a low voice, begged
to know if I had the honour of speaking to Mademoiselle de la Vire. In
the growing darkness it was impossible to distinguish faces.

'Hush!' the stouter figure muttered in a tone of warning. 'Speak lower.
Who are you, and what do you here?'

'I am here,' I answered respectfully, 'commissioned by a friend of the
lady I have named, to convey her to a place of safety.'

'Mon dieu!' was the sharp answer. 'Now? It is impossible.'

'No,' I murmured, 'not now, but to-night. The moon rises at half-past
two. My horses need rest and food. At three I will be below this window
with the means of escape, if mademoiselle choose to use them.'

I felt that they were staring at me through the dusk, as though they
would read my breast. 'Your name, sir?' the shorter figure murmured at
last, after a pause which was full of suspense and excitement.

'I do not think my name of much import at present, Mademoiselle,' I
answered, reluctant to proclaim myself a stranger. 'When--'

'Your name, your name, sir!' she repeated imperiously, and I heard her
little heel rap upon the stone floor of the balcony.

'Gaston de Marsac,' I answered unwillingly.

They both started, and cried out together. 'Impossible!' the last
speaker exclaimed, amazement and anger in her tone, 'This is a jest,
sir. This--'

What more she would have said I was left to guess, for at that moment
her attendant I had no doubt now which was mademoiselle and which
Fanchette--suddenly laid her hand on her mistress's mouth and pointed
to the room behind them. A second's suspense, and with a wanting gesture
the two turned and disappeared through the window.

I lost no time in regaining the shelter of the trees; and concluding,
though I was far from satisfied with the interview, that I could do
nothing more now, but might rather, by loitering in the neighbourhood,
awaken suspicion, I remounted and made for the highway and the village,
where I found my men in noisy occupation of the inn, a poor place, with
unglazed windows, and a fire in the middle of the earthen floor.
My first care was to stable the Cid in a shed at the back, where I
provided for its wants as far as I could with the aid of a half-naked
boy, who seemed to be in hiding there.

This done, I returned to the front of the house, having pretty well made
up my mind how I would set about the task before me. As I passed one of
the windows, which was partially closed by a rude curtain made of old
sacks, I stopped to look in. Fresnoy and his four rascals were seated
on blocks of wood round the hearth, talking loudly and fiercely, and
ruffling it as if the fire and the room were their own. A pedlar,
seated on his goods in one corner, was eyeing them with evident fear
and suspicion; in another corner two children had taken refuge under a
donkey, which some fowls had chosen as a roosting-pole. The innkeeper, a
sturdy fellow, with a great club in his fist, sat moodily at the foot of
a ladder which led to the loft above, while a slatternly woman, who was
going to and fro getting supper, seemed in equal terror of her guests
and her good man.

Confirmed by what I saw, and assured that the villains were ripe for any
mischief, and, if not checked, would speedily be beyond my control, I
noisily flung the door open and entered. Fresnoy looked up with a sneer
as I did so, and one of the men laughed. The others became silent; but
no one moved or greeted me. Without a moment's hesitation I stepped to
the nearest fellow and, with a sturdy kick, sent his log from under him.
'Rise, you rascal, when I enter!' I cried, giving vent to the anger
I had long felt. 'And you, too!' and with a second kick I sent his
neighbour's stool flying also, and administered a couple of cuts with
my riding-cane across the man's shoulders. 'Have you no manners, sirrah?
Across with you, and leave this side to your betters.'

The two rose, snarling and feeling for their weapons, and for a moment
stood facing me, looking now at me and now askance at Fresnoy. But as he
gave no sign, and their comrades only laughed, the men's courage failed
them at the pinch, and with a very poor grace they sneaked over to the
other side of the fire and sat there, scowling.

I seated myself beside their leader. 'This gentleman and I will eat
here,' I cried to the man at the foot of the ladder. 'Bid your wife lay
for us, and of the best you have; and do you give those knaves their
provender where the smell of their greasy jackets will not come between
us and our victuals.'

The man came forward, glad enough, as I saw, to discover any one in
authority, and very civilly began to draw wine and place a board for us,
while his wife filled our platters from the black pot which hung over
the fire. Fresnoy's face meanwhile wore the amused smile of one who
comprehended my motives, but felt sufficiently sure of his position
and influence with his followers to be indifferent to my proceedings.
I presently showed him, however, that I had not yet done with him. Our
table was laid in obedience to my orders at such a distance from the
men that they could not overhear our talk, and by-and-by I leant over to
him.

'M. Fresnoy,' I said, 'you are in danger of forgetting one thing, I
fancy, which it behoves you to remember.'

'What?' he muttered, scarcely deigning to look up at me.

'That you have to do with Gaston de Marsac,' I answered quietly. 'I
am making, as I told you this morning, a last attempt to recruit
my fortunes, and I will let no man--no man, do you understand, M.
Fresnoy?--thwart me and go harmless.'

'Who wishes to thwart you?' he asked impudently.

'You,' I answered unmoved, helping myself, as I spoke, from the roll of
black bread which lay beside me. 'You robbed me this afternoon; I passed
it over. You encouraged those men to be insolent; I passed it over.
But let me tell you this. If you fail me to-night, on the honour of a
gentleman, M. Fresnoy, I will run you through as I would spit a lark.'

'Will you? But two can play at that game,' he cried, rising nimbly from
his stool. 'Still better six! Don't you think, M. de Marsac, you had
better have waited--?'

'I think you had better hear one word more,' I answered coolly, keeping
my seat, 'before you appeal to your fellows there.'

'Well,' he said, still standing, 'what is it?'

'Nay,' I replied, after once more pointing to his stool in vain, 'if you
prefer to take my orders standing, well and good.'

'Your orders?' he shrieked, growing suddenly excited.

'Yes, my orders!' I retorted, rising as suddenly to my feet and hitching
forward my sword. 'My orders, sir,' I repeated fiercely, 'or, if you
dispute my right to command as well as to pay this party, let us decide
the question here and now--you and I, foot to foot, M. Fresnoy.'

The quarrel flashed up so suddenly, though I had been preparing it all
along, that no one moved. The woman indeed, fell back to her children,
but the rest looked on open-mouthed. Had they stirred, or had a moment's
hurly-burly heated his blood, I doubt not Fresnoy would have taken up
my challenge, for he did not lack hardihood. But as it was, face to face
with me in the silence, his courage failed him. He paused, glowering at
me uncertainly, and did not speak.

'Well,' I said, 'don't you think that if I pay I ought to give orders,
sir?'

'Who wishes to oppose your orders?' he muttered, drinking off a bumper,
and sitting down with an air of impudent bravado, assumed to hide his
discomfiture.

'If you don't, no one else does,' I answered. So that is settled.
Landlord, some more wine.'

He was very sulky with me for a while, fingering his glass in silence
and scowling at the table. He had enough gentility to feel the
humiliation to which he had exposed himself, and a sufficiency of wit to
understand that that moment's hesitation had cost him the allegiance of
his fellow-ruffians. I hastened, therefore, to set him at his ease by
explaining my plans for the night, and presently succeeded beyond my
hopes; for when he heard who the lady was whom I proposed to carry
off, and that she was lying that evening at the Chateau de Chize, his
surprise swept away the last trace of resentment. He stared at me, as at
a maniac.

'Mon Dieu!' he exclaimed. 'Do you know what you are doing, Sieur?'

'I think so,' I answered.

'Do you know to whom the chateau belongs?'

'To the Vicomte de Turenne.'

'And that Mademoiselle de la Vire is his relation?'

'Yes,' I said.

'Mon Dieu!' he exclaimed again. And he looked at me open-mouthed.

'What is the matter?' I asked, though I had an uneasy consciousness that
I knew--that I knew very well.

'Man, he will crush you as I crush this hat!' he answered in great
excitement. 'As easily. Who do you think will protect you from him in a
private quarrel of this kind? Navarre? France? our good man? Not one
of them. You had better steal the king's crown jewels--he is weak;
or Guise's last plot--he is generous at times, or Navarre's last
sweetheart--he is as easy as an old shoe. You had better have to do with
all these together, I tell you, than touch Turenne's ewe-lambs, unless
your aim be to be broken on the wheel! Mon Dieu, yes!'

'I am much obliged to you for your advice,' I said stiffly, 'but the die
is cast. My mind is made up. On the other hand, if you are afraid, M.
Fresnoy--'

'I am afraid; very much afraid,' he answered frankly.

'Still your name need not be brought into the matter,' I replied, 'I
will take the responsibility. I will let them know my name here at the
inn, where, doubtless, inquiries will be made.'

'To be sure, that is something,' he answered thoughtfully. 'Well, it
is an ugly business, but I am in for it. You want me to go with you a
little after two, do you? and the others to be in the saddle at three?
Is that it?'

I assented, pleased to find him so far acquiescent; and in this
way, talking the details over more than once, we settled our course,
arranging to fly by way of Poitiers and Tours. Of course I did not tell
him why I selected Blois as our refuge, nor what was my purpose there;
though he pressed me more than once on the point, and grew thoughtful
and somewhat gloomy when I continually evaded it. A little after eight
we retired to the loft to sleep; our men remaining below round the fire
and snoring so merrily as almost to shake the crazy old building. The
host was charged to sit up and call us as soon as the moon rose, but,
as it turned out, I might as well have taken this office on myself, for
between excitement and distrust I slept little, and was wide awake when
I heard his step on the ladder and knew it was time to rise.

I was up in a moment, and Fresnoy was little behind me; so that, losing
no time in talk, we were mounted and on the road, each with a spare
horse at his knee, before the moon was well above the trees. Once in the
Chase we found it necessary to proceed on foot, but, the distance being
short, we presently emerged without misadventure and stood opposite to
the chateau, the upper part of which shone cold and white in the moon's
rays.

There was something so solemn in the aspect of the place, the night
being fine and the sky without a cloud, that I stood for a minute awed
and impressed, the sense of the responsibility I was here to accept
strong upon me. In that short space of time all the dangers before me,
as well the common risks of the road as the vengeance of Turenne and the
turbulence of my own men, presented themselves to my mind, and made
a last appeal to me to turn back from an enterprise so foolhardy. The
blood in a man's veins runs low and slow at that hour, and mine was
chilled by lack of sleep and the wintry air. It needed the remembrance
of my solitary condition, of my past spent in straits and failure, of
the grey hairs which swept my cheek, of the sword which I had long used
honourably, if with little profit to myself; it needed the thought of
all these things to restore me to courage and myself.

I judged at a later period that my companion was affected in somewhat
the same way; for, as I stooped to press home the pegs which I had
brought to tether the horses, he laid his hand on my arm. Glancing up to
see what he wanted, I was struck by the wild look in his face (which the
moonlight invested with a peculiar mottled pallor), and particularly in
his eyes, which glittered like a madman's. He tried to speak, but seemed
to find a difficulty in doing so; and I had to question him roughly
before he found his tongue. When he did speak, it was only to implore me
in an odd, excited manner to give up the expedition and return.

'What, now?' I said, surprised. 'Now we are here, Fresnoy?'

'Ay, give it up!' he cried, shaking me almost fiercely by the arm. 'Give
it up, man! It will end badly, I tell you! In God's name, give it up,
and go home before worse comes of it.'

'Whatever comes of it,' I answered coldly, shaking his grasp from my
arm, and wondering much at this sudden fit of cowardice, 'I go on. You,
M. Fresnoy, may do as you please!'

He started and drew back from me; but he did not reply, nor did he speak
again. When I presently went off to fetch a ladder, of the position of
which I had made a note during the afternoon, he accompanied me, and
followed me back in the same dull silence to the walk below the balcony.
I had looked more than once and eagerly at mademoiselle's window without
any light or movement in that quarter rewarding my vigilance; but,
undeterred by this, which might mean either that my plot was known,
or that Mademoiselle de la Vire distrusted me, I set the ladder softly
against the balcony, which was in deep shadow, and paused only to give
Fresnoy his last instructions. These were simply to stand on guard
at the foot of the ladder and defend it in case of surprise; so that,
whatever happened inside the chateau, my retreat by the window might not
be cut off.

Then I went cautiously up the ladder, and, with my sheathed sword in my
left hand, stepped over the balustrade. Taking one pace forward, with
fingers outstretched, I felt the leaded panes of the window and tapped
softly.

As softly the casement gave way, and I followed it. A hand which I could
see but not feel was laid on mine. All was darkness in the room, and
before me, but the hand guided me two paces forward, then by a sudden
pressure bade me stand. I heard the sound of a curtain being drawn
behind me, and the next moment the cover of a rushlight was removed, and
a feeble but sufficient light filled the chamber.

I comprehended that the drawing of that curtain over the window had cut
off my retreat as effectually as if a door had been closed behind me.
But distrust and suspicion gave way the next moment to the natural
embarrassment of the man who finds himself in a false position and knows
he can escape from it only by an awkward explanation.

The room in which I found myself was long, narrow, and low in the
ceiling; and being hung with some dark stuff which swallowed up the
light, terminated funereally at the farther end in the still deeper
gloom of an alcove. Two or three huge chests, one bearing the remnants
of a meal, stood against the walls. The middle of the floor was covered
with a strip of coarse matting, on which a small table, a chair and
foot-rest, and a couple of stools had place, with some smaller articles
which lay scattered round a pair of half-filled saddle-bags. The
slighter and smaller of the two figures I had seen stood beside the
table, wearing a mask and riding cloak; and by her silent manner of
gazing at me, as well as by a cold, disdainful bearing, which neither
her mask nor cloak could hide, did more to chill and discomfit me than
even my own knowledge that I had lost the pass-key which should have
admitted me to her confidence.

The stouter figure of the afternoon turned out to be a red-cheeked,
sturdy woman of thirty, with bright black eyes and a manner which lost
nothing of its fierce impatience when she came a little later to address
me. All my ideas of Fanchette were upset by the appearance of this
woman, who, rustic in her speech and ways, seemed more like a duenna,
than the waiting-maid of a court beauty, and better fitted to guard a
wayward damsel than to aid her in such an escapade as we had in hand.

She stood slightly behind her mistress, her coarse red hand resting on
the back of the chair from which mademoiselle had apparently risen on my
entrance. For a few seconds, which seemed minutes to me, we stood gazing
at one another in silence, mademoiselle acknowledging my bow by a slight
movement of the head. Then, seeing that they waited for me to speak, I
did so.

'Mademoiselle de la Vire?' I murmured doubtfully.

She bent her head again; that was all.

I strove to speak with confidence. 'You will pardon me, mademoiselle,'
I said, 'if I seem to be abrupt, but time is everything. The horses are
standing within a hundred yards of the house, and all the preparations
for your flight are made. If we leave now, we can do so without
opposition. The delay even of an hour may lead to discovery.'

For answer she laughed behind her mask-laughed coldly and ironically.
'You go too fast, sir,' she said, her low clear voice matching the laugh
and rousing a feeling almost of anger in my heart. 'I do not know you;
or, rather, I know nothing of you which should entitle you to interfere
in my affairs. You are too quick to presume, sir. You say you come from
a friend. From whom?'

'From one whom I am proud to call by that title,' I answered with what
patience I might.

'His name!'

I answered firmly that I could not give it. And I eyed her steadily as I
did so.

This for the moment seemed to baffle and confuse her, but after a pause
she continued: 'Where do you propose to take me, sir?'

'To Blois; to the lodging of a friend of my friend.'

'You speak bravely,' she replied with a faint sneer. 'You have made some
great friends lately it seems! But you bring me some letter, no doubt;
at least some sign, some token, some warranty, that you are the person
you pretend to be, M. de Marsac?'

'The truth is, Mademoiselle,' I stammered, 'I must explain. I should
tell you--'

'Nay, sir,' she cried impetuously, 'there is no need of telling. If you
have what I say, show it me! It is you who lose time. Let us have no
more words!'

I had used very few words, and, God knows, was not in the mind to use
many; but, being in the wrong, I had no answer to make except the truth,
and that humbly. 'I had such a token as you mention, mademoiselle,' I
said, 'no farther back than this afternoon, in the shape of half a gold
coin, entrusted to me by my friend. But, to my shame I say it, it was
stolen from me a few hours back.'

'Stolen from you!' she exclaimed.

'Yes, mademoiselle; and for that reason I cannot show it,' I answered.

'You cannot show it? And you dare to come to me without it!' she cried,
speaking with a vehemence which fairly startled me, prepared as I was
for reproaches. You come to me! You!' she continued. And with that,
scarcely stopping to take breath, she loaded me with abuse; calling me
impertinent, a meddler, and a hundred other things, which I now blush
to recall, and displaying in all a passion which even in her attendant
would have surprised me, but in one so slight and seemingly delicate,
overwhelmed and confounded me. In fault as I was, I could not understand
the peculiar bitterness she displayed, or the contemptuous force of her
language, and I stared at her in silent wonder until, of her own accord,
she supplied the key to her feelings. In a fresh outburst of rage she
snatched off her mask, and to my astonishment I saw before me the
young maid of honour whom I had encountered in the King of Navarre's
antechamber, and whom I had been so unfortunate as to expose to the
raillery of Mathurine.

'Who has paid you, sir,' she continued, clenching her small hands and
speaking with tears of anger in her eyes, 'to make me the laughing-stock
of the Court? It was bad enough when I thought you the proper agent of
those to whom I have a right to look for aid! It was bad enough when
I thought myself forced, through their inconsiderate choice, to
decide between an odious imprisonment and the ridicule to which your
intervention must expose me! But that you should have dared, of your own
notion, to follow me, you, the butt of the Court--'

'Mademoiselle!' I cried.

'A needy, out-at-elbows adventurer!' she persisted, triumphing in her
cruelty. 'It exceeds all bearing! It is not to be suffered! It--'

'Nay, mademoiselle; you SHALL hear me!' I cried, with a sternness which
at last stopped her. 'Granted I am poor, I am still a gentleman; yes,
mademoiselle,' I continued, firmly, 'a gentleman, and the last of a
family which has spoken with yours on equal terms. And I claim to be
heard. I swear that when I came here to-night I believed you to be a
perfect stranger! I was unaware that I had ever seen you, unaware that I
had ever met you before.'

'Then why did you come?' she said viciously.

'I was engaged to come by those whom you have mentioned, and there,
and there only am I in fault. They entrusted to me a token which I have
lost. For that I crave your pardon.'

'You have need to,' she answered bitterly, yet with a changed
countenance, or I was mistaken, 'if your story be true, sir.'

'Ay, that you have!' the woman beside her echoed.

'Hoity toity, indeed! Here is a fuss about nothing. You call yourself a
gentleman, and wear such a doublet as--'

'Peace, Fanchette,' mademoiselle said imperiously. And then for a moment
she stood silent, eyeing me intently, her lips trembling with excitement
and two red spots burning in her cheeks. It was clear from her dress
and other things that she had made up her mind to fly had the token been
forthcoming; and seeing this, and knowing how unwilling a young girl
is to forgo her own way, I still had some hopes that she might not
persevere in her distrust and refusal. And so it turned out.

Her manner had changed to one of quiet scorn when she next spoke. 'You
defend yourself skilfully, sir,' she said, drumming with her fingers on
the table and eyeing me steadfastly. 'But can you give me any reason for
the person you name making choice of such a messenger?'

'Yes,' I answered, boldly. 'That he may not be suspected of conniving at
your escape.'

'Oh!' she cried, with a spark of her former passion. 'Then it is to be
put about that Mademoiselle de la Vire had fled from Chize with M. de
Marsac, is it? I thought that!'

'Through the assistance of M. de Marsac,' I retorted, correcting her
coldly. 'It is for you, mademoiselle,' I continued, 'to weigh that
disadvantage against the unpleasantness of remaining here. It only
remains for me to ask you to decide quickly. Time presses, and I have
stayed here too long already.'

The words had barely passed my lips when they received unwelcome
confirmation in the shape of a distant sound--the noisy closing of a
door, which, clanging through the house at such an hour--I judged it to
be after three o'clock--could scarcely mean anything but mischief.
This noise was followed immediately, even while we stood listening with
raised fingers, by other sounds--a muffled cry, and the tramp of heavy
footsteps in a distant passage. Mademoiselle looked at me, and I at her
woman. 'The door!' I muttered. 'Is it locked?'

'And bolted!' Fanchette answered; 'and a great chest set against it. Let
them ramp; they will do no harm for a bit.'

'Then you have still time, mademoiselle,' I whispered, retreating a step
and laying my hand on the curtain before the window. Perhaps I affected
greater coolness than I felt. 'It is not too late. If you choose to
remain, well and good. I cannot help it. If, on the other hand, you
decide to trust yourself to me, I swear, on the honour of a gentleman,
to be worthy of the trust--to serve you truly and protect you to the
last! I can say no more.'

She trembled, looking from me to the door, on which some one had just
begun to knock loudly. That seemed to decide her. Her lips apart, her
eyes full of excitement, she turned hastily to Fanchette.

'Ay, go if you like,' the woman answered doggedly, reading the meaning
of her look. 'There cannot be a greater villain than the one we know
of. But once started, heaven help us, for if he overtakes us we'll pay
dearly for it!'

The girl did not speak herself, but it was enough. The noise at the door
increased each second, and began to be mingled with angry appeals to
Fanchette to open, and with threats in case she delayed. I cut the
matter short by snatching up one of the saddle-bags--the other we left
behind--and flung back the curtain which covered the window. At the same
time the woman dashed out the light--a timely precaution--and throwing
open the casement I stepped on to the balcony, the others following me
closely.

The moon had risen high, and flooding with light the small open space
about the house enabled me to see clearly all round the foot of the
ladder, to my surprise Fresnoy was not at his post, nor was he to be
seen anywhere; but as, at the moment I observed this, an outcry away to
my left, at the rear of the chateau, came to my ears, and announced
that the danger was no longer confined to the interior of the house,
I concluded that he had gone that way to intercept the attack. Without
more, therefore, I began to descend as quickly as I could, my sword
under one arm and the bag under the other.

I was half-way down, and mademoiselle was already stepping on to the
ladder to follow, when I heard footsteps below, and saw him run up, his
sword in his hand.

'Quick, Fresnoy!' I cried. 'To the horses and unfasten them! quick!'

I slid down the rest of the way, thinking he had gone to do my bidding.
But my feet were scarcely on the ground when a tremendous blow in the
side sent me staggering three paces from the ladder. The attack was
so sudden, so unexpected, that but for the sight of Fresnoy's scowling
face, wild with rage, at my shoulder, and the sound of his fierce
breathing as he strove to release his sword, which had passed through my
saddle-bag, I might never have known who struck the blow, or how narrow
had been my escape.

Fortunately the knowledge did come to me in time, and before he freed
his blade; and it nerved my hand. To draw my-blade at such close
quarters was impossible, but, dropping the bag which had saved my life,
I dashed my hilt twice in his face with such violence that he fell
backwards and lay on the turf, a dark stain growing and spreading on his
upturned face.

It was scarcely done before the women reached the foot of the ladder and
stood beside me. 'Quick!' I cried to them, 'or they will be upon us.'
Seizing mademoiselle's hand, just as half-a-dozen men came running round
the corner of the house, I jumped with her down the haha, and, urging
her to her utmost speed, dashed across the open ground which lay between
us and the belt of trees. Once in the shelter of the latter, where our
movements were hidden from view, I had still to free the horses and
mount mademoiselle and her woman, and this in haste. But my companions'
admirable coolness and presence of mind, and the objection which our
pursuers, who did not know our numbers, felt to leaving the open ground,
enabled us to do all with, comparative ease. I sprang on the Cid (it has
always been my habit to teach my horse to stand for me, nor do I know
any accomplishment more serviceable at a pinch), and giving Fresnoy's
grey a cut over the flanks which despatched it ahead, led the way down
the ride by which I had gained the chateau in the afternoon. I knew
it to be level and clear of trees, and the fact that we chose it might
throw our pursuers off the track for a time, by leading them to think we
had taken the south road instead of that through the village.



CHAPTER V. THE ROAD TO BLOIS.

We gained the road without let or hindrance, whence a sharp burst in the
moonlight soon brought us to the village. Through this we swept on
to the inn, almost running over the four evangelists, whom we found
standing at the door ready for the saddle. I bade them, in a quick
peremptory tone, to get to horse, and was overjoyed to see them obey
without demur or word of Fresnoy. In another minute, with a great
clatter of hoofs, we sprang clear of the hamlet, and were well on the
road to Melle, with Poitiers some thirteen leagues before us. I looked
back, and thought I discerned lights moving in the direction of the
chateau; but the dawn was still two hours off, and the moonlight left
me in doubt whether these were real or the creatures of my own fearful
fancy.

I remember, three years before this time, on the occasion of the famous
retreat from Angers--when the Prince of Conde had involved his army
beyond the Loire, and saw himself, in the impossibility of recrossing
the river, compelled to take ship for England, leaving every one to
shift for himself--I well remember on that occasion riding, alone and
pistol in hand, through more than thirty miles of the enemy's country
without drawing rein. But my anxieties were then confined to the four
shoes of my horse. The dangers to which I was exposed at every ford and
cross road were such as are inseparable from a campaign, and breed in
generous hearts only a fierce pleasure, rarely to be otherwise enjoyed.
And though I then rode warily, and where I could not carry terror,
had all to fear myself, there was nothing secret or underhand in my
business.

It was very different now. During the first few hours of our flight from
Chize I experienced a painful excitement, an alarm, a feverish anxiety
to get forward, which was new to me; which oppressed my spirits to the
very ground; which led me to take every sound borne to us on the wind
for the sound of pursuit, transforming the clang of a hammer on the
anvil into the ring of swords, and the voices of my own men into those
of the pursuers. It was in vain mademoiselle rode with a free hand, and
leaping such obstacles as lay in our way, gave promise of courage and
endurance beyond my expectations. I could think of nothing but the three
long day's before us, with twenty-four hours to every day, and each hour
fraught with a hundred chances of disaster and ruin.

In fact, the longer I considered our position--and as we pounded along,
now splashing through a founderous hollow, now stumbling as we wound
over a stony shoulder, I had ample time to reflect upon it--the greater
seemed the difficulties before us. The loss of Fresnoy, while it freed
me from some embarrassment, meant also the loss of a good sword, and we
had mustered only too few before. The country which lay between us and
the Loire, being the borderland between our party and the League, had
been laid desolate so often as to be abandoned to pillage and disorder
of every kind. The peasants had flocked into the towns. Their places
had been taken by bands of robbers and deserters from both parties,
who haunted the ruined villages about Poitiers, and preyed upon all who
dared to pass. To add to our perils, the royal army under the Duke of
Nevers was reported to be moving slowly southward, not very far to the
left of our road; while a Huguenot expedition against Niort was also in
progress within a few leagues of us.

With four staunch and trustworthy comrades at my back, I might have
faced even this situation with a smile and a light heart; but the
knowledge that my four knaves might mutiny at any moment, or, worse
still, rid themselves of me and all restraint by a single treacherous
blow such as Fresnoy had aimed at me, filled me with an ever-present
dread; which it taxed my utmost energies to hide from them, and which I
strove in vain to conceal from mademoiselle's keener vision.

Whether it was this had an effect upon her, giving her a meaner opinion
of me than that which I had for a while hoped she entertained, or that
she began, now it was too late, to regret her flight and resent my
part in it, I scarcely know; but from daybreak onwards she assumed an
attitude of cold suspicion towards me, which was only less unpleasant
than the scornful distance of her manner when she deigned, which was
seldom, to address me.

Not once did she allow me to forget that I was in her eyes a needy
adventurer, paid by her friends to escort her to a place of safety, but
without any claim to the smallest privilege of intimacy or equality.
When I would have adjusted her saddle, she bade her woman come and hold
up her skirt, that my hands might not touch its hem even by accident.
And when I would have brought wine to her at Melle, where we stayed for
twenty minutes, she called Fanchette to hand it to her. She rode for
the most part in her mask; and with her woman. One good effect only her
pride and reserve had; they impressed our men with a strong sense of
her importance, and the danger to which any interference with her might
expose them.

The two men whom Fresnoy had enlisted I directed to ride a score of
paces in advance. Luke and John I placed in the rear. In this manner
I thought to keep them somewhat apart. For myself, I proposed to ride
abreast of mademoiselle, but she made it so clear that my neighbourhood
displeased her that I fell back, leaving her to ride with Fanchette; and
contented myself with plodding at their heels, and striving to attach
the later evangelists to my interests.

We were so fortunate, despite my fears, as to find the road nearly
deserted--as, alas, was much of the country on either side--and to meet
none but small parties travelling along it; who were glad enough, seeing
the villainous looks of our outriders, to give us a wide berth, and be
quit of us for the fright. We skirted Lusignan, shunning the streets,
but passing near enough for me to point out to mademoiselle the site of
the famous tower built, according to tradition, by the fairy Melusina,
and rased thirteen years back by the Leaguers. She received my
information so frigidly, however, that I offered no more, but fell back
shrugging my shoulders, and rode in silence, until, some two hours after
noon, the city of Poitiers came into sight, lying within its circle of
walls and towers on a low hill in the middle of a country clothed in
summer with rich vineyards, but now brown and bare and cheerless to the
eye.

Fanchette turned and asked me abruptly if that were Poitiers.

I answered that it was, but added that for certain reasons I proposed
not to halt, but to lie at a village a league beyond the city, where
there was a tolerable inn.

'We shall do very well here,' the woman answered rudely. 'Any way, my
lady will go no farther. She is tired and cold, and wet besides, and has
gone far enough.'

'Still,' I answered, nettled by the woman's familiarity, 'I think
mademoiselle will change her mind when she hears my reasons for going
farther.'

'Mademoiselle does not wish to hear them, sir,' the lady replied
herself, and very sharply.

'Nevertheless, I think you had better hear them,' I persisted, turning
to her respectfully. 'You see, mademoiselle--'

'I see only one thing, sir,' she exclaimed, snatching off her mask and
displaying a countenance beautiful indeed, but flushed for the moment
with anger and impatience, 'that, whatever betides, I stay at Poitiers
to-night.'

'If it would content you to rest an hour?' I suggested gently.

'It will not content me!' she rejoined with spirit. 'And let me tell
you, sir,' she went on impetuously, 'once for all, that you take too
much upon yourself. You are here to escort me, and to give orders to
these ragamuffins, for they are nothing better, with whom you have
thought fit to disgrace our company; but not to give orders to me or
to control my movements. Confine yourself for the future, sir, to your
duties, if you please.'

'I desire only to obey you,' I answered, suppressing the angry feelings
which rose in my breast, and speaking as coolly as lay in my power.
'But, as the first of my duties is to provide for your safety, I am
determined to omit nothing which can conduce to that end. You have not
considered that, if a party in pursuit of us reaches Poitiers to-night,
search will be made for us in the city, and we shall be taken. If, on
the other hand, we are known to have passed through, the hunt may go no
farther; certainly will go no farther to-night. Therefore we must not,
mademoiselle,' I added firmly, 'lie in Poitiers to-night.'

'Sir,' she exclaimed, looking at me, her face crimson with wonder and
indignation, 'do you dare to--?'

'I dare do my duty, mademoiselle,' I answered, plucking up a spirit,
though my heart was sore. 'I am a man old enough to be your father, and
with little to lose, or I had not been here. I care nothing what you
think or what you say of me, provided I can do what I have undertaken
to do and place you safely in the hands of your friends. But enough,
mademoiselle, we are at the gate. If you will permit me, I will ride
through the streets beside you. We shall so attract less attention.'

Without waiting for a permission which she was very unlikely to give,
I pushed my horse forward, and took my place beside her, signing to
Fanchette to fall back. The maid obeyed, speechless with indignation;
while mademoiselle flashed a scathing glance at me and looked round in
helpless anger, as though it was in her mind to appeal against me even
to the passers-by. But she thought better of it, and contenting herself
with muttering the word 'Impertinent' put on her mask with fingers which
trembled, I fancy, not a little.

A small rain was falling and the afternoon was well advanced when we
entered the town, but I noticed that, notwithstanding this, the streets
presented a busy and animated appearance, being full of knots of people
engaged in earnest talk. A bell was tolling somewhere, and near the
cathedral a crowd of no little size was standing, listening to a man
who seemed to be rending a placard or manifesto attached to the wall. In
another place a soldier, wearing the crimson colours of the League,
but splashed and stained as with recent travel, was holding forth to
a breathless circle who seemed to hang upon his lips. A neighbouring
corner sheltered a handful of priests who whispered together with gloomy
faces. Many stared at us as we passed, and some would have spoken; but I
rode steadily on, inviting no converse. Nevertheless at the north gate I
got a rare fright; for, though it wanted a full half-hour of sunset,
the porter was in the act of closing it. Seeing us, he waited grumbling
until we came up, and then muttered, in answer to my remonstrance,
something about queer times and wilful people having their way. I
took little notice of what he said, however, being anxious only to get
through the gate and leave as few traces of our passage as might be.

As soon as we were outside the town I fell back, permitting Fanchette to
take my place. For another league, a long and dreary one, we plodded
on in silence, horses and men alike jaded and sullen, and the women
scarcely able to keep their saddles for fatigue. At last, much to my
relief, seeing that I began to fear I had taxed mademoiselle's strength
too far, the long low buildings of the inn at which I proposed to stay
came in sight, at the crossing of the road and river. The place looked
blank and cheerless, for the dusk was thickening; but as we trailed one
by one into the courtyard a stream of firelight burst on us from doors
and windows, and a dozen sounds of life and comfort greeted our ears.

Noticing that mademoiselle was benumbed and cramped with long sitting, I
would have helped her to dismount; but she fiercely rejected my aid, and
I had to content myself with requesting the landlord to assign the best
accommodation he had to the lady and her attendant, and secure as much
privacy for them as possible. The man assented very civilly and said all
should be done; but I noticed that his eyes wandered while I talked, and
that he seemed to have something on his mind. When he returned, after
disposing of them, it came out.

'Did you ever happen to see him, sir?' he asked with a sigh; yet was
there a smug air of pleasure mingled with his melancholy.

'See whom?' I answered, staring at him, for neither of us had mentioned
any one.

'The Duke, sir.'

I stared again between wonder and suspicion. 'The Duke of Nevers is not
in this part, is he?' I said slowly. 'I heard he was on the Brittany
border, away to the westward.'

'Mon Dieu!' my host exclaimed, raising his hands in astonishment. 'You
have not heard, sir?'

'I have heard nothing,' I answered impatiently.

'You have not heard, sir, that the most puissant and illustrious lord
the Duke of Guise is dead?'

'M. de Guise dead? It is not true!' I cried astonished.

He nodded, however, several times with an air of great importance, and
seemed as if he would have gone on to give me some particulars. But,
remembering, as I fancied, that he spoke in the hearing of half-a-dozen
guests who sat about the great fire behind me, and had both eyes and
ears open, he contented himself with shifting his towel to his other arm
and adding only, 'Yes, sir, dead as any nail. The news came through here
yesterday, and made a pretty stir. It happened at Blois the day but one
before Christmas, if all be true.'

I was thunderstruck. This was news which might change the face of
France. 'How did it happen?' I asked.

My host covered his mouth with his hand and coughed, and, privily
twitching my sleeve, gave me to understand with some shamefacedness
that he could not say more in public. I was about to make some excuse to
retire with him, when a harsh voice, addressed apparently to me, caused
me to turn sharply. I found at my elbow a tall thin-faced monk in the
habit of the Jacobin order. He had risen from his seat beside the fire,
and seemed to be labouring under great excitement.

'Who asked how it happened?' he cried, rolling his eyes in a kind of
frenzy, while still observant, or I was much mistaken, of his listeners.
Is there a man in France to whom the tale has not been told? Is there?'

'I will answer for one,' I replied, regarding him with little favour. 'I
have heard nothing.'

'Then you shall! Listen!' he exclaimed, raising his right hand and
brandishing it as though he denounced a person then present. 'Hear my
accusation, made in the name of Mother Church and the saints against
the arch hypocrite, the perjurer and assassin sitting in high places! He
shall be Anathema Maranatha, for he has shed the blood of the holy and
the pure, the chosen of Heaven! He shall go down to the pit, and that
soon. The blood that he has shed shall be required of him, and that
before he is one year older.'

'Tut-tut. All that sounds very fine, good father,' I said, waxing
impatient, and a little scornful; for I saw that he was one of those
wandering and often crazy monks in whom the League found their most
useful emissaries. 'But I should profit more by your gentle words, if I
knew whom you were cursing.'

'The man of blood!' he cried; 'through whom the last but not the least
of God's saints and martyrs entered into glory on the Friday before
Christmas.'

Moved by such profanity, and judging him, notwithstanding the
extravagance of his words and gestures, to be less mad than he seemed,
and at least as much knave as fool, I bade him sternly have done with
his cursing, and proceed to his story if he had one.

He glowered at me for a moment, as though he were minded to launch
his spiritual weapons at my head; but as I returned his glare with an
unmoved eye--and my four rascals, who were as impatient as myself to
learn the news, and had scarce more reverence for a shaven crown, began
to murmur--he thought better of it, and cooling as suddenly as he had
flamed up, lost no more time in satisfying our curiosity.

It would ill become me, however, to set down the extravagant and often
blasphemous harangue in which, styling M. de Guise the martyr of God, he
told the story now so familiar--the story of that dark wintry morning
at Blois, when the king's messenger, knocking early at the duke's door,
bade him hurry, for the king wanted him. The story is trite enough now.
When I heard it first in the inn on the Clain, it was all new and all
marvellous.

The monk, too, telling the story as if he had seen the events with his
own eyes, omitted nothing which might impress his hearers. He told us
how the duke received warning after warning, and answered in the very
antechamber, 'He dare not!' How his blood, mysteriously advised of
coming dissolution, grew chill, and his eye, wounded at Chateau Thierry,
began to run, so that he had to send for the handkerchief he had
forgotten to bring. He told us, even, how the duke drew his assassins up
and down the chamber, how he cried for mercy, and how he died at last
at the foot of the king's bed, and how the king, who had never dared to
face him living, came and spurned him dead!

There were pale faces round the fire when he ceased, and bent brows
and lips hard pressed together. Then he stood and cursed the King of
France--cursing him openly by the name of Henry of Valois, a thing I
had never looked to hear in France--though no one said 'Amen,' and all
glanced over their shoulders, and our host pattered from the room as if
he had seen a ghost, it seemed to be no man's duty to gainsay him.

For myself, I was full of thoughts which it would have been unsafe to
utter in that company or so near the Loire. I looked back sixteen years.
Who but Henry of Guise had spurned the corpse of Coligny? And who but
Henry of Valois had backed him in the act? Who but Henry of Guise had
drenched Paris with blood, and who but Henry of Valois had ridden by
his side? One 23rd of the month--a day never to be erased from France's
annals--had purchased for him a term of greatness. A second 23rd saw
him, pay the price--saw his ashes cast secretly and by night no man
knows where!

Moved by such thoughts, and observing that the priest was going the
round of the company collecting money for masses for the duke's soul,
to which object I could neither give with a good conscience nor refuse
without exciting suspicion, I slipped out; and finding a man of decent
appearance talking with the landlord in a small room beside the kitchen,
I called for a flask of the best wine, and by means of that introduction
obtained my supper in their company.

The stranger was a Norman horsedealer, returning home, after disposing
of his string. He seemed to be in a large way of business, and being of
a bluff, independent spirit, as many of those Norman townsmen are, was
inclined at first to treat me with more familiarity than respect; the
fact of my nag, for which he would have chaffered, excelling my coat
in quality, leading him to set me down as a steward or intendant. The
pursuit of his trade, however, had brought him into connection with all
classes of men and he quickly perceived his mistake; and as he knew the
provinces between the Seine and Loire to perfection, and made it part of
his business to foresee the chances of peace and war, I obtained a great
amount of information from him, and indeed conceived no little liking
for him. He believed that the assassination of M. de Guise would
alienate so much of France from the king that his majesty would have
little left save the towns on the Loire, and some other places lying
within easy reach of his court at Blois.

'But,' I said,'things seem quiet now. Here, for instance.'

'It is the calm before the storm,' he answered. 'There is a monk in
there. Have you heard him?'

I nodded.

'He is only one among a hundred--a thousand,' the horsedealer continued,
looking at me and nodding with meaning. He was a brown-haired man with
shrewd grey eyes, such as many Normans have. 'They will get their way
too, you will see,' he went on. 'Well, horses will go up, so I have no
cause to grumble; but, if I were on my way to Blois with women or gear
of that kind, I should not choose this time for picking posies on the
road. I should see the inside of the gates as soon as possible.'

I thought there was much in what he said; and when he went on to
maintain that the king would find himself between the hammer and the
anvil--between the League holding all the north and the Huguenots
holding all the south--and must needs in time come to terms with the
latter seeing that the former would rest content with nothing short of
his deposition, I began to agree with him that we should shortly see
great changes and very stirring times.

'Still if they depose the king,' I said, 'the King of Navarre must
succeed him. He is the heir of France.'

'Bah!' my companion replied somewhat contemptuously. 'The League will
see to that. He goes with the other.'

'Then the kings are in one cry, and you are right,' I said with
conviction. 'They must unite.'

'So they will. It is only a question of time,' he said.

In the morning, having only one man with him, and, as I guessed, a
considerable sum of money, he volunteered to join our party as far as
Blois. I assented gladly, and he did so, this addition to our numbers
ridding me at once of the greater part of my fears. I did not expect any
opposition on the part of mademoiselle, who would gain in consequence as
well as in safety. Nor did she offer any. She was content, I think,
to welcome any addition to our party which would save her from the
necessity of riding in the company of my old cloak.



CHAPTER VI. MY MOTHER'S LODGING.

Travelling by way of Chatelherault and Tours, we reached the
neighbourhood of Blois a little after noon on the third day without
misadventure or any intimation of pursuit. The Norman proved himself
a cheerful companion on the road, as I already knew him to be a man of
sense and shrewdness while his presence rendered the task of keeping
my men in order an easy one. I began to consider the adventure as
practically achieved; and regarding Mademoiselle de la Vire as already
in effect transferred to the care of M. de Rosny, I ventured to turn my
thoughts to the development of my own plans and the choice of a haven in
which I might rest secure from the vengeance of M. de Turenne.

For the moment I had evaded his pursuit, and, assisted by the confusion
caused everywhere by the death of Guise had succeeded in thwarting his
plans and affronting his authority with seeming ease. But I knew too
much of his power and had heard too many instances of his fierce temper
and resolute will to presume on short impunity or to expect the future
with anything but diffidence and dismay.

The exclamations of my companions on coming within sight of Blois
aroused me from these reflections. I joined them, and fully shared their
emotion as I gazed on the stately towers which had witnessed so many
royal festivities, and, alas! one royal tragedy; which had sheltered
Louis the Well-beloved and Francis the Great, and rung with the laughter
of Diana of Poitiers and the second Henry. The play of fancy wreathed
the sombre building with a hundred memories grave and gay. But, though
the rich plain of the Loire still swelled upward as of old in gentle
homage at the feet of the gallant town, the shadow of crime seemed to
darken all, and dim even the glories of the royal standard which hung
idly in the air.

We had heard so many reports of the fear and suspicion which reigned in
the city and of the strict supervision which was exercised over all
who entered--the king dreading a repetition of the day of the
Barricades--that we halted at a little inn a mile short of the gate
and broke up our company. I parted from my Norman friend with mutual
expressions of esteem, and from my own men, whom I had paid off in the
morning, complimenting each of them with a handsome present, with a
feeling of relief equally sincere. I hoped--but the hope was not fated
to be gratified--that I might never see the knaves again.

It wanted less than an hour of sunset when I rode up to the gate, a few
paces in front of mademoiselle and her woman; as if I had really been
the intendant for whom the horse-dealer had mistaken me. We found the
guardhouse lined with soldiers, who scanned us very narrowly as we
approached, and whose stern features and ordered weapons showed that
they were not there for mere effect. The fact, however, that we came
from Tours, a city still in the king's hands, served to allay suspicion,
and we passed without accident.

Once in the streets, and riding in single file between the houses,
to the windows of which the townsfolk seemed to be attracted by the
slightest commotion, so full of terror was the air, I experienced a
moment of huge relief. This was Blois--Blois at last. We were within a
few score yards of the Bleeding Heart. In a few minutes I should receive
a quittance, and be free to think only of myself.

Nor was my pleasure much lessened by the fact that I was so soon to
part from Mademoiselle de la Vire. Frankly, I was far from liking her.
Exposure to the air of a court had spoiled, it seemed to me, whatever
graces of disposition the young lady had ever possessed. She still
maintained, and had maintained throughout the journey, the cold and
suspicious attitude assumed at starting; nor had she ever expressed
the least solicitude on my behalf, or the slightest sense that we were
incurring danger in her service. She had not scrupled constantly to
prefer her whims to the common advantage, and even safety; while her
sense of self-importance had come to be so great, that she seemed to
hold herself exempt from the duty of thanking any human creature. I
could not deny that she was beautiful--indeed, I often thought, when
watching her, of the day when I had seen her in the King of Navarre's
antechamber in all the glory of her charms. But I felt none the less
that I could turn my back on her--leaving her in safety--without regret;
and be thankful that her path would never again cross mine.

With such thoughts in my breast I turned the corner of the Rue de
St. Denys and came at once upon the Bleeding Heart, a small but
decent-looking hostelry situate near the end of the street and opposite
a church. A bluff grey-haired man, who was standing in the doorway, came
forward as we halted, and looking curiously at mademoiselle asked what I
lacked; adding civilly that the house was full and they had no sleeping
room, the late events having drawn a great assemblage to Blois.

'I want only an address,' I answered, leaning from the saddle and
speaking in a low voice that I might not be overheard by the passers-by.
'The Baron de Rosny is in Blois, is he not?'

The man started at the name of the Huguenot leader, and looked round him
nervously. But, seeing that no one was very near us, he answered: 'He
was, sir; but he left town a week ago and more. 'There have been strange
doings here, and M. de Rosny thought that the climate suited him ill.'

He said this with so much meaning, as well as concern that he should not
be overheard, that, though I was taken aback and bitterly disappointed,
I succeeded in restraining all exclamations and even show of feeling.
After a pause of dismay, I asked whither M. de Rosny had gone.

'To Rosny,' was the answer.

'And Rosny?'

'Is beyond Chartres, pretty well all the way to Mantes,' the man
answered, stroking my horse's neck. 'Say thirty leagues.'

I turned my horse, and hurriedly communicated what he said to
mademoiselle, who was waiting a few paces away. Unwelcome to me, the
news was still less welcome to her. Her chagrin and indignation knew no
bounds. For a moment words failed her, but her flashing eyes said more
than her tongue as she cried to me: 'Well, sir, and what now? Is this
the end of your fine promises? Where is your Rosny, if all be not a
lying invention of your own?'

Feeling that she had some excuse I suppressed my choler, and humbly
repeating that Rosny was at his house, two days farther on, and that I
could see nothing for it but to go to him, I asked the landlord where we
could find a lodging for the night.

'Indeed, sir, that is more than I can say,' he answered, looking
curiously at us, and thinking, I doubt not, that with my shabby cloak
and fine horse, and mademoiselle's mask and spattered riding-coat,
we were an odd couple. 'There is not an inn which is not full to the
garrets--nay, and the stables; and, what is more, people are chary of
taking strangers in. These are strange times. They say,' be continued in
a lower tone, 'that the old queen is dying up there, and will not last
the night.'

I nodded. 'We must go somewhere' I said.

'I would help you if I could,' he answered, shrugging his shoulders.
'But there it is! Blois is full from the tiles to the cellars.'

My horse shivered under me, and mademoiselle, whose patience was gone,
cried harshly to me to do something. 'We cannot spend the night in the
streets,' she said fiercely.

I saw that she was worn out and scarcely mistress of herself. The light
was falling, and with it some rain. The reek of the kennels and the
close air from the houses seemed to stifle us. The bell at the church
behind us was jangling out vespers. A few people, attracted by the
sight of our horses standing before the inn, had gathered round and were
watching us.

Something I saw must be done, and done quickly. In despair, and seeing
no other resort, I broached a proposal of which I had not hitherto
even dreamed. 'Mademoiselle,' I said bluntly, 'I must take you to my
mother's.'

'To your mother's, sir?' she cried, rousing herself. Her voice rang with
haughty surprise.

'Yes,' I replied brusquely; 'since, as you say, we cannot spend the
night in the streets, and I do not know where else I can dispose of you.
From the last advices I had I believe her to have followed the court
hither. My friend,' I continued, turning to the landlord, 'do you know
by name a Madame de Bonne, who should be in Blois?'

'A Madame de Bonne!' he muttered, reflecting. 'I have heard the name
lately. Wait a moment.' Disappearing into the house, he returned almost
immediately, followed by a lanky pale-faced youth wearing a tattered
black soutane. 'Yes,' he said nodding, 'there is a worthy lady of that
name lodging in the next street, I am told. As it happens, this young
man lives in the same house, and will guide you, if you like.'

I assented, and, thanking him for his information, turned my horse and
requested the youth to lead the way. We had scarcely passed the corner
of the street, however, and entered one somewhat more narrow and less
frequented, when mademoiselle, who was riding behind me, stopped and
called to me. I drew rein, and, turning, asked what it was.

'I am not coming,' she said, her voice trembling slightly, but whether
with alarm or anger I could not determine. 'I know nothing of you, and
I--I demand to be taken to M. de Rosny.'

'If you cry that name aloud in the streets of Blois, mademoiselle,' I
retorted, 'you are like enough to be taken whither you will not care to
go! As for M. de Rosny, I have told you that he is not here. He has gone
to his seat at Mantes.'

'Then take me to him!'

'At this hour of the night?' I said drily. 'It is two days' journey from
here.'

'Then I will go to an inn,' she replied sullenly.

'You have heard that there is no room in the inns' I rejoined with what
patience I could. 'And to go from inn to inn at this hour might lead us
into trouble. I can assure you that I am as much taken aback by M. de
Rosny's absence as you are. For the present, we are close to my mother's
lodging, and--'

'I know nothing of your mother!' she exclaimed passionately, her voice
raised. 'You have enticed me hither by false pretences, sir, and I will
endure it no longer. I will--'

'What you will do, I do not know then, mademoiselle,' I replied, quite
at my wits' end; for what with the rain and the darkness, the unknown
streets--in which our tarrying might at any moment collect a crowd--and
this stubborn girl's opposition, I knew not whither to turn. 'For my
part I can suggest nothing else. It does not become me to speak of my
mother,' I continued, 'or I might say that even Mademoiselle de la Vire
need not be ashamed to accept the hospitality of Madame de Bonne. Nor
are my mother's circumstances,' I added proudly, 'though narrow, so mean
as to deprive her of the privileges of her birth.'

My last words appeared to make some impression upon my companion. She
turned and spoke to her woman, who replied in a low voice, tossing her
head the while and glaring at me in speechless indignation. Had there
been anything else for it, they would doubtless have flouted my offer
still; but apparently Fanchette could suggest nothing, and presently
mademoiselle, with a sullen air, bade me lead on.

Taking this for permission, the lanky youth in the black soutane, who
had remained at my bridle throughout the discussion, now listening
and now staring, nodded and resumed his way; and I followed. After
proceeding a little more than fifty yards he stopped before a
mean-looking doorway, flanked by grated windows, and fronted by a lofty
wall which I took to be the back of some nobleman's garden. The street
at this point was unlighted, and little better than an alley; nor was
the appearance of the house, which was narrow and ill-looking, though
lofty, calculated, as far as I could make it out is the darkness,
to allay mademoiselle's suspicions. Knowing, however, that people of
position are often obliged in towns to lodge in poor houses, I thought
nothing of this, and only strove to get mademoiselle dismounted as
quickly as possible. The lad groped about and found two rings beside the
door, and to these I tied up the horses. Then, bidding him lead the way,
and begging mademoiselle to follow, I plunged into the darkness of the
passage and felt my way to the foot of the staircase, which was entirely
unlighted, and smelled close and unpleasant.

'Which floor?' I asked my guide.

'The fourth,' he answered quietly.

'Morbleu!' I muttered, as I began to ascend, my hand on the wall. 'What
is the meaning of this?'

For I was perplexed. The revenues of Marsac, though small, should have
kept my mother, whom I had last seen in Paris before the Nemours
edict, in tolerable comfort--such modest comfort, at any rate, as could
scarcely be looked for in such a house as this--obscure, ill-tended,
unlighted. To my perplexity was added, before I reached the top of
the stairs, disquietude--disquietude on her account as well as on
mademoiselle's. I felt that something was wrong, and would have given
much to recall the invitation I had pressed on the latter.

What the young lady thought herself I could pretty well guess, as I
listened to her hurried breathing at my shoulder. With every step I
expected her to refuse to go farther. But, having once made up her
mind, she followed me stubbornly, though the darkness was such that
involuntarily I loosened my dagger, and prepared to defend myself should
this turn out to be a trap.

We reached the top, however, without accident. Our guide knocked softly
at a door and immediately opened it without waiting for an answer. A
feeble light shone out on the stair-head, and bending my head, for the
lintel was low, I stepped into the room.

I advanced two paces and stood looking about me in angry bewilderment.
The bareness of extreme poverty marked everything on which my eyes
rested. A cracked earthenware lamp smoked and sputtered on a stool in
the middle of the rotting floor. An old black cloak nailed to the wall,
and flapping to and fro in the draught like some dead gallowsbird, hung
in front of the unglazed window. A jar in a corner caught the drippings
from a hole in the roof. An iron pot and a second stool--the latter
casting a long shadow across the floor--stood beside the handful of wood
ashes, which smouldered on the hearth. And that was all the furniture I
saw, except a bed which filled the farther end of the long narrow room,
and was curtained off so as to form a kind of miserable alcove.

A glance sufficed to show me all this, and that the room was empty,
or apparently empty. Yet I looked again and again, stupefied. At last
finding my voice, I turned to the young man who had brought us hither,
and with a fierce oath demanded of him what he meant.

He shrank back behind the open door, and yet; answered with a kind of
sullen surprise that I had asked for Madame de Bonne's, and this was it.

'Madame de Bonne's!' I muttered. 'This Madame de Bonne's!'

He nodded.

'Of course it is! And you know it!' mademoiselle hissed in my ear, her
voice, as she interposed, hoarse with passion. 'Don't think that you can
deceive us any longer. We know all! This,' she continued, looking round,
her cheeks scarlet, her eyes ablaze with scorn, 'is your mother's,
is it! Your mother who has followed the court hither--whose means are
narrow, but not so small as to deprive her of the privileges of her
rank! This is your mother's hospitality, is it? You are a cheat, sir!
and a detected cheat! Let us begone! Let me go, sir, I say!'

Twice I had tried to stop the current of her words; but in vain. Now
with anger which surpassed hers a hundredfold--for who, being a man,
would hear himself misnamed before his mother?--I succeeded, 'Silence,
mademoiselle!' I cried, my grasp on her wrist. 'Silence, I say! This is
my mother!'

And running forward to the bed, I fell on my knees beside it. A feeble
hand had half withdrawn the curtain, and through the gap my mother's
stricken face looked out, a great fear stamped upon it.



CHAPTER VII. SIMON FLEIX

For some minutes I forgot mademoiselle in paying those assiduous
attentions to my mother which her state and my duty demanded; and which
I offered the more anxiously that I recognised, with a sinking heart,
the changes which age and illness had made in her since my last visit.
The shock of mademoiselle's words had thrown her into a syncope, from
which she did not recover for some time; and then rather through the
assistance of our strange guide, who seemed well aware what to do, than
through my efforts. Anxious as I was to learn what had reduced her
to such straits and such a place, this was not the time to satisfy my
curiosity, and I prepared myself instead for the task of effacing the
painful impression which mademoiselle's words had made on her mind.

On first coming to herself she did not remember them, but, content to
find me by her side--for there is something so alchemic in a mother's
love that I doubt not my presence changed her garret to a palace--she
spent herself in feeble caresses and broken words. Presently, however,
her eye falling on mademoiselle and her maid, who remained standing by
the hearth, looking darkly at us from time to time, she recalled, first
the shock which had prostrated her, and then its cause, and raising
herself on her elbow, looked about her wildly. 'Gaston!' she cried,
clutching my hand with her thin fingers, 'what was it I heard? It was of
you someone spoke--a woman! She called you--or did I dream it?--a cheat!
You!'

'Madame, madame,' I said, striving to speak carelessly, though the
sight; of her grey hair, straggling and dishevelled, moved me strangely,
'was it; likely? Would anyone dare to use such expressions of me is your
presence? You must indeed have dreamed it!'

The words, however, returning more and more vividly to her mind, she
looked at me very pitifully, and in great agitation laid her arm on my
neck, as though she would shelter me with the puny strength which just
enabled her to rise in bed. 'But someone,' she muttered, her eyes on the
strangers, 'said it, Gaston? I heard it. What did it mean?'

'What you heard, madame,' I answered, with an attempt at gaiety, though
the tears stood in my eyes, 'was, doubtless, mademoiselle here scolding
our guide from Tours, who demanded three times the proper POURBOIRE. The
impudent rascal deserved all that was said to him, I assure you.'

'Was that it?' she murmured doubtfully.

'That must have been what you heard, madame,' I answered, as if I felt
no doubt.

She fell back with a sigh of relief, and a little colour came into her
wan face. But her eyes still dwelt curiously, and with apprehension, on
mademoiselle, who stood looking sullenly into the fire; and seeing this
my heart misgave me sorely that I had done a foolish thing in bringing
the girl there. I foresaw a hundred questions which would be asked, and
a hundred complications which must ensue, and felt already the blush of
shame mounting to my cheek.

'Who is that?' my mother asked softly. 'I am ill. She must excuse me.'
She pointed with her fragile finger to my companions.

I rose, and still keeping her hand in mine, turned so as to face the
hearth. 'This, madame,' I answered formally, 'is Mademoiselle--, but her
name I will commit to you later, and in private. Suffice it to say that
she is a lady of rank, who has been committed to my charge by a high
personage.'

'A high personage?' my mother repeated gently, glancing at me with a
smile of gratification.

'One of the highest,' I said, 'Such a charge being a great honour to me,
I felt that I could not better execute it madame, since we must lie in
Blois one night, than by requesting your hospitality on her behalf.'

I dared mademoiselle as I spoke--I dared her with my eye to contradict
or interrupt me. For answer, she looked at me once, inclining her head a
little, and gazing at us from under her long eyelashes. Then she turned
back to the fire, and her foot resumed its angry tapping on the floor.

'I regret that I cannot receive her better,' my mother answered feebly.
'I have had losses of late. I--but I will speak of that at another time.
Mademoiselle doubtless knows,' she continued with dignity, 'you and your
position in the south too well to think ill of the momentary straits to
which she finds me reduced.'

I saw mademoiselle start, and I writhed under the glance of covert
scorn, of amazed indignation, which she shot at me. But my mother gently
patting my hand, I answered patiently, 'Mademoiselle will think only
what is kind, madame--of that I am assured. And lodgings are scarce
to-night in Blois.'

'But tell me of yourself, Gaston,' my mother cried eagerly; and I had
not the heart, with her touch on my hand, her eyes on my face, to tear
myself away, much as I dreaded what was coming, and longed to end the
scene. 'Tell me of yourself. You are still in favour with the king of--I
will not name him here?'

'Still, madame,' I answered, looking steadily at mademoiselle, though my
face burned.

'You are still--he consults you, Gaston?'

'Still, madame.'

My mother heaved a happy sigh, and sank lower in the bed. 'And your
employments?' she murmured, her voice trembling with gratification.
'They have not been reduced? You still retain them, Gaston?'

'Still, madame,' I answered, the perspiration standing on my brow, my
shame almost more than I could bear.

'Twelve thousand livres a year, I think?'

'The same, madame.'

'And your establishment? How many do you keep now? Your valet, of
course? And lackeys--how many at present?' She glanced, with an eye of
pride, while she waited for my answer, first at the two silent figures
by the fire, then at the poverty-stricken room; as if the sight of its
bareness heightened for her the joy of my prosperity.

She had no suspicion of my trouble, my misery, or that the last question
almost filled the cup too full. Hitherto all had been easy, but this
seemed to choke me. I stammered and lost my voice. Mademoiselle, her
head bowed, was gazing into the fire. Fanchette was staring at me, her
black eyes round as saucers, her mouth half-open. 'Well, madame,'
I muttered at length, 'to tell you the truth, at present, you must
understand, I have been forced to--'

'What, Gaston?' Madame de Bonne half rose in bed. Her voice was sharp
with disappointment and apprehension; the grasp of her fingers on my
hand grew closer.

I could not resist that appeal. I flung away the last rag of shame.
'To reduce my establishment somewhat,' I answered, looking a miserable
defiance at mademoiselle's averted figure. She had called me a liar and
a cheat--here in the room! I must stand before her a liar and a cheat
confessed. 'I keep but three lackeys now, madame.'

Still it is creditable,' my mother muttered thoughtfully, her eyes
shining. 'Your dress, however, Gaston--only my eyes are weak--seems to
me--'

'Tut, tut! It is but a disguise,' I answered quickly.

'I might have known that,' she rejoined, sinking back with a smile and
a sigh of content. 'But when I first saw you I was almost afraid that
something had happened to you. And I have been uneasy lately,' she
went on, releasing my hand, and beginning to play with the coverlet,
as though the remembrance troubled her. 'There was a man here a while
ago--a friend of Simon Fleix there--who had been south to Pau and Nerac,
and he said there was no M. de Marsac about the Court.'

'He probably knew less of the Court than the wine-tavern,' I answered
with a ghastly smile.

'That was just what I told him,' my mother responded quickly and
eagerly. 'I warrant you I sent him away ill-satisfied.'

'Of course,' I said; 'there will always be people of that kind. But
now, if you will permit me, madame, I will make such arrangements for
mademoiselle as are necessary.'

Begging her accordingly to lie down and compose herself--for even so
short a conversation, following on the excitement of our arrival,
had exhausted her to a painful degree--I took the youth, who had just
returned from stabling our horses, a little aside, and learning that he
lodged in a smaller chamber on the farther side of the landing, secured
it for the use of mademoiselle and her woman. In spite of a certain
excitability which marked him at times, he seemed to be a quick, ready
fellow, and he willingly undertook to go out, late as it was, and
procure some provisions and a few other things which were sadly needed,
as well for my mother's comfort as for our own. I directed Fanchette to
aid him in the preparation of the other chamber, and thus for a while I
was left alone with mademoiselle. She had taken one of the stools, and
sat cowering over the fire, the hood of her cloak drawn about her head;
in such a manner that even when she looked at me, which she did from
time to time, I saw little more than her eyes, bright with contemptuous
anger.

'So, sir,' she presently began, speaking in a low voice, and turning
slightly towards me, 'you practise lying even here?'

I felt so strongly the futility of denial or explanation that I shrugged
my shoulders and remained silent under the sneer. Two more days--two
more days would take us to Rosny, and my task would be done, and
Mademoiselle and I would part for good and all. What would it matter
then what she thought of me? What did it matter now?

For the first time in our intercourse my silence seemed to disconcert
and displease her. 'Have you nothing to say for yourself?' she muttered
sharply, crushing a fragment of charcoal under her foot, and stooping
to peer at the ashes. 'Have you not another lie in your quiver, M. de
Marsac?' De Marsac!' And she repeated the title, with a scornful laugh,
as if she put no faith in my claim to it.

But I would answer nothing--nothing; and we remained silent until
Fanchette, coming in to say that the chamber was ready, held the light
for her mistress to pass out. I told the woman to come back and fetch
mademoiselle's supper, and then, being left alone with my mother, who
had fallen asleep, with a smile on her thin, worn face, I began to
wonder what had happened to reduce her to such dire poverty.

I feared to agitate her by referring to it; but later in the evening,
when her curtains were drawn and Simon Fleix and I were left together,
eyeing one another across the embers like dogs of different breeds--with
a certain strangeness and suspicion--my thoughts recurred to the
question; and determining first to learn something about my companion,
whose pale, eager face and tattered, black dress gave him a certain
individuality, I asked him whether he had come from Paris with Madame de
Bonne.

He nodded without speaking.

I asked him if he had known her long.

'Twelve months,' he answered. 'I lodged on the fifth, madame on the
second, floor of the same house in Paris.'

I leaned forward and plucked the hem of his black robe. 'What is this?'
I said, with a little contempt. 'You are not a priest, man.'

'No,' he answered, fingering the stuff himself, and gazing at me in a
curious, vacant fashion. 'I am a student of the Sorbonne.'

I drew off from him with a muttered oath, wondering--while I looked at
him with suspicious eyes--how he came to be here, and particularly how
he came to be in attendance on my mother, who had been educated from
childhood in the Religion, and had professed it in private all her life.
I could think of no one who, in old days, would have been less welcome
in her house than a Sorbonnist, and began to fancy that here should lie
the secret of her miserable condition.

'You don't like, the Sorbonne?' he said, reading my thoughts; which
were, indeed, plain enough.

'No more than I love the devil!' I said bluntly.

He leaned forward and, stretching out a thin, nervous hand, laid it
on my knee. 'What if they are right, though?' he muttered, his voice
hoarse. 'What if they are right, M. de Marsac?'

'Who right?' I asked roughly, drawing back afresh.

'The Sorbonne.' he repeated, his face red with excitement, his eyes
peering uncannily into mine. 'Don't you see,' he continued, pinching
my knee in his earnestness, and thrusting his face nearer and nearer
to mine, 'it all turns on that? It all turns on that--salvation or
damnation! Are they right? Are you right? You say yes to this, no to
that, you white-coats; and you say it lightly, but are you right? Are
you right? Mon Dieu!' he continued, drawing back abruptly and clawing
the air with impatience, 'I have read, read, read! I have listened to
sermons, theses, disputations, and I know nothing. I know no more than
when I began.'

He sprang up and began to pace the floor, while I gazed at him with a
feeling of pity. A very learned person once told me that the troubles of
these times bred four kinds of men, who were much to be compassionated:
fanatics on the one side or the other, who lost sight of all else in the
intensity of their faith; men who, like Simon Fleix, sought desperately
after something to believe, and found it not; and lastly, scoffers, who,
believing in nothing, looked on all religion as a mockery.

He presently stopped walking--in his utmost excitement I remarked that
he never forgot my mother, but trod more lightly when he drew near the
alcove--and spoke again. 'You are a Huguenot?' he said.

'Yes,' I replied.

'So is she,' he rejoined, pointing towards the bed. 'But do you feel no
doubts?'

'None,' I said quietly.

'Nor does she.' he answered again, stopping opposite me. You made up
your mind--how?'

'I was born in the Religion,' I said.

'And you have never questioned it?'

'Never.'

'Nor thought much about it?'

'Not a great deal,' I answered.

'Saint Gris!' he exclaimed in a low tone. 'And do you never think of
hell-fire--of the worm which dieth not, and the fire which shall not be
quenched? Do you never think of that, M. de Marsac?'

'No, my friend, never!' I answered, rising impatiently; for at
that hour, and in that silent, gloomy room I found his conversation
dispiriting. 'I believe what I was taught to believe, and I strive to
hurt no one but the enemy. I think little; and if I were you I would
think less. I would do something, man--fight, play, work, anything but
think! I leave that to clerks.'

'I am a clerk,' he answered.

'A poor one, it seems,' I retorted, with a little scorn in my tone.
'Leave it, man. Work! Fight! Do something!'

'Fight?' he said, as if the idea were a novel one. 'Fight? But there, I
might be killed; and then hell-fire, you see!'

'Zounds, man!' I cried, out of patience with a folly which, to tell the
truth, the lamp burning low, and the rain pattering on the roof, made
the skin of my back feel cold and creepy. 'Enough of this! Keep your
doubts and your fire to yourself! And answer me,' I continued, sternly.
'How came Madame de Bonne so poor? How did she come down to this place?'

He sat down on his stool, the excitement dying quickly out of his face.
'She gave away all her money,' he said slowly and reluctantly. It may be
imagined that this answer surprised me. 'Gave it away?' I exclaimed. 'To
whom? And when?'

He moved uneasily on his seat and avoided my eye, his altered manner
filling me with suspicions which the insight I had just obtained into
his character did not altogether preclude. At last he said, 'I had
nothing to do with it, if you mean that; nothing. On the contrary, I
have done all I could to make it up to her. I followed her here. I swear
that is so, M. de Marsac.'

'You have not told me yet to whom she gave it,' I said sternly.

'She gave it,' he muttered, 'to a priest.'

'To what priest?'

'I do not know his name. He is a Jacobin.'

'And why?' I asked, gazing incredulously at the student. 'Why did
she give it to him? Come, come! have a care. Let me have none of your
Sorbonne inventions!'

He hesitated a moment, looking at me timidly, and then seemed to make up
his mind to tell me. 'He found out--it was when we lived in Paris, you
understand, last June--that she was a Huguenot. It was about the time
they burned the Foucards, and he frightened her with that, and made her
pay him money, a little at first, and then more and more, to keep her
secret. When the king came to Blois she followed his Majesty, thinking
to be safer here; but the priest came too, and got more money, and more,
until he left her--this.'

'This!' I said. And I set my teeth together.

Simon Fleix nodded.

I looked round the wretched garret to which my mother had been reduced,
and pictured the days and hours of fear and suspense through which she
had lived; through which she must have lived, with that caitiff's threat
hanging over her grey head! I thought of her birth and her humiliation;
of her frail form and patient, undying love for me; and solemnly, and
before heaven, I swore that night to punish the man. My anger was too
great for words, and for tears I was too old. I asked Simon Fleix no
more questions, save when the priest might be looked for again--which
he could not tell me--and whether he would know him again--to which he
answered, 'Yes.' But, wrapping myself in my cloak, I lay down by the
fire and pondered long and sadly.

So, while I had been pinching there, my mother had been starving here.
She had deceived me, and I her. The lamp flickered, throwing uncertain
shadows as the draught tossed the strange window-curtain to and fro.
The leakage from the roof fell drop by drop, and now and again the wind
shook the crazy building, as though it would lift it up bodily and carry
it away.



CHAPTER VIII. AN EMPTY ROOM.

Desiring to start as early as possible, that we might reach Rosny on the
second evening, I roused Simon Fleix before it was light, and learning
from him where the horses were stabled, went out to attend to them;
preferring to do this myself, that I might have an opportunity of
seeking out a tailor, and providing myself with clothes better suited to
my rank than those to which I had been reduced of late. I found that I
still had ninety crowns left of the sum which the King of Navarre had
given me, and twelve of these I laid out on a doublet of black cloth
with russet points and ribands, a dark cloak lined with the same
sober colour, and a new cap and feather. The tradesman would fain have
provided me with a new scabbard also, seeing my old one was worn-out at
the heel; but this I declined, having a fancy to go with my point bare
until I should have punished the scoundrel who had made my mother's
failing days a misery to her; a business which, the King of Navarre's
once done, I promised myself to pursue with energy and at all costs.

The choice of my clothes, and a few alterations which it was necessary
to make in them, detained me some time, so that it was later than I
could have wished when I turned my face towards the house again, bent
on getting my party to horse as speedily as possible. The morning,
I remember, was bright, frosty, and cold; the kennels were dry, the
streets comparatively clean. Here and there a ray of early sunshine,
darting between the overhanging eaves, gave promise of glorious
travelling-weather. But the faces, I remarked in my walk, did not
reflect the surrounding cheerfulness. Moody looks met me everywhere and
on every side; and while courier after courier galloped by me bound for
the castle, the townsfolk stood aloof is doorways listless and inactive,
or, gathering in groups in corners, talked what I took to be treason
under the breath. The queen-mother still lived, but Orleans had
revolted, and Sens and Mans, Chartres and Melun. Rouen was said to be
wavering, Lyons in arms, while Paris had deposed her king, and cursed
him daily from a hundred altars. En fin, the great rebellion which
followed the death of Guise, and lasted so many years, was already in
progress; so that on this first day of the new year the king's writ
scarce ran farther than he could see, peering anxiously out from the
towers above my head.

Reaching the house, I climbed the long staircase hastily, abusing its
darkness and foulness, and planning as I went how my mother might most
easily and quickly be moved to a better lodging. Gaining the top of the
last flight, I saw that mademoiselle's door on the left of the landing
was open, and concluding from this that she was up, and ready to start,
I entered my mother's room with a brisk step and spirits reinforced by
the crisp morning air.

But on the threshold I stopped, and stood silent and amazed. At first I
thought the room was empty. Then, at a second glance, I saw the student.
He was on his knees beside the bed in the alcove, from which the curtain
had been partially dragged away. The curtain before the window had been
torn down also, and the cold light of day, pouring in on the unsightly
bareness of the room, struck a chill to my heart. A stool lay overturned
by the fire, and above it a grey cat, which I had not hitherto noticed,
crouched on a beam and eyed me with stealthy fierceness. Mademoiselle
was not to be seen, nor was Fanchette, and Simon Fleix did not hear me.
He was doing something at the bed--for my mother it seemed.

'What is it, man?' I cried softly, advancing on tiptoe to the bedside.
'Where are the others?'

The student looked round and saw me. His face was pale and gloomy. His
eyes burned, and yet there were tears in them, and on his cheeks. He did
not speak, but the chilliness, the bareness, the emptiness of the room
spoke for him, and my heart sank.

I took him by the shoulders. 'Find your tongue, man!' I said angrily.
'Where are they?'

He rose from his knees and stood staring at me. 'They are gone!' he said
stupidly.

'Gone?' I exclaimed. 'Impossible! When? Whither?'

'Half an hour ago. Whither--I do not know.'

Confounded and amazed, I glared at him between fear and rage. 'You do
not know?' I cried. 'They are gone, and you do not know?'

He turned suddenly on me and gripped my arm. 'No, I do not know! I do
not know!' he cried, with a complete change of manner and in a tone
of fierce excitement. 'Only, may the fiend go with them! But I do know
this. I know this, M. de Marsac, with whom they went, these friends of
yours! A fop came, a dolt, a fine spark, and gave them fine words and
fine speeches and a gold token, and, hey presto! they went, and forgot
you!'

'What!' I cried, beginning to understand, and snatching fiercely at the
one clue in his speech. 'A gold token? They have been decoyed away then!
There is no time to be lost. I must follow.'

'No, for that is not all!' he replied, interrupting me sternly, while
his grasp on my arm grew tighter and his eyes flashed as they looked
into mine. 'You have not heard all. They have gone with one who called
you an impostor, and a thief, and a beggar, and that to your mother's
face--and killed her! Killed her as surely as if he had taken a sword to
her, M. de Marsac! Will you, after that, leave her for them?'

He spoke plainly. And yet, God forgive me, it was some time before I
understood him: before I took in the meaning of his words, or could
transfer my thoughts from the absent to my mother lying on the bed
before me. When I did do so, and turned to her, and saw her still face
and thin hair straggling over the coarse pillow, then, indeed, the sight
overcame me. I thought no more of others--for I thought her dead; and
with a great and bitter cry I fell on my knees beside her and hid my
face. What, after all, was this headstrong girl to me? What were even
kings and king's commissions to me beside her--beside the one human
being who loved me still, the one being of my blood and name left, the
one ever-patient, ever-constant heart which for years had beaten only
for me? For a while, for a few moments, I was worthy of her; for I
forgot all others.

Simon Fleix roused me at last from my stupor, making me understand that
she was not dead, but in a deep swoon, the result of the shock she had
undergone. A leech, for whom he had despatched a neighbour, came in as I
rose, and taking my place, presently restored her to consciousness. But
her extreme feebleness warned me not to hope for more than a temporary
recovery; nor had I sat by her long before I discerned that this last
blow, following on so many fears and privations, had reached a vital
part, and that she was even now dying.

She lay for a while with her hand in mine and her eyes closed, but about
noon, the student, contriving to give her some broth, she revived, and,
recognising me, lay for more than an hour gazing at me with unspeakable
content and satisfaction. At the end of that time, and when I thought
she was past speaking, she signed to me to bend over her, and whispered
something, which at first I could not catch. Presently I made it out to
be, 'She is gone--The girl you brought?'

Much troubled, I answered yes, begging her not to think about the
matter. I need not have feared, however, for when she spoke again she
did so without emotion, and rather as one seeing clearly something
before her.

'When you find her, Gaston,' she murmured, 'do not be angry with her. It
was not her fault. She--he deceived her. See!'

I followed the direction rather of her eyes than her hand, and found
beneath the pillow a length of gold chain. 'She left that?' I murmured,
a strange tumult of emotions in my breast.

'She laid it there,' my mother whispered. 'And she would have stopped
him saying what he did'--a shudder ran through my mother's frame at the
remembrance of the man's words, though her eyes still gazed into mine
with faith and confidence--'she would have stopped him, but she could
not, Gaston. And then he hurried her away.'

'He showed her a token, madame, did he not?' I could not for my life
repress the question, so much seemed to turn on the point.

'A bit of gold,' my mother whispered, smiling faintly. 'Now let me
sleep.' And, clinging always to my hand, she closed her eyes.

The student came back soon afterwards with some comforts for which I had
despatched him, and we sat by her until the evening fell, and far into
the night. It was a relief to me to learn from the leech that she had
been ailing for some time, and that in any case the end must have
come soon. She suffered no pain and felt no fears, but meeting my
eyes whenever she opened her own, or came out of the drowsiness which
possessed her, thanked God, I think, and was content. As for me, I
remember that room became, for the time, the world. Its stillness
swallowed up all the tumults which filled the cities of France, and
its one interest the coming and going of a feeble breath--eclipsed the
ambitions and hopes of a lifetime.

Before it grew light Simon Fleix stole out to attend to the horses. When
he returned he came to me and whispered in my ear that he had something
to tell me; and my mother lying in a quiet sleep at the time, I
disengaged my hand, and, rising softly, went with him to the hearth.

Instead of speaking, he held his fist before me and suddenly unclosed
the fingers. 'Do you know it?' he said, glancing at me abruptly.

I took what he held, and looking at it, nodded. It was a knot of velvet
of a peculiar dark red colour, and had formed, as I knew the moment I
set eyes on it, part of the fastening of mademoiselle's mask. 'Where
did you find it?' I muttered, supposing that he had picked it up on the
stairs.

'Look at it!' he answered impatiently. 'You have not looked.'

I turned it over, and then saw something which had escaped me at
first--that the wider part of the velvet was disfigured by a fantastic
stitching, done very roughly and rudely with a thread of white silk.
The stitches formed letters, the letters words. With a start I read, 'A
MOI!' and saw in a corner, in smaller stitches, the initials 'C. d. l.
V.'

I looked eagerly at the student. 'Where did you find this?' I said.

'I picked it up in the street,' he answered quietly, 'not three hundred
paces from here.'

I thought a moment. 'In the gutter, or near the wall?' I asked.

'Near the wall, to be sure.'

'Under a window?'

'Precisely,' he said. 'You may be easy; I am not a fool. I marked the
place, M. de Marsac, and shall not forget it.'

Even the sorrow and solicitude I felt on my mother's behalf--feelings
which had seemed a minute before to secure me against all other cares or
anxieties whatever--were not proof against this discovery. For I found
myself placed in a strait so cruel I must suffer either way. On the
one hand, I could not leave my mother; I were a heartless ingrate to do
that. On the other, I could not, without grievous pain, stand still and
inactive while Mademoiselle de la Vire, whom I had sworn to protect, and
who was now suffering through my laches and mischance, appealed to me
for help. For I could not doubt that this was what the bow of velvet
meant; still less that it was intended for me, since few save myself
would be likely to recognise it, and she would naturally expect me to
make some attempt at pursuit.

And I could not think little of the sign. Remembering mademoiselle's
proud and fearless spirit, and the light in which she had always
regarded me, I augured the worst from it. I felt assured that no
imaginary danger and no emergency save the last would have induced her
to stoop so low; and this consideration, taken with the fear I felt
that she had fallen into the hands of Fresnoy, whom I believed to be
the person who had robbed me of the gold coin, filled me with a horrible
doubt which way my duty lay. I was pulled, as it were, both ways. I felt
my honour engaged both to go and to stay, and while my hand went to my
hilt, and my feet trembled to be gone, my eyes sought my mother, and my
ears listened for her gentle breathing.

Perplexed and distracted, I looked at the student, and he at me. 'You
saw the man who took her away,' I muttered. Hitherto, in my absorption
on my mother's account, I had put few questions, and let the matter pass
as though it moved me little and concerned me less. 'What was he like?
Was he a big, bloated man, Simon, with his head bandaged, or perhaps a
wound on his face?'

'The gentleman who went away with mademoiselle, do you mean?' he asked.

'Yes, yes, gentleman if you like!'

'Not at all,' the student answered. 'He was a tall young gallant, very
gaily dressed, dark-haired, and with a rich complexion, I heard him tell
her that he came from a friend of hers too high to be named in public
or in Blois. He added that he brought a token from him; and when
mademoiselle mentioned you--she had just entered madame's room with her
woman when he appeared--'

'He had watched me out, of course.'

'Just so. Well, when she mentioned you, he swore you were an adventurer,
and a beggarly impostor, and what not, and bade her say whether she
thought it likely that her friend would have entrusted such a mission to
such a man.'

'And then she went with him?'

The student nodded.

'Readily? Of her own free-will?'

'Certainly,' he answered. 'It seemed so to me. She tried to prevent him
speaking before your mother, but that was all.'

On the impulse of the moment I took a step towards the door;
recollecting my position, I turned back with a groan. Almost beside
myself, and longing for any vent for my feelings, I caught the lad by
the shoulder, where he stood on the hearth, and shook him to and fro.

'Tell me, man, what am I to do?' I said between my teeth. 'Speak! think!
invent something!'

But he shook his head.

I let him go with a muttered oath, and sat down on a stool by the bed
and took my head between my hands. At that very moment, however, relief
came--came from an unexpected quarter. The door opened and the leech
entered. He was a skilful man, and, though much employed about the
Court, a Huguenot--a fact which had emboldened Simon Fleix to apply to
him through the landlord of the 'Bleeding Heart,' the secret rendezvous
of the Religion in Blois. When he had made his examination he was for
leaving, being a grave and silent man, and full of business, but at the
door I stopped him.

'Well, sir?' I said in a low tone, my hand on his cloak.

'She has rallied, and may live three days,' he answered quietly. 'Four,
it may be, and as many more as God wills.'

Pressing two crowns into his hand, I begged him to call daily, which he
promised to do; and then he went. My mother was still dozing peacefully,
and I turned to Simon Fleix, my doubts resolved and my mind made up.

'Listen,' I said, 'and answer me shortly. We cannot both leave; that is
certain. Yet I must go, and at once, to the place where you found the
velvet knot. Do you describe the spot exactly, so that I may find it,
and make no mistake.'

He nodded, and after a moment's reflection answered,

'You know the Rue St. Denys, M. de Marsac? Well, go down it, keeping the
"Bleeding Heart" on your left. Take the second turning on the same side
after passing the inn. The third house from the corner, on the left
again, consists of a gateway leading to the Hospital of the Holy Cross.
Above the gateway are two windows in the lower story, and above them
two more. The knot lay below the first window you come to. Do you
understand?'

'Perfectly,' I said. 'It is something to be a clerk, Simon.'

He looked at me thoughtfully, but added nothing; and I was busy
tightening my sword-hilt, and disposing my cloak about the lower part
of my face. When I had arranged this to my satisfaction, I took out
and counted over the sum of thirty-five crowns, which I gave to him,
impressing on him the necessity of staying beside my mother should I not
return; for though I proposed to reconnoitre only, and learn if possible
whether mademoiselle was still in Blois, the future was uncertain, and
whereas I was known to my enemies, they were strangers to me.

Having enjoined this duty upon him, I bade my mother a silent farewell,
and, leaving the room, went slowly down the stairs, the picture of her
worn and patient face going with me, and seeming, I remember, to hallow
the purpose I had in my mind.

The clocks were striking the hour before noon as I stepped from the
doorway, and, standing a moment in the lane, looked this way and that
for any sign of espionage. I could detect none, however. The lane was
deserted; and feeling assured that any attempt to mislead my opponents,
who probably knew Blois better than I did, must fail, I made none, but
deliberately took my way towards the 'Bleeding Heart,' in the Rue St.
Denys. The streets presented the same appearance of gloomy suspense
which I had noticed on the previous day. The same groups stood about in
the same corners, the same suspicious glances met me in common with
all other strangers who showed themselves; the same listless inaction
characterised the townsfolk, the same anxious hurry those who came and
went with news. I saw that even here, under the walls of the palace, the
bonds of law and order were strained almost to bursting, and judged that
if there ever was a time in France when right counted for little, and
the strong hand for much, it was this. Such a state of things was not
unfavourable to my present design, and caring little for suspicious
looks, I went resolutely on my way.

I had no difficulty in finding the gateway of which Simon had spoken,
or in identifying the window beneath which he had picked up the velvet
knot. An alley opening almost opposite, I took advantage of this to
examine the house at my leisure, and remarked at once, that whereas the
lower window was guarded only by strong shutters, now open, that in the
story above was heavily barred. Naturally I concentrated my attention
on the latter. The house, an old building of stone, seemed sufficiently
reputable, nor could I discern anything about it which would have
aroused my distrust had the knot been found elsewhere. It bore the arms
of a religious brotherhood, and had probably at one time formed the
principal entrance to the hospital, which still stood behind it, but it
had now come, as I judged, to be used as a dwelling of the better class.
Whether the two floors were separately inhabited or not I failed to
decide.

After watching it for some time without seeing anyone pass in or out, or
anything occurring to enlighten me one way or the other, I resolved to
venture in, the street being quiet and the house giving no sign of being
strongly garrisoned. The entrance lay under the archway, through a door
on the right side. I judged from what I saw that the porter was probably
absent, busying himself with his gossips in matters of State.

And this proved to be the case, for when I had made the passage of the
street with success, and slipped quietly in through the half-open door,
I found only his staff and charcoal-pan there to represent him. A single
look satisfied me on that point; forthwith, without hesitation, I
turned to the stairs and began to mount, assured that if I would effect
anything single-handed I must trust to audacity and surprise rather than
to caution or forethought.

The staircase was poorly lighted by loopholes looking towards the rear,
but it was clean and well-kept. Silence, broken only by the sound of my
footsteps, prevailed throughout the house, and all seemed so regular
and decent and orderly that the higher I rose the lower fell my hopes
of success. Still, I held resolutely on until I reached the second floor
and stood before a closed door. The moment had come to put all to the
touch. I listened for a few seconds but hearing nothing, cautiously
lifted the latch. Somewhat to my surprise the door yielded to my hand,
and I entered.

A high settle stood inside, interrupting my view of the room, which
seemed to be spacious and full of rich stuffs and furniture, but low
in the roof, and somewhat dimly lighted by two windows rather wide than
high. The warm glow of a fire shone on the woodwork of the ceiling,
and as I softly closed the door a log on the hearth gave way, with a
crackling of sparks, which pleasantly broke the luxurious silence. The
next moment a low, sweet voice asked, 'Alphonse, is that you?'

I walked round the settle and came face to face with a beautiful woman
reclining on a couch. On hearing the door open she had raised herself on
her elbow. Now, seeing a stranger before her, she sprang up with a low
cry, and stood gazing at me, her face expressing both astonishment and
anger. She was of middling height, her features regular though somewhat
childlike, her complexion singularly fair. A profusion of golden hair
hung in disorder about her neck, and matched the deep blue of her eyes,
wherein it seemed to me, there lurked more spirit and fire than the
general cast of her features led one to expect.

After a moment's silence, during which she scanned me from head to foot
with great haughtiness--and I her with curiosity and wonder--she spoke.
'Sir!' she said slowly, 'to what am I to attribute this--visit?'

For the moment I was so taken aback by her appearance and extraordinary
beauty, as well as by the absence of any sign of those I sought, that I
could not gather my thoughts to reply, but stood looking vaguely at her.
I had expected, when I entered the room, something so different from
this!

'Well, sir?' she said again, speaking sharply, and tapping her foot on
the floor.

'This visit, madame?' I stammered.

'Call it intrusion, sir, if you please!' she cried imperiously. 'Only
explain it, or begone.'

'I crave leave to do both, madame,' I answered, collecting myself by an
effort. 'I ascended these stairs and opened your door in error--that is
the simple fact--hoping to find a friend of mine here. I was mistaken,
it seems, and it only remains for me to withdraw, offering at the same
time the humblest apologies,' And as I spoke I bowed low and prepared to
retire.

'One moment, sir!' she said quickly, and in an altered tone. 'You are,
perhaps, a friend of M. de Bruhl--of my husband. In that case, if you
desire to leave any message I will--I shall be glad to deliver it.'

She looked so charming that, despite the tumult of my feelings, I could
not but regard her with admiration. 'Alas! madame, I cannot plead
that excuse,' I answered. 'I regret that I have not the honour of his
acquaintance.'

She eyed me with some surprise. 'Yet still, sir,' she answered, smiling
a little, and toying with a gold brooch which clasped her habit, 'you
must have had some ground, some reason, for supposing you would find a
friend here?'

'True, madame,' I answered, 'but I was mistaken.'

I saw her colour suddenly. With a smile and a faint twinkle of the eye
she said, 'It is not possible, sir, I suppose--you have not come here,
I mean, out of any reason connected with a--a knot of velvet, for
instance?'

I started, and involuntarily advanced a step towards her. 'A knot of
velvet!' I exclaimed, with emotion. 'Mon Dieu! Then I was not mistaken!
I have come to the right house, and you--you know something of this!
Madame,' I continued impulsively, 'that knot of velvet? Tell me what it
means, I implore you!'

She seemed alarmed by my violence, retreating a step or two, and looking
at me haughtily, yet with a kind of shame-facedness. 'Believe me, it
means nothing,' she said hurriedly. 'I beg you to understand that, sir.
It was a foolish jest.'

'A jest?' I said. 'It fell from this window.'

'It was a jest, sir,' she answered stubbornly. But I could see that,
with all her pride, she was alarmed; her face was troubled, and there
were tears in her eyes. And this rendered me under the circumstances
only the more persistent.

'I have the velvet here, madame,' I said. 'You must tell me more about
it.'

She looked at me with a weightier impulse of anger than she had yet
exhibited. 'I do not think you know to whom you are speaking,' she said,
breathing fast. 'Leave the room, sir, and at once! I have told you it
was a jest. If you are a gentleman you will believe me, and go.' And she
pointed to the door.

But I held my ground, with an obstinate determination to pierce the
mystery. 'I am a gentleman, madame,' I said, 'and yet I must know more.
Until I know more I cannot go.'

'Oh, this is insufferable!' she cried, looking round as if for a way of
escape; but I was between her and the only door. 'This is unbearable!
The knot was never intended for you, sir. And what is more, if M. de
Bruhl comes and finds you here, you will repent it bitterly.'

I saw that she was at least as much concerned on her own account as on
mine, and thought myself justified under the circumstances in taking
advantage of her fears. I deliberately laid my cap on the table which
stood beside me. 'I will go madame,' I said, looking at her fixedly,
'when I know all that you know about this knot I hold, and not before.
If you are unwilling to tell me, I must wait for M. de Bruhl, and ask
him.'

She cried out 'Insolent!' and looked at me as if in her rage and dismay
she would gladly have killed me; being, I could see, a passionate woman.
But I held my ground, and after a moment she spoke. 'What do you want to
know?' she said, frowning darkly.

'This knot--how did it come to lie in the street below your window? I
want to know that first.'

'I dropped it,' she answered sullenly.

'Why?' I said.

'Because--' And then she stopped and looked at me, and then again looked
down, her face crimson. 'Because, if you must know,' she continued
hurriedly, tracing a pattern on the table with her finger, 'I saw it
bore the words "A MOI." I have been married only two months, and I
thought my husband might find it--and bring it to me. It was a silly
fancy.'

'But where did you get it?' I asked, and I stared at her in growing
wonder and perplexity. For the more questions I put, the further, it
seemed to me, I strayed from my object.

'I picked it up in the Ruelle d'Arcy,' she answered, tapping her foot
on the floor resentfully. 'It was the silly thing put it into my head
to--to do what I did. And now, have you any more questions, sir?'

'One only,' I said, seeing it all clearly enough. 'Will you tell me,
please, exactly where you found it?'

'I have told you. In the Ruelle d'Arcy, ten paces from the Rue de
Valois. Now, sir, will you go?'

'One word, madame. Did--'

But she cried, 'Go, sir, go! go!' so violently, that after making one
more attempt to express my thanks, I thought it better to obey her. I
had learned all she knew; I had solved the puzzle. But, solving it,
I found myself no nearer to the end I had in view, no nearer to
mademoiselle. I closed the door with a silent bow, and began to descend
the stairs, my mind full of anxious doubts and calculations. The velvet
knot was the only clue I possessed, but was I right; in placing any
dependence on it? I knew now that, wherever it had originally lain, it
had been removed once. If once, why not twice? why not three times?



CHAPTER IX. THE HOUSE IN THE RUELLE D'ARCY.

I had not gone down half a dozen steps before I heard a man enter the
staircase from the street, and begin to ascend. It struck me at once
that this might be M. de Bruhl; and I realised that I had not left
madame's apartment a moment too soon. The last thing I desired,
having so much on my hands, was to embroil myself with a stranger, and
accordingly I quickened my pace, hoping to meet him so near the foot
of the stairs as to leave him in doubt whether I had been visiting the
upper or lower part of the house. The staircase was dark, however, and
being familiar with it, he had the advantage over me. He came leaping up
two steps at a time, and turning the angle abruptly, surprised me before
I was clear of the upper flight.

On seeing me, he stopped short and stared; thinking at first, I fancy,
that he ought to recognise me. When he did not, he stood back a pace.
'Umph!' he said. 'Have you been--have you any message for me, sir?'

'No,' I said, 'I have not.'

He frowned. 'I am M. de Bruhl,' he said.

'Indeed?' I muttered, not knowing what else to say.

'You have been--'

'Up your stairs, sir? Yes. In error,' I answered bluntly.

He gave a kind of grunt at that, and stood aside, incredulous and
dissatisfied, yet uncertain how to proceed. I met his black looks with
a steady countenance, and passed by him, becoming aware, however, as I
went on down the stairs that he had turned and was looking after me. He
was a tall, handsome man, dark, and somewhat ruddy of complexion, and
was dressed in the extreme of Court fashion, in a suit of myrtle-green
trimmed with sable. He carried also a cloak lined with the same on his
arm. Beyond looking back when I reached the street, to see that he did
not follow me, I thought no more of him. But we were to meet again, and
often. Nay, had I then known all that was to be known I would have gone
back and--But of that in another place.

The Rue de Valois, to which a tradesman, who was peering cautiously out
of his shop, directed me, proved to be one of the main streets of
the city, narrow and dirty, and darkened by overhanging eaves and
signboards, but full of noise and bustle. One end of it opened on the
PARVIS of the Cathedral; the other and quieter end appeared to abut on
the west gate of the town. Feeling the importance of avoiding notice in
the neighbourhood of the house I sought, I strolled into the open space
in front of the Cathedral, and accosting two men who stood talking
there, learned that the Ruelle d'Arcy was the third lane on the right
of the Rue de Valois, and some little distance along it. Armed with this
information I left them, and with my head bent down, and my cloak drawn
about the lower part of my face, as if I felt the east wind, I proceeded
down the street until I reached the opening of the lane. Without looking
up I turned briskly into it.

When I had gone ten paces past the turning, however, I stopped and,
gazing about me, began to take in my surroundings as fast as I could.
The lane, which seemed little frequented, was eight or nine feet wide,
unpaved, and full of ruts. The high blank wall of a garden rose on one
side of it, on the other the still higher wall of a house; and both
were completely devoid of windows, a feature which I recognised with the
utmost dismay. For it completely upset all my calculations. In vain
I measured with my eye the ten paces I had come; in vain I looked up,
looked this way and that. I was nonplussed. No window opened on the lane
at that point, nor, indeed, throughout its length. For it was bounded to
the end, as far as I could see, by dead-walls as of gardens.

Recognising, with a sinking heart, what this meant, I saw in a moment
that all the hopes I had raised on Simon Fleix's discovery were
baseless. Mademoiselle had dropped the velvet bow, no doubt, but not
from a window. It was still a clue, but one so slight and vague as to be
virtually useless, proving only that she was in trouble and in need of
help; perhaps that she had passed through this lane on her way from one
place of confinement to another.

Thoroughly baffled and dispirited, I leant for awhile against the wall,
brooding over the ill-luck which seemed to attend me in this, as in
so many previous adventures. Nor was the low voice of conscience,
suggesting that such failures arose from mismanagement rather than
from ill-luck, slow to make itself heard. I reflected that if I had not
allowed myself to be robbed of the gold token, mademoiselle would have
trusted me; that if I had not brought her to so poor an abode as my
mother's, she would not have been cajoled into following a stranger;
finally, that if I had remained with her, and sent Simon to attend to
the horses in my place, no stranger would have gained access to her.

But it has never been my way to accept defeat at the first offer, and
though I felt these self-reproaches to be well deserved, a moment's
reflection persuaded me that in the singular and especial providence
which had brought the velvet knot safe to my hands I ought to find
encouragement. Had Madame de Bruhl not picked it up it would have
continued to lie in this by-path, through which neither I nor Simon
Fleix would have been likely to pass. Again, had madame not dropped it
in her turn, we should have sought in vain for any, even the slightest,
clue to Mademoiselle de la Vire's fate or position.

Cheered afresh by this thought, I determined to walk to the end of the
lane; and forthwith did so, looking sharply about me as I went, but
meeting no one. The bare upper branches of a tree rose here and there
above the walls, which were pierced at intervals by low, strong doors.
These doors I carefully examined, but without making any discovery;
all were securely fastened, and many seemed to have been rarely opened.
Emerging at last and without result on the inner side of the city
ramparts, I turned, and moodily retraced my steps through the lane,
proceeding more slowly as I drew near to the Rue de Valois. This time,
being a little farther from the street, I made a discovery.

The corner house, which had its front on the Rue Valois, presented, as
I have said, a dead, windowless wall to the lane; but from my present
standpoint I could see the upper part of the back of this house--that
part of the back, I mean, which rose above the lower garden-wall that
abutted on it--and in this there were several windows. The whole of two
and a part of a third were within the range of my eyes; and suddenly in
one of these I discovered something which made my heart beat high with
hope and expectation. The window in question was heavily grated; that
which I saw was tied to one of the bars. It was a small knot of some
white stuff--linen apparently--and it seemed a trifle to the eye; but
it was looped, as far as I could see from a distance, after the same
fashion as the scrap of velvet I had in my pouch.

The conclusion was obvious, at the same time that it inspired me with
the liveliest admiration of mademoiselle's wit and resources. She was
confined in that room; the odds were that she was behind those bars. A
bow dropped thence would fall, the wind being favourable, into the lane,
not ten, but twenty paces from the street. I ought to have been prepared
for a slight inaccuracy in a woman's estimate of distance.

It may be imagined with what eagerness I now scanned the house, with
what minuteness I sought for a weak place. The longer I looked, however,
the less comfort I derived from my inspection. I saw before me a gloomy
stronghold of brick, four-square, and built in the old Italian manner,
with battlements at the top, and a small machicolation, little more than
a string-course, above each story; this serving at once to lessen the
monotony of the dead-walls, and to add to the frowning weight of the
upper part. The windows were few and small, and the house looked
damp and mouldy; lichens clotted the bricks, and moss filled the
string-courses. A low door opening from the lane into the garden
naturally attracted my attention; but it proved to be of abnormal
strength, and bolted both at the top and bottom.

Assured that nothing could be done on that side, and being unwilling to
remain longer in the neighbourhood, lest I should attract attention, I
returned to the street, and twice walked past the front of the house,
seeing all I could with as little appearance of seeing anything as I
could compass. The front retreated somewhat from the line of the street,
and was flanked on the farther side by stables. Only one chimney smoked,
and that sparely. Three steps led up to imposing double doors, which
stood half open, and afforded a glimpse of a spacious hall and a state
staircase. Two men, apparently servants, lounged on the steps, eating
chestnuts, and jesting with one another; and above the door were three
shields blazoned in colours. I saw with satisfaction, as I passed the
second time, that the middle coat was that of Turenne impaling one which
I could not read--which thoroughly satisfied me that the bow of velvet
had not lied; so that, without more ado, I turned homewards, formulating
my plans as I went.

I found all as I had left it; and my mother still lying in a
half-conscious state, I was spared the pain of making excuses for past
absence, or explaining that which I designed. I communicated the plan
I had formed to Simon Fleix, who saw no difficulty in procuring a
respectable person to stay with Madame de Bonne. But for some time he
would come no farther into the business. He listened, his mouth open
and his eyes glittering, to my plan until I came to his share in it; and
then he fell into a violent fit of trembling.

'You want me to fight, monsieur,' he cried reproachfully, shaking all
over like one in the palsy. 'You said so the other night. You want to
get me killed! That's it.'

'Nonsense!' I answered sharply. 'I want you to hold the horses!'

He looked at me wildly, with a kind of resentment in his face, and yet
as if he were fascinated.

'You will drag me into it!' he persisted. 'You will!'

'I won't,' I said.

'You will! You will! And the end I know. I shall have no chance. I am
a clerk, and not bred to fighting. You want to be the death of me!' he
cried excitedly.

'I don't want you to fight,' I answered with some contempt. 'I would
rather that you kept out of it for my mother's sake. I only want you to
stay in the lane and hold the horses. You will run little more risk than
you do sitting by the hearth here.'

And in the end I persuaded him to do what I wished; though still,
whenever he thought of what was in front of him, he fell a-trembling
again, and many times during the afternoon got up and walked to and
fro between the window and the hearth, his face working and his hands
clenched like those of a man in a fever. I put this down at first to
sheer chicken-heartedness, and thought it augured ill for my enterprise;
but presently remarking that he made no attempt to draw back, and that
though the sweat stood on his brow he set about such preparations as
were necessary--remembering also how long and kindly, and without pay or
guerdon, he had served my mother, I began to see that here was something
phenomenal; a man strange and beyond the ordinary, of whom it was
impossible to predicate what he would do when he came to be tried.

For myself, I passed the afternoon in a state almost of apathy. I
thought it my duty to make this attempt to free mademoiselle, and to
make it at once, since it was impossible to say what harm might come of
delay, were she in such hands as Fresnoy's; but I had so little hope of
success that I regarded the enterprise as desperate. The certain loss
of my mother, however, and the low ebb of my fortunes, with the
ever-present sense of failure, contributed to render me indifferent to
risks; and even when we were on our way, through by-streets known to
Simon, to the farther end of the Ruelle d'Arcy, and the red and frosty
sunset shone in our faces, and gilded for a moment the dull eaves and
grey towers above us, I felt no softening. Whatever the end, there was
but one in the world whom I should regret, or who would regret me; and
she hung, herself, on the verge of eternity.

So that I was able to give Simon Fleix his last directions with as
much coolness as I ever felt in my life. I stationed him with the three
horses in the lane--which seemed as quiet and little frequented as in
the morning--near the end of it, and about a hundred paces or more from
the house.

'Turn their heads towards the ramparts,' I said, wheeling them round
myself, 'and then they will be ready to start. They are all quiet
enough. You can let the Cid loose. And now listen to me, Simon,' I
continued. 'Wait here until you see me return, or until you see you are
going to be attacked. In the first case, stay for me, of course; in the
second, save yourself as you please. Lastly, if neither event occurs
before half-past five--you will hear the convent-bell yonder ring at
the half-hour--begone, and take the horses; they are yours, And one
word more,' I added hurriedly. 'If you can only get away with one horse,
Simon, take the Cid. It is worth more than most men, and will not fail
you at a pinch.'

As I turned away, I gave him one look to see if he understood. It was
not without hesitation that after that look I left him. The lad's
face was flushed, he was breathing hard, his eyes seemed to be almost
starting from his head. He sat his horse shaking in every limb, and had
all the air of a man in a fit. I expected him to call me back; but he
did not, and reflecting that I must trust him, or give up the attempt,
I went up the lane with my sword under my arm, and my cloak loose on my
shoulders. I met a man driving a donkey laden with faggots. I saw no one
else. It was already dusk between the walls, though light enough in the
open country; but that was in my favour, my only regret; being that as
the town gates closed shortly after half-past five, I could not defer my
attempt until a still later hour.

Pausing in the shadow of the house while a man might count ten, I
impressed on my memory the position of the particular window which bore
the knot; then I passed quickly into the street, which was still full of
movement, and for a second, feeling myself safe from observation in the
crowd, I stood looking at the front of the house. The door was shut. My
heart sank when I saw this, for I had looked to find it still open.

The feeling, however, that I could not wait, though time might present
more than one opportunity, spurred me on. What I could do I must do now,
at once. The sense that this was so being heavy upon me, I saw nothing
for it but to use the knocker and gain admission, by fraud if I could,
and if not, by force. Accordingly I stepped briskly across the kennel,
and made for the entrance.

When I was within two paces of the steps, however, someone abruptly
threw the door open and stepped out. The man did not notice me, and I
stood quickly aside, hoping that at the last minute my chance had come.
Two men, who had apparently attended this first person downstairs, stood
respectfully behind him, holding lights. He paused a moment on the steps
to adjust his cloak, and with more than a little surprise I recognised
my acquaintance of the morning, M. de Bruhl.

I had scarcely time to identify him before he walked down the steps
swinging his cane, brushed carelessly past me, and was gone. The two
men looked after him awhile, shading their lights from the wind, and one
saying something, the other laughed coarsely. The next moment they threw
the door to and went, as I saw by the passage of their light, into the
room on the left of the hall.

Now was my time. I could have hoped for, prayed for, expected no better
fortune than this. The door had rebounded slightly from the jamb, and
stood open an inch or more. In a second I pushed it from me gently, slid
into the hall, and closed it behind me.

The door of the room on the left was wide open, and the light which
shone through the doorway--otherwise the hall was dark--as well as the
voices of the two men I had seen, warned me to be careful. I stood,
scarcely daring to breathe, and looked about me. There was no matting
on the floor, no fire on the hearth. The hall felt cold, damp, and
uninhabited. The state staircase rose in front of me, and presently
bifurcating, formed a gallery round the place. I looked up, and up, and
far above me, in the dim heights of the second floor, I espied a faint
light--perhaps, the reflection of a light.

A movement in the room on my left warned me that I had no time to lose,
if I meant to act. At any minute one of the men might come out and
discover me. With the utmost care I started on my journey. I stole
across the stone floor of the hall easily and quietly enough, but I
found the real difficulty begin when I came to the stairs. They were of
wood, and creaked and groaned under me to such an extent that, with each
step I trod, I expected the men to take the alarm. Fortunately all went
well until I passed the first corner--I chose, of course, the left-hand
flight--then a board jumped under my foot with a crack which sounded in
the empty hall, and to my excited ears, as loud as a pistol-shot. I was
in two minds whether I should not on the instant make a rush for it, but
happily I stood still. One of the men came out and listened, and I heard
the other ask, with an oath, what it was. I leant against the wall,
holding my breath.

'Only that wench in one of her tantrums!' the man who had come out
answered, applying an epithet to her which I will not set down, but
which I carried to his account in the event of our coming face to face
presently. 'She is quiet now. She may hammer and hammer, but--'

The rest I lost, as he passed through the doorway and went back to his
place by the fire. But in one way his words were of advantage to me.
I concluded that I need not be so very cautious now, seeing that they
would set down anything they heard to the same cause; and I sped on more
quickly, I had just gained the second floor landing when a loud noise
below--the opening of the street door and the heavy tread of feet in the
hall--brought me to a temporary standstill. I looked cautiously over the
balustrade, and saw two men go across to the room on the left. One
of them spoke as he entered, chiding the other knaves, I fancied, for
leaving the door unbarred; and the tone, though not the words, echoing
sullenly up the staircase, struck a familiar chord in my memory. The
voice was Fresnoy's!



CHAPTER X. THE FIGHT ON THE STAIRS.

The certainty, which this sound gave me, that I was in the right house,
and that it held also the villain to whom I owed all my misfortunes--for
who but Fresnoy could have furnished the broken coin which had deceived
mademoiselle?--had a singularly inspiriting effect upon me. I felt every
muscle in my body grow on the instant; hard as steel, my eyes more keen,
my ears sharper--all my senses more apt and vigorous. I stole off like
a cat from the balustrade, over which I had been looking, and without a
second's delay began the search for mademoiselle's room; reflecting that
though the garrison now amounted to four, I had no need to despair. If I
could release the prisoners without noise--which would be easy were the
key in the lock--we might hope to pass through the hall by a tour de
force of one kind or another. And a church-clock at this moment striking
Five, and reminding me that we had only half an hour in which to do all
and reach the horses, I was the more inclined to risk something.

The light which I had seen from below hung in a flat-bottomed lantern
just beyond the head of the stairs, and outside the entrance to one
of two passages which appeared to lead to the back part of the house.
Suspecting that M. de Bruhl's business had lain with mademoiselle, I
guessed that the light had been placed for his convenience. With this
clue and the position of the window to guide me, I fixed on a door on
the right of this passage, and scarcely four paces from the head of the
stairs. Before I made any sign, however, I knelt down and ascertained
that there was a light in the room, and also that the key was not in the
lock.

So far satisfied, I scratched on the door with my finger-nails, at first
softly, then with greater force, and presently I heard someone in the
room rise. I felt sure that the person whoever it was had taken the
alarm and was listening, and putting my lips to the keyhole I whispered
mademoiselle's name.

A footstep crossed the room sharply, and I heard muttering just within
the door. I thought I detected two voices. But I was impatient, and,
getting no answer, whispered in the same manner as before, 'Mademoiselle
de la Vire, are you there?'

Still no answer. The muttering, too, had stopped, and all was still--in
the room, and in the silent house. I tried again. 'It is I, Gaston de
Marsac,' I said. 'Do you hear? I am come to release you.' I spoke as
loudly as I dared, but most of the sound seemed to come back on me and
wander in suspicious murmurings down the staircase.

This time, however, an exclamation of surprise rewarded me, and a voice,
which I recognised at once as mademoiselle's, answered softly:

'What is it? Who is there?'

'Gaston de Marsac,' I answered. 'Do you need my help?'

The very brevity of her reply; the joyful sob which accompanied it,
and which I detected even through the door; the wild cry of
thankfulness--almost an oath--of her companion--all these assured me
at once that I was welcome--welcome as I had never been before--and, so
assuring me, braced me to the height of any occasion which might befall.

'Can you open the door? I muttered. All the time I was on my knees, my
attention divided between the inside of the room and the stray sounds
which now and then came up to me from the hall below. 'Have you the
key?'

'No; we are locked in,' mademoiselle answered.

I expected this. 'If the door is bolted inside,' I whispered, 'unfasten
it, if you please!'

They answered that it was not, so bidding them stand back a little from
it, I rose and set my shoulder against it. I hoped to be able to burst
it in with only one crash, which by itself, a single sound, might not
alarm the men downstairs. But my weight made no impression upon the
lock, and the opposite wall being too far distant to allow me to get any
purchase for my feet, I presently desisted. The closeness of the door
to the jambs warned me that an attempt to prise it open would be equally
futile; and for a moment I stood gazing in perplexity at the solid
planks, which bid fair to baffle me to the end.

The position was, indeed, one of great difficulty, nor can I now think
of any way out of it better or other than that which I adopted. Against
the wall near the head of the stairs I had noticed, as I came up, a
stout wooden stool. I stole out and fetched this, and setting it against
the opposite wall, endeavoured in this way to get sufficient purchase
for my feet. The lock still held; but, as I threw my whole weight on the
door, the panel against which I leaned gave way and broke inwards with
a loud, crashing sound, which echoed through the empty house, and might
almost have been beard in the street outside.

It reached the ears, at any rate, of the men sitting below, and I heard
them troop noisily out and stand in the hall, now talking loudly, and
now listening. A minute of breathless suspense followed--it seemed a
long minute; and then, to my relief, they tramped back again, and I
was free to return to my task. Another thrust, directed a little lower,
would, I hoped, do the business; but to make this the more certain I
knelt down and secured the stool firmly against the wall. As I rose
after settling it, something else, without sound or warning, rose also,
taking me completely by surprise--a man's head above the top stair,
which, as it happened, faced me. His eyes met mine, and I knew I was
discovered.

He turned and bundled downstairs again with a scared face, going so
quickly that I could not have caught him if I would, or had had the wit
to try. Of silence there was so longer need. In a few seconds the alarm
would be raised. I had small time for thought. Laying myself bodily
against the door, I heaved and pressed with all my strength; but whether
I was careless in my haste, or the cause was other, the lock did not
give. Instead the stool slipped, and I fell with a crash on the floor at
the very moment the alarm reached the men below.

I remember that the crash of my unlucky fall seemed to release all the
prisoned noises of the house. A faint scream within the room was but
a prelude, lost the next moment in the roar of dismay, the clatter of
weapons, and volley of oaths and cries and curses which, rolling up from
below, echoed hollowly about me, as the startled knaves rushed to their
weapons, and charged across the flags and up the staircase. I had space
for one desperate effort. Picking myself up, I seized the stool by two
of its legs and dashed it twice against the door, driving in the panel
I had before splintered. But that was all. The lock held, and I had no
time for a third blow. The men were already halfway up the stairs. In a
breath almost they would be upon me. I flung down the useless stool and
snatched up my sword, which lay unsheathed beside me. So far the matter
had gone against us, but it was time for a change of weapons now, and
the end was not yet. I sprang to the head of the stairs and stood there,
my arm by my side and my point resting on the floor, in such an attitude
of preparedness as I could compass at the moment.

For I had not been in the house all this time, as may well be supposed,
without deciding what I would do in case of surprise, and exactly where
I could best stand on the defensive. The flat bottom of the lamp which
hung outside the passage threw a deep shadow on the spot immediately
below it, while the light fell brightly on the steps beyond. Standing in
the shadow I could reach the edge of the stairs with my point, and swing
the blade freely, without fear of the balustrade; and here I posted
myself with a certain grim satisfaction as Fresnoy, with his three
comrades behind him, came bounding up the last flight.

They were four to one, but I laughed to see how, not abruptly, but
shamefacedly and by degrees, they came to a stand halfway up the flight,
and looked at me, measuring the steps and the advantage which the light
shining in their eyes gave me. Fresnoy's ugly face was rendered uglier
by a great strip of plaister which marked the place where the hilt of
my sword had struck him in our last encounter at Chize; and this and the
hatred he bore to me gave a peculiar malevolence to his look. The deaf
man Matthew, whose savage stolidity had more than once excited my anger
on our journey, came next to him, the two strangers whom I had seen in
the hall bringing up the rear. Of the four, these last seemed the most
anxious to come to blows, and had Fresnoy not barred the way with his
hand we should have crossed swords without parley.

'Halt, will you!' he cried, with an oath, thrusting one of them back.
And then to me he said, 'So, so, my friend! It is you, is it?'

I looked at him in silence, with a scorn which knew no bounds, and did
not so much as honour him by raising my sword, though I watched him
heedfully.

'What are you doing here? he continued, with an attempt at bluster.

Still I would not answer him, or move, but stood looking down at him.
After a moment of this, he grew restive, his temper being churlish and
impatient at the best. Besides, I think he retained just so much of a
gentleman's feelings as enabled him to understand my contempt and smart
under it. He moved a step upward, his brow dark with passion.

'You beggarly son of a scarecrow!' he broke out on a sudden, adding a
string of foul imprecations, 'will you speak, or are you going to wait
to be spitted where you stand? If we once begin, my bantam, we shall not
stop until we have done your business! If you have anything to say, say
it, and--' But I omit the rest of his speech, which was foul beyond the
ordinary.

Still I did not move or speak, but looked at him unwavering, though it
pained me to think the women heard. He made a last attempt.' Come, old
friend,' he said, swallowing his anger again, or pretending to do so,
and speaking with a vile bonhomie which I knew to be treacherous, 'if
we come to blows we shall give you no quarter. But one chance you shall
have, for the sake of old days when we followed Conde. Go! Take the
chance, and go. We will let you pass, and that broken door shall be the
worst of it. That is more,' he added with a curse, 'than I would do for
any other man in your place, M. de Marsac.'

A sudden movement and a low exclamation in the room behind me showed
that his words were heard there; and these sounds being followed
immediately by a noise as of riving wood, mingled with the quick
breathing of someone hard at work, I judged that the women were striving
with the door--enlarging the opening it might be. I dared not look
round, however, to see what progress they made, nor did I answer
Fresnoy, save by the same silent contempt, but stood watching the men
before me with the eye of a fencer about to engage. And I know nothing
more keen, more vigilant, more steadfast than that.

It was well I did, for without signal or warning the group wavered a
moment, as though retreating, and the next instant precipitated itself
upon me. Fortunately, only two could engage me at once, and Fresnoy, I
noticed, was not of the two who dashed forward up the steps. One of the
strangers forced himself to the front, and, taking the lead, pressed me
briskly, Matthew seconding him in appearance, while really watching
for an opportunity of running in and stabbing me at close quarters, a
manoeuvre I was not slow to detect.

That first bout lasted half a minute only. A fierce exultant joy ran
through me as the steel rang and grated, and I found that I had not
mistaken the strength of wrist or position. The men were mine. They
hampered one another on the stairs, and fought in fetters, being unable
to advance or retreat, to lunge with freedom, or give back without fear.
I apprehended greater danger from Matthew than from my actual opponent,
and presently, watching my opportunity, disarmed the latter by a strong
parade, and sweeping Matthew's sword aside by the same movement, slashed
him across the forehead; then, drawing back a step, gave my first
opponent the point. He fell in a heap on the floor, as good as dead,
and Matthew, dropping his sword, staggered backwards and downwards into
Fresnoy's arms.

'Bonne Foi! France et Bonne Foi!' It seemed to me that I bad not spoken,
that I had plied steel in grimmest silence; and yet the cry still rang
and echoed in the roof as I lowered my point, and stood looking grimly
down at them. Fresnoy's face was disfigured with rage and chagrin. They
were now but two to one, for Matthew, though his wound was slight, was
disabled by the blood which ran down into his eyes and blinded him.
'France et Bonne Foi!'

'Bonne Foi and good sword!' cried a voice behind me. And looking swiftly
round, I saw mademoiselle's face thrust through the hole in the door.
Her eyes sparkled with a fierce light, her lips were red beyond the
ordinary, and her hair, loosened and thrown into disorder by her
exertions, fell in thick masses about her white cheeks, and gave her the
aspect of a war-witch, such as they tell of in my country of Brittany.
'Good sword!' she cried again, and clapped her hands.

'But better board, mademoiselle!' I answered gaily. Like most of the
men of my province, I am commonly melancholic, but I have the habit of
growing witty at such times as these. 'Now, M. Fresnoy,' I continued,
'I am waiting your convenience. Must I put on my cloak to keep myself
warm?'

He answered by a curse, and stood looking at me irresolutely. 'If you
will come down,' he said.

'Send your man away and I will come,' I answered briskly. 'There
is space on the landing, and a moderate light. But I must be quick.
Mademoiselle and I are due elsewhere, and we are late already.'

Still he hesitated. Still he looked at the man lying at his feet--who
had stretched himself out and passed, quietly enough, a minute
before--and stood dubious, the most pitiable picture of cowardice
and malice--he being ordinarily a stout man--I ever saw. I called him
poltroon and white-feather, and was considering whether I had not better
go down to him, seeing that our time must be up, and Simon would be
quitting his post, when a cry behind me caused me to turn, and I saw
that mademoiselle was no longer looking through the opening in the door.

Alarmed on her behalf, as I reflected that there might be other doors to
the room, and the men have other accomplices in the house, I sprang to
the door to see, but had basely time to send a single glance round-the
interior--which showed me only that the room was still occupied--before
Fresnoy, taking advantage of my movement and of my back being turned,
dashed up the stairs, with his comrade at his heels, and succeeded in
pinning me into the narrow passage where I stood.

I had scarcely time, indeed, to turn and put myself on guard before he
thrust at me. Nor was that all. The superiority in position no longer
lay with me. I found myself fighting between walls close to the opening
in the door, through which the light fell athwart my eyes, baffling and
perplexing me. Fresnoy was not slow to see the aid this gave him, and
pressed me hard and desperately; so that we played for a full minute at
close quarters, thrusting and parrying, neither of us having room to use
the edge, or time to utter word or prayer.

At this game we were so evenly matched that for a time the end was hard
to tell. Presently, however, there came a change. My opponent's habit
of wild living suited ill with a prolonged bout, and as his strength and
breath failed and he began to give ground I discerned I had only to wear
him out to have him at my mercy. He felt this himself, and even by that
light I saw the sweat spring in great drops to his forehead, saw the
terror grow in his eyes. Already I was counting him a dead man and the
victory mine, when something hashed behind his blade, and his comrade's
poniard, whizzing past his shoulder, struck me fairly on the chin,
staggering me and hurling me back dizzy and half-stunned, uncertain what
had happened to me.

Sped an inch lower it, would have done its work and finished mine. Even
as it was, my hand going up as I reeled back gave Fresnoy an opening, of
which he was not slow to avail himself. He sprang forward, lunging at me
furiously, and would have run me through there and then, and ended the
matter, bad not his foot, as he advanced, caught in the stool, which
still lay against the wall. He stumbled, his point missed my hip by a
hair's breadth, and he himself fell all his length on the floor, his
rapier breaking off short at the hilt.

His one remaining backer stayed to cast a look at him, and that was all.
The man fled, and I chased him as far as the head of the stairs; where
I left him, assured by the speed and agility he displayed in clearing
flight after flight that I had nothing to fear from him. Fresnoy lay,
apparently stunned, and completely at my mercy. I stood an instant
looking down at him, in two minds whether I should not run him through.
But the memory of old days, when he had played his part in more
honourable fashion and shown a coarse good-fellowship in the field, held
my hand; and flinging a curse at him, I turned in anxious haste to the
door, the centre of all this bloodshed and commotion. The light still
shone through the breach in the panel, but for some minutes--since
Fresnoy's rush up the stairs, indeed--I had heard no sound from
this quarter. Now, looking in with apprehensions which grew with the
continuing silence, I learned the reason. The room was empty!

Such a disappointment in the moment of triumph was hard to bear. I saw
myself, after all done and won, on the point of being again outwitted,
distanced, it might be fooled. In frantic haste and excitement I
snatched up the stool beside me, and, dashing it twice against the lock,
forced it at last to yield. The door swung open, and I rushed into the
room, which, abandoned by those who had so lately occupied it, presented
nothing to detain me. I cast a single glance round, saw that it was
squalid, low-roofed, unfurnished, a mere prison; then swiftly crossing
the floor, I made for a door at the farther end, which my eye had marked
from the first. A candle stood flaring and guttering on a stool, and as
I passed I took it up.

Somewhat to my surprise the door yielded to my touch. In trembling
haste--for what might not befall the women while I fumbled with doors
or wandered in passages?--I flung it wide, and passing through it, found
myself at the head of a narrow, mean staircase, leading, doubtless, to
the servants' offices. At this, and seeing no hindrance before me, I
took heart of grace, reflecting that mademoiselle might have escaped
from the house this way. Though it would now be too late to quit the
city, I might still overtake her, and all end well. Accordingly I
hurried down the stairs, shading my candle as I went from a cold draught
of air which met me, and grew stronger as I descended; until reaching
the bottom at last, I came abruptly upon an open door, and an old,
wrinkled, shrivelled woman.

The hag screamed at sight of me, and crouched down on the floor; and
doubtless, with my drawn sword, and the blood dripping from my chin
and staining all the front of my doublet, I looked fierce and uncanny
enough. But I felt it was no time for sensibility--I was panting to be
away--and I demanded of her sternly where they were. She seemed to have
lost her voice--through fear, perhaps--and for answer only stared at me
stupidly; but on my handling my weapon with some readiness she so far
recovered her senses as to utter two loud screams, one after the other,
and point to the door beside her. I doubted her; and yet I thought in
her terror she must be telling the truth, the more as I saw no other
door. In any case I must risk it, so, setting the candle down on the
step beside her, I passed out.

For a moment the darkness was so intense that I felt my way with my
sword before me, in absolute ignorance where I was or on what my foot
might next rest. I was at the mercy of anyone who chanced to be lying
in wait for me; and I shivered as the cold damp wind struck my cheek and
stirred my hair. But by-and-by, when I had taken two or three steps, my
eyes grew accustomed to the gloom, and I made, out the naked boughs of
trees between myself and the sky, and guessed that I was in a garden. My
left hand, touching a shrub, confirmed me in this belief, and in another
moment I distinguished something like the outline of a path stretching
away before me. Following it rapidly--as rapidly as I dared--I came to
a corner, as it seemed to me, turned it blindly, and stopped short,
peeping into a curtain of solid blackness which barred my path, and
overhead mingled confusedly with the dark shapes of trees. But this,
too, after a brief hesitation, I made out to be a wall. Advancing to
it with outstretched hands, I felt the woodwork of a door, and, groping
about, lit presently on a loop of cord. I pulled at this, the door
yielded, and I went out.

I found myself in a narrow, dark lane, and looking up and down
discovered, what I might have guessed before, that it, was the Ruelle
d'Arcy. But mademoiselle? Fanchette? Simon? Where were they? No one was
to be seen, Tormented by doubts, I lifted up my voice and called on them
in turn; first on mademoiselle, then on Simon Fleix. In vain; I got no
answer. High up above me I saw, as I stood back a little, lights moving
in the house I had left; and the suspicion that, after all, the enemy
had foiled me grew upon me. Somehow they had decoyed mademoiselle to
another part of the house, and then the old woman had misled me!

I turned fiercely to the door, which I had left ajar, resolved to
re-enter by the way I had come, and have an explanation whether or no.
To my surprise--for I had not moved six paces from the door nor heard
the slightest sound--I found it not; only closed but bolted--bolted both
at top and bottom, as I discovered on trying it.

I fell on that to kicking it furiously, desperately; partly in a tempest
of rage and chagrin, partly in the hope that I might frighten the old
woman, if it was she who had closed it, into opening it again. In vain,
of course; and presently I saw this and desisted, and, still in a whirl
of haste and excitement, set off running towards the place where I had
left Simon Fleix and the horses. It was fully six o'clock as I judged;
but some faint hope that I might find him there with mademoiselle and
her woman still lingered in my mind. I reached the end of the lane, I
ran to the very foot; of the ramparts, I looked right and left. In vain.
The place was dark, silent, deserted.

I called 'Simon! Simon! Simon Fleix!' but my only answer was
the soughing of the wind in the eaves, and the slow tones of the
convent-bell striking Six.



CHAPTER XI. THE MAN AT THE DOOR.

There are some things, not shameful in themselves, which it shames
one to remember, and among these I count the succeeding hurry and
perturbation of that night: the vain search, without hope or clue, to
which passion impelled me, and the stubborn persistence with which
I rushed frantically from place to place long after the soberness of
reason would have had me desist. There was not, it seems to me, looking
back now, one street or alley, lane or court, in Blois which I did not
visit again and again in my frantic wanderings; not a beggar skulking
on foot that night whom I did not hunt down and question; not a wretched
woman sleeping in arch or doorway whom I did not see and scrutinise. I
returned to my mother's lodging again and again, always fruitlessly. I
rushed to the stables and rushed away again, or stood and listened
in the dark, empty stalls, wondering what had happened, and torturing
myself with suggestions of this or that. And everywhere, not only at
the North-gate, where I interrogated the porters and found that no party
resembling that which I sought had passed out, but on the PARVIS of the
Cathedral, where a guard was drawn up, and in the common streets, where
I burst in on one group and another with my queries, I ran the risk of
suspicion and arrest, and all that might follow thereon.

It was strange indeed that I escaped arrest. The wound in my chin still
bled at intervals, staining my doublet; and as I was without my cloak,
which I had left in the house in the Rue Valois, I had nothing to cover
my disordered dress. I was keenly, fiercely anxious. Stray passers
meeting me in the glare of a torch, or seeing me hurry by the great
braziers which burned where four streets met, looked askance at me and
gave me the wall; while men in authority cried to me to stay and answer
their questions. I ran from the one and the other with the same savage
impatience, disregarding everything in the feverish anxiety which
spurred me on and impelled me to a hundred imprudences, such as at my
age I should have blushed to commit. Much of this feeling was due, no
doubt, to the glimpse I had had of mademoiselle, and the fiery words she
had spoken; more, I fancy, to chagrin and anger at the manner in which
the cup of success had been dashed at the last moment from my lips.

For four hours I wandered through the streets, now hot with purpose,
now seeking aimlessly. It was ten o'clock when at length I gave up the
search, and, worn out both in body and mind, climbed the stairs at my
mother's lodgings and entered her room. An old woman sat by the fire,
crooning softly to herself, while she stirred something in a black pot.
My mother lay in the same heavy, deep sleep in which I had left her. I
sat down opposite the nurse (who cried out at my appearance) and asked
her dully for some food. When I had eaten it, sitting in a kind of
stupor the while, the result partly of my late exertions, and partly of
the silence which prevailed round me, I bade the woman call me if any
change took place; and then going heavily across to the garret Simon
had occupied, I lay down on his pallet, and fell into a sound, dreamless
sleep.

The next day and the next night I spent beside my mother, watching the
life ebb fast away, and thinking with grave sorrow of her past and my
future. It pained me beyond measure to see her die thus, in a garret,
without proper attendance or any but bare comforts; the existence which
had once been bright and prosperous ending in penury and gloom, such as
my mother's love and hope and self-sacrifice little deserved. Her state
grieved me sharply on my own account too, seeing that I had formed none
of those familiar relations which men of my age have commonly formed,
and which console them for the loss of parents and forbears; Nature so
ordering it, as I have taken note, that men look forward rather
than backward, and find in the ties they form with the future full
compensation for the parting strands behind them. I was alone,
poverty-stricken, and in middle life, seeing nothing before me except
danger and hardship, and these unrelieved by hope or affection. This
last adventure, too, despite all my efforts, had sunk me deeper in the
mire; by increasing my enemies and alienating from me some to whom I
might have turned at the worst. In one other respect also it had added
to my troubles not a little; for the image of mademoiselle wandering
alone and unguarded through the streets, or vainly calling on me for
help, persisted in thrusting itself on my imagination when I least
wanted it, and came even between my mother's patient face and me.

I was sitting beside Madame de Bonne a little after sunset on the
second day, the woman who attended her being absent on an errand, when
I remarked that the lamp, which had been recently lit, and stood on a
stool in the middle of the room, was burning low and needed snuffing.
I went to it softly, and while stooping over it, trying to improve the
light, heard a slow, heavy step ascending the stairs. The house was
quiet, and the sound attracted my full attention. I raised myself and
stood listening, hoping that this might be the doctor, who had not been
that day.

The footsteps passed the landing below, but at the first stair of
the next flight the person, whoever it was, stumbled, and made a
considerable noise. At that, or it might be a moment later, the step
still ascending, I heard a sudden rustling behind me, and, turning
quickly with a start, saw my mother sitting up in bed. Her eyes were
open, and she seemed fully conscious; which she had not been for days,
nor indeed since the last conversation I have recorded. But her face,
though it was now sensible, was pinched and white, and so drawn with
mortal fear that I believed her dying, and sprang to her, unable to
construe otherwise the pitiful look in her straining eyes.

'Madame,' I said, hastily passing my arm round her, and speaking with as
much encouragement as I could infuse into my voice, 'take comfort. I am
here. Your son.'

'Hush!' she muttered in answer, laying her feeble hand on my wrist and
continuing to look, not at me, but at the door. 'Listen, Gaston! Don't
you hear? There it is again. Again!'

For a moment I thought her mind still wandered, and I shivered, having
no fondness for hearing such things. Then I saw she was listening
intently to the sound which had attracted my notice. The step had
reached the landing by this time. The visitor, whoever it was, paused
there a moment, being in darkness, and uncertain, perhaps, of the
position of the door; but in a little while I heard him move forward
again, my mother's fragile form, clasped as it was in my embrace,
quivering with each step he took, as though his weight stirred the
house. He tapped at the door.

I had thought, while I listened and wondered, of more than one whom this
might be: the leech, Simon Fleix, Madame Bruhl, Fresnoy even. But as the
tap came, and I felt my mother tremble in my arms, enlightenment came
with it, and I pondered no more, I knew as well as if she hail spoken
and told me. There could be only one man whose presence had such power
to terrify her, only one whose mere step, sounding through the veil,
could drag her back to consciousness and fear! And that was the man who
had beggared her, who had traded so long on her terrors.

I moved a little, intending to cross the floor softly, that when he
opened the door he might find me face to face with him; but she detected
the movement, and, love giving her strength, she clung to my wrist so
fiercely that I had not the heart, knowing how slender was her hold on
life and how near the brink she stood, to break from her. I constrained
myself to stand still, though every muscle grew tense as a drawn
bowstring, and I felt the strong rage rising in my throat and choking me
as I waited for him to enter.

A log on the hearth gave way with a dull sound startling in the silence.
The man tapped again, and getting no answer, for neither of us spoke,
pushed the door slowly open, uttering before he showed himself the
words, 'Dieu vous benisse!' in a voice so low and smooth I shuddered at
the sound. The next moment he came in and saw me, and, starting, stood
at gaze, his head thrust slightly forward, his shoulders bent, his hand
still on the latch, amazement and frowning spite in turn distorting
his lean face. He had looked to find a weak, defenceless woman, whom he
could torture and rob at his will; he saw instead a strong man armed,
whose righteous anger he must have been blind indeed had he failed to
read.

Strangest thing of all, we had met before! I knew him at once--he me. He
was the same Jacobin monk whom I had seen at the inn on the Claine, and
who had told me the news of Guise's death!

I uttered an exclamation of surprise on making this discovery, and my
mother, freed suddenly, as it seemed, from the spell of fear, which had
given her unnatural strength, sank back on the bed. Her grasp relaxed,
and her breath came and went with so loud a rattle that I removed my
gaze from him, and bent over her, full of concern and solicitude. Our
eyes met. She tried to speak, and at last gasped, 'Not now, Gaston! Let
him--let him--'

Her lips framed the word 'go,' but she could not give it sound. I
understood, however, and in impotent wrath I waved my hand to him to
begone. When I looked up he had already obeyed me. He had seized the
first opportunity to escape. The door was closed, the lamp burned
steadily, and we were alone.

I gave her a little Armagnac, which stood beside the bed for such an
occasion, and she revived, and presently opened her eyes. But I saw at
once a great change in her. The look of fear had passed altogether from
her face, and one of sorrow, yet content, had taken its place. She laid
her hand in mine, and looked up at me, being too weak, as I thought,
to speak. But by-and-by, when the strong spirit had done its work, she
signed to me to lower my head to her mouth.

'The King of Navarre,' she murmured-you are sure, Gaston--he will retain
you is your--employments?'

Her pleading eyes were so close to mine, I felt no scruples such as some
might have felt, seeing her so near death; but I answered firmly and
cheerfully, 'Madame, I am assured of it. There is no prince in Europe so
trustworthy or so good to his servants.'

She sighed with infinite content, and blessed him in a feeble whisper.
'And if you live,' she went on, 'you will rebuild the old house, Gaston.
The walls are sound yet. And the oak in the hall was not burned. There
is a chest of linen at Gil's, and a chest with your father's gold
lace--but that is pledged,' she added dreamily. 'I forgot.'

'Madame,' I answered solemnly, 'it shall be done--it shall be done as
you wish, if the power lie with me.'

She lay for some time after that murmuring prayers, her head supported
on my shoulder. I longed impatiently for the nurse to return, that I
might despatch her for the leech; not that I thought anything could be
done, but for my own comfort and greater satisfaction afterwards, and
that my mother might not die without some fitting attendance. The house
remained quiet, however, with that impressive quietness which sobers the
heart at such times, and I could not do this. And about six o'clock my
mother opened her eyes again.

'This is not Marsac,' she murmured abruptly, her eyes roving from the
ceiling to the wall at the foot of the bed.

No, Madame,' I answered, leaning over her, 'you are in Blois. But I am
here--Gaston, your son.'

She looked at me, a faint smile of pleasure stealing over her pinched
face. 'Twelve thousand livres a year,' she whispered, rather to herself
than to me, 'and an establishment, reduced a little, yet creditable,
very creditable.' For a moment she seemed to be dying in my arms, but
again opened her eyes quickly and looked me in the face. 'Gaston?' she
said, suddenly and strangely. 'Who said Gaston? He is with the King--I
have blessed him; and his days shall be long in the land!' Then, raising
herself in my arms with a last effort of strength, she cried loudly,
'Way there! Way for my son, the Sieur de Marsac!'

They were her last words. When I laid her down on the bed a moment
later, she was dead, and I was alone.

Madame de Bonne, my mother, was seventy at the time of her death, having
survived my father eighteen years. She was Marie de Loche de Loheac,
third daughter of Raoul, Sieur de Loheac, on the Vilaine, and by her
great-grandmother, a daughter of Jean de Laval, was descended from the
ducal family of Rohan, a relationship which in after-times, and under
greatly altered circumstances, Henry Duke of Rohan condescended to
acknowledge, honouring me with his friendship on more occasions than
one. Her death, which I have here recorded, took place on the fourth
of January, the Queen-Mother of France, Catherine de Medicis, dying a
little after noon on the following day.

In Blois, as in every other town, even Paris itself, the Huguenots
possessed at this time a powerful organisation; and with the aid of the
surgeon, who showed me much respect in my bereavement, and exercised in
my behalf all the influence which skilful and honest; men of his craft
invariably possess, I was able to arrange for my mother's burial in a
private ground about a league beyond the walls and near the village
of Chaverny. At the time of her death I had only thirty crowns in gold
remaining, Simon Fleix, to whose fate I could obtain no clue, having
carried off thirty-five with the horses. The whole of this residue,
however, with the exception of a handsome gratuity to the nurse and a
trifle spent on my clothes, I expended on the funeral, desiring that
no stain should rest on my mother's birth or my affection. Accordingly,
though the ceremony was of necessity private, and indeed secret, and
the mourners were few, it lacked nothing, I think, of the decency and
propriety which my mother loved; and which she preferred, I have often
heard her say, to the vulgar show that is equally at the command of the
noble and the farmer of taxes.

Until she was laid in her quiet resting-place I stood in constant fear
of some interruption on the part either of Bruhl, whose connection with
Fresnoy and the abduction I did not doubt, or of the Jacobin monk.
But none came; and nothing happening to enlighten me as to the fate of
Mademoiselle de la Vire, I saw my duty clear before me. I disposed of
the furniture of my mother's room, and indeed of everything which
was saleable, and raised in this way enough money to buy myself a new
cloak--without which I could not travel in the wintry weather--and to
hire a horse. Sorry as the animal was, the dealer required security, and
I had none to offer. It was only at the last moment, I bethought me of
the fragment of gold chain which mademoiselle had left behind her, and
which, as well as my mother's rings and vinaigrette, I had kept back
from the sale. This I was forced to lodge with him. Having thus, with
some pain and more humiliation, provided means for the journey, I lost
not an hour in beginning it. On the eighth of January I set oat for
Rosny, to carry the news of my ill-success and of mademoiselle's
position whither I had looked a week before to carry herself.



CHAPTER XII. MAXIMILIAN DE BETHUNE, BARON DE ROSNY.

I looked to make the journey to Rosny in two days. But the heaviness of
the roads and the sorry condition of my hackney hindered me so greatly
that I lay the second night at Dreux, and, hearing the way was still
worse between that place and my destination, began to think that I
should be fortunate if I reached Rosny by the following noon. The
country in this part seemed devoted to the League, the feeling
increasing in violence as I approached the Seine. I heard nothing save
abuse of the King of France and praise of the Guise princes, and had
much ado, keeping a still tongue and riding modestly, to pass without
molestation or inquiry.

Drawing near to Rosny, on the third morning, through a low marshy
country covered with woods and alive with game of all kinds, I began to
occupy myself with thoughts of the reception I was likely to encounter;
which, I conjectured, would be none of the most pleasant. The daring
and vigour of the Baron de Rosny, who had at this time the reputation of
being in all parts of France at once, and the familiar terms on which he
was known to live with the King of Navarre, gave me small reason to hope
that he would listen with indulgence to such a tale as I had to tell.
The nearer I came to the hour of telling it, indeed, the more improbable
seemed some of its parts, and the more glaring my own carelessness in
losing the token, and in letting mademoiselle out of my sight in such
a place as Blois. I saw this so clearly now, and more clearly as the
morning advanced, that I do not know that I ever anticipated anything
with more fear than this explanation; which it yet seemed my duty to
offer with all reasonable speed. The morning was warm, I remember;
cloudy, yet not dark; the air near at hand full of moisture and very
clear, with a circle of mist rising some way off, and filling the woods
with blue distances. The road was deep and foundrous, and as I was
obliged to leave it from time to time in order to pass the worst places,
I presently began to fear that I had strayed into a by-road. After
advancing some distance, in doubt whether I should persevere or turn
back, I was glad to see before me a small house placed at the junction
of several woodland paths. From the bush which hung over the door, and a
water-trough which stood beside it, I judged the place to be an inn; and
determining to get my horse fed before I went farther, I rode up to the
door and rapped on it with my riding-switch.

The position of the house was so remote that I was surprised to see
three or four heads thrust immediately out of a window. For a moment I
thought I should have done better to have passed by; but the landlord
coming out very civilly, and leading the way to a shed beside the house,
I reflected that I had little to lose, and followed him. I found, as I
expected, four horses tied up in the shed, the bits hanging round their
necks and their girths loosed; while my surprise was not lessened by the
arrival, before I had fastened up my own horse, of a sixth rider, who,
seeing us by the shed, rode up to us, and saluted me as he dismounted.

He was a tall, strong man in the prime of youth, wearing a plain, almost
mean suit of dust-coloured leather, and carrying no weapons except a
hunting-knife, which hung in a sheath at his girdle. He rode a powerful
silver-roan horse, and was splashed to the top of his high untanned
boots, as if he had come by the worst of paths, if by any.

He cast a shrewd glance at the landlord as he led his horse into the
shed; and I judged from his brown complexion and quick eyes that he had
seen much weather and lived an out-of-door life.

He watched me somewhat curiously while I mixed the fodder for my horse;
and when I went into the house and sat down in the first room I came to,
to eat a little bread-and-cheese which I had in my pouch, he joined
me almost immediately. Apparently he could not stomach my poor fare,
however, for after watching me for a time in silence, switching his boot
with his whip the while, he called the landlord, and asked him, in a
masterful way, what fresh meat he had, and particularly if he had any
lean collops, or a fowl.

The fellow answered that there was nothing. His honour could have some
Lisieux cheese, he added, or some stewed lentils.

'His honour does not want cheese,' the stranger answered peevishly, 'nor
lentil porridge. And what is this I smell, my friend?' he continued,
beginning suddenly to sniff with vigour. 'I swear I smell cooking.'

'It is the hind-quarter of a buck, which is cooking for the four
gentlemen of the Robe; with a collop or two to follow,' the landlord
explained; and humbly excused himself on the ground that the gentlemen
had strictly engaged it for their own eating.

'What? A whole quarter! AND a collop or two to follow!' the stranger
retorted, smacking his lips. 'Who are they?'

'Two advocates and their clerks from the Parliament of Paris. They have
been viewing a boundary near here, and are returning this afternoon,'
the landlord answered.

'No reason why they should cause a famine!' ejaculated the stranger with
energy. 'Go to them and say a gentleman, who has ridden far, and fasted
since seven this morning, requests permission to sit at their table. A
quarter of venison and a collop or two among four!' he continued, in a
tone of extreme disgust, 'It is intolerable! And advocates! Why, at that
rate, the King of France should eat a whole buck, and rise hungry! Don't
you agree with me, sir?' he continued, turning on me and putting the
question abruptly.

He was so comically and yet so seriously angry, and looked so closely at
me as he spoke, that I hastened to say I agreed with him perfectly.

'Yet you eat cheese, sir!' he retorted irritably.

I saw that, not withstanding the simplicity of his dress, he was a
gentleman, and so, forbearing to take offence, I told him plainly that
my purse being light I travelled rather as I could than as I would.

'Is it so?' he answered hastily. 'Had I known that, I would have joined
you in the cheese! After all, I would rather fast with a gentleman, than
feast with a churl. But it is too late now. Seeing you mix the fodder, I
thought your pockets were full.'

'The nag is tired, and has done its best,' I answered.

He looked at me curiously, and as though he would say more. But the
landlord returning at that moment, he turned to him instead.

'Well!' he said briskly. 'Is it all right?'

'I am sorry, your honour,' the man answered, reluctantly, and with a
very downcast air, 'but the gentlemen beg to be excused.'

'Zounds!' cried my companion roundly. 'They do, do they?'

'They say they have no more, sir,' the landlord continued, faltering,
'than enough for themselves and a little dog they have with them.'

A shout of laughter which issued at that moment from the other room
seemed to show that the quartette were making merry over my companion's
request. I saw his cheek redden, and looked for an explosion of anger on
his part; but instead he stood a moment in thought in the middle of the
floor, and then, much to the innkeeper's relief, pushed a stool towards
me, and called for a bottle of the best wine. He pleasantly begged
leave to eat a little of my cheese, which he said looked better than the
Lisieux, and, filling my glass with wine, fell to as merrily as if he
had never heard of the party in the other room.

I was more than a little surprised, I remember; for I had taken him to
be a passionate man, and not one to sit down under an affront. Still I
said nothing, and we conversed very well together. I noticed, however,
that he stopped speaking more than once, as though to listen; but
conceiving that he was merely reverting to the party in the other room,
who grew each moment more uproarious, I said nothing, and was completely
taken by surprise when he rose on a sudden, and, going to the open
window, leaned out, shading his eyes with his hand.

'What is it?' I said, preparing to follow him.

He answered by a quiet chuckle. 'You shall see,' he added the next
instant.

I rose, and going to the window looked out over his shoulder. Three
men were approaching the inn on horseback. The first, a great burly,
dark-complexioned man with fierce black eyes and a feathered cap, had
pistols in his holsters and a short sword by his side. The other two,
with the air of servants, were stout fellows, wearing green doublets and
leather breeches. All three rode good horses, while a footman led two
hounds after them in a leash. On seeing us they cantered forward, the
leader waving his bonnet.

'Halt, there!' cried my companion, lifting up his voice when they were
within a stone's throw of us. 'Maignan!'

'My lord?' answered he of the feather, pulling up on the instant.

'You will find six horses in the shed there,' the stranger cried in a
voice of command. 'Turn out the four to the left as you go in. Give each
a cut, and send it about its business!'

The man wheeled his horse before the words were well uttered, and crying
obsequiously 'that it was done,' flung his reins to one of the other
riders and disappeared in the shed, as if the order given him were the
most commonplace one in the world.

The party in the other room, however, by whom all could be heard, were
not slow to take the alarm. They broke into a shout of remonstrance, and
one of their number, leaping from the window, asked with a very fierce
air what the devil we meant. The others thrust out their faces, swollen
and flushed with the wine they had drunk, and with many oaths backed up
his question. Not feeling myself called upon to interfere, I prepared to
see something diverting.

My companion, whose coolness surprised me, had all the air of being as
little concerned as myself. He even persisted for a time in ignoring the
angry lawyer, and, turning a deaf ear to all the threats and abuse with
which the others assailed him, continued to look calmly at the prospect.
Seeing this, and that nothing could move him, the man who had jumped
through the window, and who seemed the most enterprising of the party,
left us at last and ran towards the stalls. The aspect of the two
serving-men, however, who rode up grinning, and made as if they would
ride him down, determined him to return; which he did, pale with fury,
as the last of the four horses clattered out, and after a puzzled look
round trotted off at its leisure into the forest.

On this, the man grew more violent, as I have remarked frightened men
do; so that at last the stranger condescended to notice him.

'My good sir,' he said coolly, looking at him through the window as if
he had not seen him before, 'you annoy me. What is the matter?'

The fellow retorted with a vast amount of bluster, asking what the devil
we meant by turning out his horses.

'Only to give you and the gentlemen with you a little exercise,' my
companion answered, with grim humour, and in a severe tone strange in
one so young--'than which nothing is more wholesome after a full meal.
That, and a lesson in good manners. Maignan,' he continued, raising
his voice, 'if this person has anything more to say, answer him. He is
nearer your degree than mine.'

And leaving the man to slink away like a whipped dog--for the mean are
ever the first to cringe--my friend turned from the window. Meeting my
eyes as he went back to his seat, he laughed. 'Well,' he said, 'what do
you think?'

'That the ass in the lion's skin is very well till it meets the lion,' I
answered.

He laughed again, and seemed pleased, as I doubt not he was. 'Pooh,
pooh!' he said. 'It passed the time, and I think I am quits with my
gentlemen now. But I must be riding. Possibly our roads may lie for a
while in the same direction, sir?' And he looked at me irresolutely.

I answered cautiously that I was going to the town of Rosny.

'You are not from Paris?' he continued, still looking at me.

'No,' I answered. 'I am from the south.'

'From Blois, perhaps?'

I nodded.

'Ah!' he said, making no comment, which somewhat surprised me, all men
at this time desiring news, and looking to Blois for it. 'I am riding
towards Rosny also. Let us be going.'

But I noticed that as we got to horse, the man he called Maignan holding
his stirrup with much formality, he turned and looked at me more than
once with an expression in his eye which I could not interpret; so
that, being in an enemy's country, where curiosity was a thing to be
deprecated, I began to feel somewhat uneasy. However, as he presently
gave way to a fit of laughter, and seemed to be digesting his late
diversion at the inn, I thought no more of it, finding him excellent
company and a man of surprising information.

Notwithstanding this my spirits began to flag as I approached Rosny; and
as on such occasions nothing is more trying than the well-meant rallying
of a companion ignorant of our trouble, I felt rather relief than regret
when he drew rein at four cross-roads a mile or so short of the town,
and, announcing that here our paths separated, took a civil leave of me,
and went his way with his servants.

I dismounted at an inn at the extremity of the town, and, stopping
only to arrange my dress and drink a cup of wine, asked the way to the
Chateau, which was situate, I learned, no more than a third of a mile
away. I went thither on foot by way of an avenue of trees leading up
to a drawbridge and gateway. The former was down, but the gates were
closed, and all the formalities of a fortress in time of war were
observed on my admission, though the garrison appeared to consist only
of two or three serving-men and as many foresters. I had leisure after
sending in my name to observe that the house was old and partly
ruinous, but of great strength, covered in places with ivy, and closely
surrounded by woods. A staid-looking page came presently to me, and led
me up a narrow staircase to a parlour lighted by two windows, looking,
one into the courtyard, the other towards the town. There a tall man was
waiting to receive me, who rose on my entrance and came forward. Judge
of my surprise when I recognised my acquaintance of the afternoon! 'M.
de Rosny?' I exclaimed, standing still and looking at him in confusion.

'The same, sir,' he answered, with a quiet smile. 'You come from the
King of Navarre, I believe? and on an errand to me. You may speak
openly. The king has no secrets from me.'

There was something in the gravity of his demeanour as he waited for me
to speak: which strongly impressed me; notwithstanding that he was ten
years younger than myself, and I had seen him so lately in a lighter
mood. I felt that his reputation had not belied him--that here was a
great man; and reflecting with despair on the inadequacy of the tale I
had to tell him, I paused to consider in what terms I should begin. He
soon put an end to this, however. 'Come, sir,' he said with impatience.
'I have told you that you may speak out. You should have been here four
days ago, as I take it. Now you are here, where is the lady?'

'Mademoiselle de la Vire?' I stammered, rather to gain time than with
any other object.

'Tut, tut!' he rejoined, frowning. 'Is there any other lady in the
question? Come, sir, speak out. Where have you left her? This is no
affair of gallantry,' he continued, the harshness of his demeanour
disagreeably surprising me, 'that you need beat about the bush. The king
entrusted to you a lady, who, I have no hesitation in telling you now,
was in possession of certain State secrets. It is known that she escaped
safely from Chize and arrived safely at Blois. Where is she?'

'I would to Heaven I knew, sir!' I exclaimed in despair, feeling the
painfulness of my position increased a hundred fold by his manner. 'I
wish to God I did.'

'What is this?' he cried in a raised voice. 'You do not know where she
is? You jest, M. de Marsac.'

'It were a sorry jest,' I answered, summoning up a rueful smile. And on
that, plunging desperately into the story which I have here set down, I
narrated the difficulties under which I had raised my escort, the manner
in which I came to be robbed of the gold token, how mademoiselle was
trepanned, the lucky chance by which I found her again, and the final
disappointment. He listened, but listened throughout with no word of
sympathy--rather with impatience, which grew at last into derisive
incredulity. When I had done he asked me bluntly what I called myself.

Scarcely understanding what he meant, I repeated my name.

He answered, rudely and flatly, that it was impossible. I do not believe
it, sir!' he repeated, his brow dark. 'You are not the man. You bring
neither the lady nor the token, nor anything else by which I can test
your story. Nay, sir, do not scowl at me,' he continued sharply. 'I am
the mouthpiece of the King of Navarre, to whom this matter is of the
highest importance. I cannot believe that the man whom he would choose
would act so. This house you prate of in Blois, for instance, and the
room with the two doors? What were you doing while mademoiselle was
being removed?'

'I was engaged with the men of the house,' I answered, striving to
swallow the anger which all but choked me. 'I did what I could. Had the
door given way, all would have been well.'

He looked at me darkly. 'That is fine talking!' he said with a sneer.
Then he dropped his eyes and seemed for a time to fall into a brown
study, while I stood before him, confounded by this new view of the
case, furious, yet not knowing how to vent my fury, cut to the heart by
his insults, yet without hope or prospect of redress.

'Come' he said harshly, after two or three minutes of gloomy reflection
on his part and burning humiliation on mine, 'is there anyone here who
can identify you, or in any other way confirm your story, sir? Until I
know how the matter stands I can do nothing.'

I shook my head in sullen shame. I might protest against his brutality
and this judgment of me, but to what purpose while he sheltered himself
behind his master?

'Stay!' he said presently, with an abrupt gesture of remembrance. 'I had
nearly forgotten. I have some here who have been lately at the King of
Navarre's Court at St. Jean d'Angely. If you still maintain that you
are the M. de Marsac to whom this commission was entrusted, you will
doubtless have no objection to seeing them?'

On this I felt myself placed in a most cruel dilemma if I refused to
submit my case to the proposed ordeal, I stood an impostor confessed.
If I consented to see these strangers, it was probable they would not
recognise me, and possible that they might deny me in terms calculated
to make my position even worse, if that might be. I hesitated but, Rosny
standing inexorable before me awaiting an answer, I finally consented.

'Good!' he said curtly. 'This way, if you please. They are here. The
latch is tricky. Nay, sir, it is my house.'

Obeying the stern motion of his hand, I passed before him into the next
room, feeling myself more humiliated than I can tell by this reference
to strangers. For a moment I could see no one. The day was waning, the
room I entered was long and narrow, and illuminated only by a glowing
fire. Besides I was myself, perhaps, in some embarrassment. I believed
that my conductor had made a mistake, or that his guests had departed,
and I turned towards him to ask for an explanation. He merely pointed
onwards, however, and I advanced; whereupon a young and handsome lady,
who had been seated in the shadow of the great fireplace, rose suddenly,
as if startled, and stood looking at me, the glow of the burning wood
falling on one side of her face and turning her hair to gold.

'Well!' M. de Rosny said, in a voice which sounded a little odd in my
ears. 'You do not know madame, I think?'

I saw that she was a complete stranger to me, and bowed to her without
speaking. The lady saluted me in turn ceremoniously and in silence.

'Is there no one else here who should know you?' M. de Rosny continued,
in a tone almost of persiflage, and with the same change in his voice
which had struck me before; but now it was more marked. 'If not, M. de
Marsac, I am afraid--But first look round, look round, sir; I would not
judge any man hastily.'

He laid his hand on my shoulder as he finished in a manner so familiar
and so utterly at variance with his former bearing that I doubted if I
heard or felt aright. Yet I looked mechanically at the lady, and seeing
that her eyes glistened in the firelight, and that she gazed at me very
kindly, I wondered still more; falling, indeed, into a very confusion
of amazement. This was not lessened but augmented a hundredfold when,
turning in obedience to the pressure of de Rosny's hand, I saw beside
me, as if she had risen from the floor, another lady--no other than
Mademoiselle de la Vire herself! She had that moment stepped out of the
shadow of the great fireplace, which had hitherto hidden her, and stood
before me curtseying prettily, with the same look on her face and in her
eyes which madame's wore.

'Mademoiselle!' I muttered, unable to take my eyes from her.

'Mais oui, monsieur, mademoiselle,' she answered, curtseying lower, with
the air of a child rather than a woman.

'Here?' I stammered, my mouth open, my eyes staring.

'Here, sir--thanks to the valour of a brave man,' she answered, speaking
in a voice so low I scarcely heard her. And then, dropping her eyes,
she stepped back into the shadow, as if either she had said too much
already, or doubted her composure were she to say more. She was so
radiantly dressed, she looked in the firelight more like a fairy than
a woman, being of small and delicate proportions; and she seemed in
my eyes so different a person, particularly in respect of the softened
expression of her features, from the Mademoiselle de la Vire whom I had
known and seen plunged in sloughs and bent to the saddle with fatigue,
that I doubted still if I had seen aright, and was as far from
enlightenment as before.

It was M. de Rosny himself who relieved me from the embarrassment I was
suffering. He embraced me in the most kind and obliging manner, and this
more than once; begging me to pardon the deception he had practised upon
me, and to which he had been impelled partly by the odd nature of our
introduction at the inn, and partly by his desire to enhance the joyful
surprise he had in store for me. 'Come,' he said presently, drawing me
to the window, 'let me show you some more of your old friends.'

I looked out, and saw below me in the courtyard my three horses drawn up
in a row, the Cid being bestridden by Simon Fleix, who, seeing me, waved
a triumphant greeting. A groom stood at the head of each horse, and on
either side was a man with a torch. My companion laughed gleefully.
'It was Maignan's arrangement,' he said. 'He has a quaint taste in such
things.'

After greeting Simon Fleix a hundred times, I turned back into the room,
and, my heart overflowing with gratitude and wonder, I begged M. de
Rosny to acquaint me with the details of mademoiselle's escape.

'It was the most simple thing in the world,' he said, taking me by the
hand and leading me back to the hearth. 'While you were engaged with
the rascals, the old woman who daily brought mademoiselle's food grew
alarmed at the uproar, and came into the room to learn what it was.
Mademoiselle, unable to help you, and uncertain of your success, thought
the opportunity too good to be lost. She forced the old woman to show
her and her maid the way out through the garden. This done, they ran
down a lane, as I understand, and came immediately upon the lad with the
horses, who recognised them and helped them to mount. They waited some
minutes for you, and then rode off.'

'But I inquired at the gate,' I said.

'At which gate?' inquired M. de Rosny, smiling.

'The North-gate, of course,' I answered.

'Just so,' he rejoined with a nod. 'But they went out through the
West-gate and made a circuit. He is a strange lad, that of yours below
there. He has a head on his shoulder, M. de Marsac. Well, two leagues
outside the town they halted, scarcely knowing how to proceed. By good
fortune, however, a horse-dealer of my acquaintance was at the inn.
He knew Mademoiselle de la Vire, and, hearing whither she was bound,
brought her hither without let or hindrance.'

'Was he a Norman?' I asked,

M. de Rosny nodded, smiling at me shrewdly. 'Yes,' he said, 'he told
me much about you. And now let me introduce you to my wife, Madame de
Rosny.'

He led me up to the lady who had risen at my entrance, and who now
welcomed me as kindly as she had before looked on me, paying me many
pleasant compliments. I gazed at her with interest, having heard much
of her beauty and of the strange manner in which M. de Rosny, being
enamoured of two young ladies, and chancing upon both while lodging in
different apartments at an inn, had decided which he should visit and
make his wife. He appeared to read what was in my mind, for as I bowed
before her, thanking her for the obliging things which she had uttered,
and which for ever bound me to her service, he gaily pinched her ear,
and said, 'When you want a good wife, M. de Marsac, be sure you turn to
the right.'

He spoke in jest, and having his own case only in his mind. But I,
looking mechanically in the direction he indicated, saw mademoiselle
standing a pace or two to my right in the shadow of the great
chimney-piece. I know not whether she frowned more or blushed more;
but this for certain, that she answered my look with one of sharp
displeasure, and, turning her back on me, swept quickly from the room,
with no trace in her bearing of that late tenderness and gratitude which
I had remarked.



CHAPTER XIII. AT ROSNY.

The morning brought only fresh proofs of the kindness which M. de
Rosny had conceived for me. Awaking early I found on a stool beside
my clothes, a purse of gold containing a hundred crowns; and a youth
presently entering to ask me if I lacked anything, I had at first some
difficulty in recognising Simon Fleix, so sprucely was the lad dressed,
in a mode resembling Maignan's. I looked at the student more than once
before I addressed him by his name; and was as much surprised by
the strange change I observed in him for it was not confined to his
clothes--as by anything which had happened since I entered the house. I
rubbed my eyes, and asked him what he had done with his soutane. 'Burned
it, M. de Marsac,' he answered briefly.

I saw that he had burned much, metaphorically speaking, besides his
soutane. He was less pale, less lank, less wobegone than formerly, and
went more briskly. He had lost the air of crack-brained disorder which
had distinguished him, and was smart, sedate, and stooped less. Only the
odd sparkle remained in his eyes, and bore witness to the same nervous,
eager spirit within.

'What are you going to do, then, Simon?' I asked, noting these changes
curiously.

'I am a soldier,' he answered, 'and follow M. de Marsac.'

I laughed. 'You have chosen a poor service, I am afraid,' I said,
beginning to rise; 'and one, too, Simon, in which it is possible you may
be killed. I thought that would not suit you,' I continued, to see what
he would say. But he answered nothing, and I looked at him in great
surprise. 'You have made up your mind, then, at last?' I said.

'Perfectly,' he answered.

'And solved all your doubts?'

'I have no doubts.'

'You are a Huguenot?'

'That is the only true and pure religion,' he replied gravely. And with
apparent sincerity and devotion he repeated Beza's Confession of Faith.

This filled me with profound astonishment, but I said no more at the
time, though I had my doubts. I waited until I was alone with M. de
Rosny, and then I unbosomed myself on the matter; expressing my surprise
at the suddenness of the conversion, and at such a man, as I had found
the student to be, stating his views so firmly and steadfastly, and with
so little excitement. Observing that M. de Rosny smiled but answered
nothing, I explained myself farther.

'I am surprised,' I said, 'because I have always heard it maintained
that clerkly men, becoming lost in the mazes of theology, seldom find
any sure footing; that not one in a hundred returns to his old faith, or
finds grace to accept a new one. I am speaking only of such, of course,
as I believe this lad to be--eager, excitable brains, learning much, and
without judgment to digest what they learn.'

'Of such I also believe it to be true,' M. de Rosny answered, still
smiling. 'But even on them a little influence, applied at the right
moment, has much effect, M. de Marsac.'

'I allow that,' I said. 'But my mother, of whom I have spoken to you,
saw much of this youth. His fidelity to her was beyond praise. Yet her
faith, though grounded on a rock, had no weight with him.'

M. de Rosny shook his head, still smiling.

'It is not our mothers who convert us,' he said.

'What!' I cried, my eyes opened. 'Do you mean--do you mean that
Mademoiselle has done this?'

'I fancy so,' he answered, nodding. 'I think my lady cast her spell over
him by the way. The lad left Blois with her, if what you say be true,
without faith in the world. He came to my hands two days later the
stoutest of Huguenots. It is not hard to read this riddle.'

'Such, conversions are seldom lasting,' I said.

He looked at me queerly; and, the smile still hovering about his lips,
answered 'Tush, man! Why so serious? Theodore Beza himself could not
look dryer. The lad is in earnest, and there is no harm done.'

And, Heaven knows, I was in no mood to suspect harm; nor inclined
just then to look at the dark side of things. It may be conceived how
delightful it was to me to be received as an equal and honoured guest by
a man, even then famous, and now so grown in reputation as to overshadow
all Frenchmen save his master; how pleasant to enjoy the comforts and
amiabilities of home, from which I had been long estranged; to pour my
mother's story into Madame's ears and find comfort in her sympathy; to
feel myself, en fin, once more a gentleman with an acknowledged place
in the world. Our days we spent in hunting, or excursions of some
kind, our evenings in long conversations, which impressed me with an
ever-growing respect for my lord's powers.

For there seemed to be no end either to his knowledge of France, or to
the plans for its development, which even then filled his brain, and
have since turned wildernesses into fruitful lands, and squalid towns
into great cities. Grave and formal, he could yet unbend; the most
sagacious of counsellors, he was a soldier also, and loved the seclusion
in which we lived the more that it was not devoid of danger; the
neighbouring towns being devoted to the League, and the general disorder
alone making it possible for him to lie unsuspected in his own house.

One thing only rendered my ease and comfort imperfect, and that was
the attitude which Mademoiselle de la Vire assumed towards me. Of her
gratitude in the first blush of the thing I felt no doubt, for not only
had she thanked me very prettily, though with reserve, on the evening of
my arrival, but the warmth of M. de Rosny's kindness left me no choice,
save to believe that she had given him an exaggerated idea of my merits
and services. I asked no more than this. Such good offices left me
nothing to expect or desire; my age and ill-fortune placing me at so
great a disadvantage that, far from dreaming of friendship or intimacy
with her, I did not even assume the equality in our daily intercourse to
which my birth, taken by itself, entitled me. Knowing that I must appear
in her eyes old, poor, and ill-dressed, and satisfied, with having
asserted my conduct and honour, I was careful not to trespass on her
gratitude; and while forward in such courtesies as could not weary
her, I avoided with equal care every appearance of pursuing her, or
inflicting my company upon her. I addressed her formally and upon formal
topics only, such, I mean, as we shared with the rest of our company;
and I reminded myself often that though we now met in the same house
and at the same table, she was still the Mademoiselle de la Vire who had
borne herself so loftily in the King of Navarre's ante-chamber. This
I did, not out of pique or wounded pride, which I no more, God knows,
harboured against her than against a bird; but that I might not in my
new prosperity forget the light in which such a woman, young, spoiled,
and beautiful, must still regard me.

Keeping to this inoffensive posture, I was the more hurt when I found
her gratitude fade with the hour. After the first two days, during which
I remarked that she was very silent, seldom speaking to me or looking at
me, she resumed much of her old air of disdain. For that I cared little;
but she presently went farther, and began to rake up the incidents which
had happened at St. Jean d'Angely, and in which I had taken part. She
continually adverted to my poverty while there, to the odd figure I had
cut, and the many jests her friends had made at my expense. She seemed
to take a pleasure positively savage in these, gibing at me sometimes
so bitterly as to shame and pain me, and bring the colour to Madame de
Rosny's cheeks.

To the time we had spent together, on the other hand, she never or
rarely referred. One afternoon, however, a week after my arrival at
Rosny, I found her sitting alone in the parlour. I had not known she
was there, and I was for withdrawing at once with a bow and a muttered
apology. But she stopped me with an angry gesture. 'I do not bite,'
she said, rising from her stool and meeting my eyes, a red spot in each
cheek. 'Why do you look at me like that? Do you know, M. de Marsac, that
I have no patience with you.' And she stamped her foot on the floor.

'But, mademoiselle,' I stammered humbly, wondering what in the world she
meant, 'what have I done?'

'Done?' she repeated angrily. 'Done? It is not what you have done, it is
what you are. I have no patience with you. Why are you so dull, sir? Why
are you so dowdy? Why do you go about with your doublet awry, and your
hair lank? Why do you speak to Maignan as if he were a gentleman? Why
do you look always solemn and polite, and as if all the world were a
preche? Why? Why? Why, I say?'

She stopped from sheer lack of breath, leaving me as much astonished as
ever in my life. She looked so beautiful in her fury and fierceness too,
that I could only stare at her and wonder dumbly what it all meant.

'Well!' she cried impatiently, after bearing this as long as she could,
'have you not a word to say for yourself? Have you no tongue? Have you
no will of your own at all, M. de Marsac?'

'But, mademoiselle,' I began, trying to explain.

'Chut!' she exclaimed, cutting me short before I could get farther, as
the way of women is. And then she added, in a changed tone, and very
abruptly, 'You have a velvet knot of mine, sir. Give it me.'

'It is in my room,' I answered, astonished beyond measure at this sudden
change of subject, and equally sudden demand.

'Then fetch it, sir, if you please,' she replied, her eyes flashing
afresh. 'Fetch it. Fetch it, I say! It has served its turn, and I prefer
to have it. Who knows but that some day you may be showing it for a
love-knot?'

'Mademoiselle!' I cried, hotly. And I think that for the moment I was as
angry as she was.

'Still, I prefer to have it,' she answered sullenly, casting down her
eyes.

I was so much enraged, I went without a word and fetched it, and,
bringing it to her where she stood, in the same place, put it into her
hands. When she saw it some recollection, I fancy, of the day when she
had traced the cry for help on it, came to her in her anger; for she
took it from me with all her bearing altered. She trembled, and held it
for a moment in her hands, as if she did not know what to do with it.
She was thinking, doubtless, of the house in Blois and the peril she had
run there; and, being for my part quite willing that she should think
and feel how badly she had acted, I stood looking at her, sparing her no
whit of my glance.

'The gold chain you left on my mother's pillow,' I said coldly, seeing
she continued silent, 'I cannot return to you at once, for I have
pledged it. But I will do so as soon as I can.'

'You have pledged it?' she muttered, with her eyes averted.

'Yes, mademoiselle, to procure a horse to bring me here,' I replied
drily. 'However, it, shall be redeemed. In return, there is something I
too would ask.'

'What?' she murmured, recovering herself with all effort, and looking at
me with something of her old pride and defiance.

'The broken coin you have,' I said. 'The token, I mean. It is of no use
to you, for your enemies hold the other half. It might be of service to
me.'

'How?' she asked curtly.

'Because some day I may find its fellow, mademoiselle,'

'And then?' she cried. She looked at me, her lips parted, her eyes
flashing. 'What then, when you have found its fellow, M. de Marsac?'

I shrugged my shoulders.

'Bah!' she exclaimed, clenching her little hand, and stamping her foot
on the floor in a passion I could not understand. 'That is you! That is
M. de Marsac all over. You say nothing, and men think nothing of you.
You go with your hat in your hand, and they tread on you. They speak,
and you are silent! Why, if I could use a sword as you can, I would keep
silence before no man, nor let any man save the King of France cock his
hat in my presence! But you! There! go, leave me. Here is your coin.
Take it and go. Send me that lad of yours to keep me awake. At any rate
he has brains, he is young, he is a man, he has a soul, he can feel--if
he were anything but a clerk.'

She waved me off in such a wind of passion as might have amused me in
another, but in her smacked so strongly of ingratitude as to pain me
not a little. I went, however, and sent Simon to her; though I liked the
errand very ill, and no better when I saw the lad's face light up at
the mention of her name. But apparently she had not recovered her temper
when he reached her, for he fared no better than I had done; coming away
presently with the air of a whipped dog, as I saw from the yew-tree walk
where I was strolling.

Still, after that she made it a habit to talk to him more and more; and,
Monsieur and Madame de Rosny being much taken up with one another, there
was no one to check her fancy or speak a word of advice. Knowing her
pride, I had no fears for her; but it grieved me to think that the lad's
head should be turned. A dozen times I made up my mind to speak to her
on his behalf; but for one thing it was not my business, and for another
I soon discovered that she was aware of my displeasure, and valued it
not a jot. For venturing one morning, when she was in a pleasant humour,
to hint that she treated those beneath her too inhumanly, and with an
unkindness as little becoming noble blood as familiarity, she asked me
scornfully if I did not think she treated Simon Fleix well enough. To
which I had nothing to answer.

I might here remark on the system of secret intelligence by means of
which M. de Rosny, even in this remote place, received news of all that
was passing in France. But it is common fame. There was no coming or
going of messengers, which would quickly have aroused suspicion in the
neighbouring town, nor was it possible even for me to say exactly by
what channels news came. But come it did, and at all hours of the day.
In this way we heard of the danger of La Ganache and of the effort
contemplated by the King of Navarre for its relief. M. de Rosny not
only communicated these matters to me without reserve, but engaged
my affections by farther proofs of confidence such as might well have
flattered a man of greater importance.

I have said that, as a rule, there was no coming or going of messengers.
But one evening, returning from the chase with one of the keepers, who
had prayed my assistance in hunting down a crippled doe, I was surprised
to find a strange horse, which had evidently been ridden hard and far,
standing smoking in the yard. Inquiring whose it was, I learned that
a man believed by the grooms to be from Blois had just arrived and was
closeted with the baron. An event so far out of the ordinary course of
things naturally aroused my wonder; but desiring to avoid any appearance
of curiosity, which, if indulged, is apt to become the most vulgar of
vices, I refrained from entering the house, and repaired instead to the
yew-walk. I had scarcely, however, heated my blood, a little chilled
with riding, before the page came to me to fetch me to his master.

I found M. de Rosny striding up and down his room, his manner so
disordered and his face disfigured by so much grief and horror that I
started on seeing him. My heart sinking in a moment, I did not need to
look at Madame, who sat weeping silently in a chair, to assure myself
that something dreadful had happened. The light was failing, and a lamp
had been brought into the room. M. de Rosny pointed abruptly to a
small piece of paper which lay on the table beside it, and, obeying his
gesture, I took this up and read its contents, which consisted of less
than a score of words.

'He is ill and like to die,' the message ran, 'twenty leagues south of
La Ganache. Come at all costs. P. M.

'Who?' I said stupidly--stupidly, for already I began to understand. Who
is ill and like to die?'

M. de Rosny turned to me, and I saw that the tears were trickling
unbidden down his cheeks. 'There is but one HE for me,' he cried. 'May
God spare that one! May He spare him to France, which needs him, to the
Church, which hangs on him, and to me, who love him! Let him not fall
in the hour of fruition. O Lord, let him not fall!' And he sank on to
a stool, and remained in that posture with his face in his hands, his
broad shoulders shaken with grief.

'Come, sir,' I said, after a pause sacred to sorrow and dismay; 'let me
remind you that while there is life there is hope.'

'Hope?'

'Yes, M. de Rosny, hope,' I replied more cheerfully. 'He has work to
do. He is elected, called, and chosen; the Joshua of his people, as M.
d'Amours rightly called him. God will not take him yet. You shall see
him and be embraced by him, as has happened a hundred times. Remember,
sir, the King of Navarre is strong, hardy, and young, and no doubt in
good hands.'

'Mornay's,' M. de Rosny cried, looking up with contempt in his eye.

Yet from that moment he rallied, spurred, I think, by the thought that
the King of Navarre's recovery depended under God on M. de Mornay; whom
he was ever inclined to regard as his rival. He began to make instant
preparations for departure from Rosny, and bade me do so also, telling
me, somewhat curtly and without explanation, that he had need of me. The
danger of so speedy a return to the South, where the full weight of the
Vicomte de Turenne's vengeance awaited me, occurred to me strongly; and
I ventured, though with a little shame, to mention it. But M. de Rosny,
after gazing at me a moment in apparent doubt, put the objection aside
with a degree of peevishness unusual in him, and continued to press on
his arrangements as earnestly as though they did not include separation
from a wife equally loving and beloved.

Having few things to look to myself, I was at leisure, when the hour of
departure came, to observe both the courage with which Madame de
Rosny supported her sorrow, 'for the sake of France,' and the unwonted
tenderness which Mademoiselle de la Vire, lifted for once above herself,
lavished on her. I seemed to stand--happily in one light, and yet the
feeling was fraught with pain--outside their familiar relations; yet,
having made my adieux as short and formal as possible, that I might
not encroach on other and more sacred ones, I found at the last moment
something in waiting for me. I was surprised as I rode under the gateway
a little ahead of the others, by something small and light falling
on the saddle-bow before me. Catching it before it could slide to the
ground, I saw, with infinite astonishment, that I held in my hand a tiny
velvet bow.

To look up at the window of the parlour, which I have said was over the
archway, was my first impulse. I did so, and met mademoiselle's eyes for
a second, and a second only. The next moment she was gone. M. de Rosny
clattered through the gate at my heels, the servants behind him. And we
were on the road.



CHAPTER XIV. M. DE RAMBOUILLET.

For a while we were but a melancholy party. The incident I have last
related which seemed to admit of more explanations than one--left me
in a state of the greatest perplexity; and this prevailed with me for a
time, and was only dissipated at length by my seeing my own face, as it
were, in a glass. For, chancing presently to look behind me, I observed
that Simon Fleix was riding, notwithstanding his fine hat and feather
and his new sword, in a posture and with an air of dejection difficult
to exaggerate; whereon the reflection that master and man had the same
object in their minds--nay, the thought that possibly he bore in his
bosom a like token to that which lay warm in mine--occurring to me, I
roused myself as from some degrading dream, and, shaking up the Cid,
cantered forward to join Rosny, who, in no cheerful mood himself, was
riding steadily forward, wrapped to his eyes in his cloak.

The news of the King of Navarre's illness had fallen on him, indeed, in
the midst of his sanguine scheming with the force of a thunderbolt.
He saw himself in danger of losing at once the master he loved and the
brilliant future to which he looked forward; and amid the imminent crash
of his hopes and the destruction of the system in which he lived, he had
scarcely time to regret the wife he was leaving at Rosny or the quiet
from which he was so suddenly called. His heart was in the South, at La
Ganache, by Henry's couch. His main idea was to get there quickly at all
risks. The name of the King of Navarre's physician was constantly on his
lips. 'Dortoman is a good man. If anyone call save him, Dortoman will,'
was his perpetual cry. And whenever he met anyone who had the least
appearance of bearing news, he would have me stop and interrogate him,
and by no means let the traveller go until he had given us the last
rumour from Blois--the channel through which all the news from the South
reached us.

An incident which occurred at the inn that evening cheered him somewhat;
the most powerful minds being prone, I have observed, to snatch at omens
in times of uncertainty. An elderly man, of strange appearance, and
dressed in an affected and bizarre fashion, was seated at table when we
arrived. Though I entered first in my assumed capacity of leader of the
party, he let me pass before him without comment, but rose and solemnly
saluted M. de Rosny, albeit the latter walked behind me and was much
more plainly dressed. Rosny returned his greeting and would have passed
on; but the stranger, interposing with a still lower bow, invited him to
take his seat, which was near the fire and sheltered from the draught,
at the same time making as if he would himself remove to another place.

'Nay,' said my companion, surprised by such an excess of courtesy, 'I do
not see why I should take your place, sir.'

'Not mine only,' the old man rejoined, looking at him with a
particularity and speaking with an emphasis which attracted our
attention, 'but those of many others, who I can assure you will very
shortly yield them up to you, whether they will or not.'

M. de Rosny shrugged his shoulders and passed on, affecting to suppose
the old man wandered. But privately he thought much of his words, and
more when he learned that he was an astrologer from Paris, who had the
name, at any rate in this country, of having studied under Nostradamus.
And whether he drew fresh hopes from this, or turned his attention more
particularly as we approached Blois to present matters, certainly he
grew more cheerful, and began again to discuss the future, as though
assured of his master's recovery.

'You have never been to the King's Court?' he said presently, following
up, as I judged, a train of thought in his own mind. 'At Blois, I mean.'

'No; nor do I feel anxious to visit it,' I answered. 'To tell you the
truth, M. le Baron,' I continued with some warmth, 'the sooner me are
beyond Blois, the better I shall be pleased. I think we run some risk
there, and, besides, I do not fancy a shambles. I do not think I could
see the king without thinking of the Bartholomew, nor his chamber
without thinking of Guise.'

'Tut, tut!' he said, 'you have killed a man before now.'

'Many,' I answered.

'Do they trouble you?'

'No, but they were killed in fair fight,' I replied, 'That makes a
difference.'

'To you,' he said drily. 'But you are not the King of France, you see.
Should you ever come across him,' he continued, flicking his horse's
ears, a faint smile on his lips, 'I will give you a hint. Talk to him of
the battles at Jarnac and Moncontour, and praise your Conde's father! As
Conde lost the fight and, he won it, the compliment comes home to him.
The more hopelessly a man has lost his powers, my friend, the more
fondly he regards them, and the more highly he prizes the victories he
call no longer gain.'

'Ugh!' I muttered.

'Of the two parties at Court,' Rosny continued, calmly overlooking my
ill-humour, 'trust D'Aumont and Biron and the French clique. They are
true to France at any rate. But whomsoever you see consort with the two
Retzs--the King of Spain's jackals as men name them--avoid him for a
Spaniard and a traitor.'

'But the Retzs are Italians,' I objected peevishly.

'The same thing,' he answered curtly. 'They cry, "Vive le Roi!" but
privately they are for the League, or for Spain, or for whatever may
most hurt us; who are better Frenchmen than themselves, and whose leader
will some day, if God spare his life, be King of France.'

'Well, the less I have to do with the one or the other of them, save at
the sword's point, the better I shall be pleased,' I rejoined.

On that he looked at me with a queer smile; as was his way when he had
more in his mind than appeared. And this, and something special in the
tone of his conversation, as well, perhaps, as my own doubts about my
future and his intentions regarding me, gave me an uneasy feeling;
which lasted through the day, and left me only when more immediate peril
presently rose to threaten us.

It happened in this way. We had reached the outskirts of Blois, and were
just approaching the gate, hoping to pass through it without attracting
attention, when two travellers rode slowly out of a lane, the mouth of
which we were passing. They eyed us closely as they reined in to let
us go by; and M. de Rosny, who was riding with his horse's head at my
stirrup, whispered me to press on. Before I could comply, however, the
strangers cantered by us, and turning in the saddle when abreast of us
looked us in the face. A moment later one of them cried loudly, 'It is
he!' and both pulled their horses across the road, and waited for us to
come up.

Aware that if M. de Rosny were discovered he would be happy if he
escaped with imprisonment, the king being too jealous of his Catholic
reputation to venture to protect a Huguenot, however illustrious, I saw
that the situation was desperate; for, though we were five to two,
the neighbourhood of the city--the gate being scarcely a bow-shot
off--rendered flight or resistance equally hopeless. I could think of
nothing for it save to put a bold face on the matter, and, M. de Rosny
doing the same, we advanced in the most innocent way possible.

'Halt, there!' cried one of the strangers sharply. 'And let me tell you,
sir, you are known.'

'What if I am?' I answered impatiently, still pressing on. 'Are you
highwaymen, that you stop the way?'

The speaker on the other side looked at me keenly, but in a moment
retorted, 'Enough trifling, sir! Who YOU are I do not know. But the
person riding at your rein is M. de Rosny. Him I do know, and I warn him
to stop.'

I thought the game was lost, but to my surprise my companion answered
at once and almost in the same words I had used. 'Well, sir, and what of
that?' he said.

'What of that?' the stranger exclaimed, spurring his horse so as still
to bar the way. 'Why, only this, that you must be a madman to show
yourself on this side of the Loire.'

'It is long since I have seen the other,' was my companion's unmoved
answer.

'You are M. de Rosny? You do not deny it?' the man cried in
astonishment.

'Certainly I do not deny it,' M. de Rosny answered bluntly. 'And more,
the day has been, sir,' he continued with sudden fire, 'when few at his
Majesty's Court would have dared to chop words with Solomon de Bethune,
much less to stop him on the highway within a mile of the palace. But
times are changed with me, sir, and it would seem with others also, if
true men rallying to his Majesty in his need are to be challenged by
every passer on the road.'

'What! Are you Solomon de Bethune?' the man cried incredulously.
Incredulously, but his countenance fell, and his voice was full of
chagrin and disappointment,

'Who else, sir?' M. de Rosny replied haughtily. 'I am, and, as far as I
know, I have as much right on this side of the Loire as any other man.'

'A thousand pardons.'

'If you are not satisfied--'

'Nay, M. de Rosny, I am perfectly satisfied.'

The stranger repented this with a very crestfallen air, adding, 'A
thousand pardons'; and fell to making other apologies, doffing his hat
with great respect. 'I took you, if you will pardon me saying so, for
your Huguenot brother, M. Maximilian,' he explained. 'The saying goes
that he is at Rosny.'

'I can answer for that being false,' M. de Rosny answered peremptorily,
'for I have just come from there, and I will answer for it he is not
within ten leagues of the place. And now, sir, as we desire to enter
before the gates shut, perhaps you will excuse us.' With which he bowed,
and I bowed, and they bowed, and we separated. They gave us the road,
which M. de Rosny took with a great air, and we trotted to the gate, and
passed through it without misadventure.

The first street we entered was a wide one, and my companion took
advantage of this to ride up abreast of me. 'That is the kind of
adventure our little prince is fond of,' he muttered. 'But for my part,
M. de Marsac, the sweat is running down my forehead. I have played the
trick more than once before, for my brother and I are as like as two
peas. And yet it would have gone ill with us if the fool had been one of
his friends.'

'All's well that ends well,' I answered in a low voice, thinking it an
ill time for compliments. As it was, the remark was unfortunate, for M.
de Rosny was still in the act of reining back when Maignan called out to
us to say we were being followed.

I looked behind, but could see nothing except gloom and rain and
overhanging eaves and a few figures cowering in doorways. The servants,
however, continued to maintain that it was so, and we held, without
actually stopping, a council of war. If detected, we were caught in a
trap, without hope of escape; and for the moment I am sure M. do Rosny
regretted that he had chosen this route by Blois--that he had thrust
himself, in his haste and his desire to take with him the latest news,
into a snare so patent. The castle--huge, dark, and grim--loomed before
us at the end of the street in which we were, and, chilled as I was
myself by the sight, I could imagine how much more appalling it must
appear to him, the chosen counsellor of his master, and the steadfast
opponent of all which it represented.

Our consultation came to nothing, for no better course suggested
itself than to go as we had intended to the lodging commonly used by my
companion. We did so, looking behind us often, and saying more than once
that Maignan must be mistaken. As soon as we had dismounted, however,
and gone in, he showed us from the window a man loitering near; and
this confirmation of our alarm sending us to our expedients again, while
Maignan remained watching in a room without a light, I suggested that I
might pass myself off, though ten years older, for my companion.

'Alas!' he said, drumming with his fingers on the table 'there are too
many here who know me to make that possible. I thank you all the same.'

'Could you escape on foot? Or pass the wall anywhere, or slip through
the gates early?' I suggested.

'They might tell us at the Bleeding Heart,' he answered. But I doubt it.
I was a fool, sir, to put my neck into Mendoza's halter, and that is a
fact. But here is Maignan. What is it, man?' he continued eagerly.

'The watcher is gone, my lord,' the equerry answered.

'And has left no one?'

'No one that I can see.'

We both went into the next room and looked from the windows. The man
was certainly not where we had seen him before. But the rain was falling
heavily, the eaves were dripping, the street was a dark cavern with
only here and there a spark of light, and the fellow might be lurking
elsewhere. Maignan, being questioned, however, believed he had gone off
of set purpose.

'Which may be read half a dozen ways,' I remarked.

'At any rate, we are fasting,' M. de Rosny answered. Give me a full man
in a fight. Let us sit down and eat. It is no good jumping in the dark,
or meeting troubles half way.'

We were not through our meal, however, Simon Fleix waiting on us with a
pale face, when Maignan came in again from the dark room. 'My lord,' he
said quietly, 'three men have appeared. Two of them remain twenty paces
away. The third has come to the door.' As he spoke we heard a cautious
summons below, Maignan was for going down, but his master bade him
stand. Let the woman of the house go,' he said.

I remarked and long remembered M. de Rosny's SANG-FROID on this
occasion. His pistols he had already laid on a chair beside him throwing
his cloak over them; and now, while we waited, listening in breathless
silence, I saw him hand a large slice of bread-and-meat to his equerry,
who, standing behind his chair, began eating it with the same coolness.
Simon Fleix, on the other hand, stood gazing at the door, trembling in
every limb, and with so much of excitement and surprise in his attitude
that I took the precaution of bidding him, in a low voice, do nothing
without orders. At the same moment it occurred to me to extinguish two
of the four candles which had been lighted; and I did so, M. de Rosny
nodding assent, just as the muttered conversation which was being
carried on below ceased, and a man's tread sounded on the stairs.

It was followed immediately by a knock on the outside of our door.
Obeying my companion's look, I cried, 'Enter!'

A slender man of middle height, booted and wrapped up, with his face
almost entirely hidden by a fold of his cloak, came in quickly, and
closing the door behind him, advanced towards the table. 'Which is M. de
Rosny?' he said.

Rosny had carefully turned his face from the light, but at the sound
of the other's voice he sprang up with a cry of relief. He was about to
speak, when the newcomer, raising his hand peremptorily, continued, 'No
names, I beg. Yours, I suppose, is known here. Mine is not, nor do I
desire it should be. I want speech of you, that is all.'

'I am greatly honoured,' M. de Rosny replied, gazing at him eagerly.
'Yet, who told you I was here?'

'I saw you pass under a lamp in the street,' the stranger answered. 'I
knew your horse first, and you afterwards, and bade a groom follow you.
Believe me,' he added, with a gesture of the hand, 'you have nothing to
fear from me.'

'I accept the assurance in the spirit in which it is offered,' my
companion answered with a graceful bow, 'and think myself fortunate
in being recognised'--he paused a moment and then continued--'by a
Frenchman and a man of honour.'

The stranger shrugged his shoulders. 'Your pardon, then,' he said, 'if I
seem abrupt. My time is short. I want to do the best with it I can. Will
you favour me?'

I was for withdrawing, but M. de Rosny ordered Maignan to place lights
in the next room, and, apologising to me very graciously, retired
thither with the stranger, leaving me relieved indeed by these peaceful
appearances, but full of wonder and conjectures who this might be, and
what the visit portended. At one moment I was inclined to identify
the stranger with M. de Rosny's brother; at another with the English
ambassador; and then, again, a wild idea that he might be M. de Bruhl
occurred to me. The two remained together about a quarter of an hour and
then came out, the stranger leading the way, and saluting me politely
as he passed through the room. At the door he turned to say, 'At nine
o'clock, then?'

'At nine o'clock,' M. de Rosny replied, holding the door open. 'You will
excuse me if I do not descend, Marquis?'

'Yes, go back, my friend,' the stranger answered. And, lighted by
Maignan, whose face on such occasions could assume the most stolid air
in the world, he disappeared down the stairs, and I heard him go out.

M. de Rosny turned to me, his eyes sparkling with joy, his face and mien
full of animation. 'The King of Navarre is better,' he said. 'He is said
to be out of danger. What do you think of that, my friend?'

'That is the best news I have heard for many a day,' I answered. And I
hastened to add, that France and the Religion had reason to thank God
for His mercy.

'Amen to that,' my patron replied reverently. 'But that is not all--that
is not all.' And he began to walk up and down the room humming the 118th
Psalm a little above his breath--

  La voici l'heureuse journee
  Que Dieu a faite a plein desir;
  Par nous soit joie demenee,
  Et prenons en elle plaisir.

He continued, indeed, to walk up and down the floor so long, and with so
joyful a countenance and demeanour, that I ventured, at last to remind
him of my presence, which he had clearly forgotten. 'Ha! to be sure,'
he said, stopping short and looking at me with the utmost good-humour.
'What time is it? Seven. Then until nine o'clock, my friend, I crave
your indulgence. En fin, until that time I must keep counsel. Come,
I am hungry still. Let us sit down, and this time I hope we may not be
interrupted. Simon, set us on a fresh bottle. Ha! ha! VIVENT LE ROI ET
LE ROI DE NAVARRE!' And again he fell to humming the same psalm--

  O Dieu eternel, je te prie,
  Je te prie, ton roi maintiens:
  O Dieu, je te prie et reprie,
  Sauve ton roi et l'entretiens!

doing so with a light in his eyes and a joyous emphasis, which impressed
me the more in a man ordinarily so calm and self-contained. I saw that
something had occurred to gratify him beyond measure, and, believing his
statement that this was not the good news from La Ganache only, I waited
with the utmost interest and anxiety for the hour of nine, which had
no sooner struck than our former visitor appeared with the same air of
mystery and disguise which had attended him before.

M. de Rosny, who had risen on hearing his step and had taken up his
cloak, paused with it half on and half off, to cry anxiously, 'All is
well, is it not?'

'Perfectly,' the stranger replied, with a nod.

'And my friend?'

Yes, on condition that you answer for his discretion and fidelity.' And
the stranger glanced involuntarily at me who stood uncertain whether to
hold my ground or retire.

'Good,' M. de Rosny cried. Then he turned to me with a mingled air
of dignity and kindness, and continued: 'This is the gentleman. M. de
Marsac, I am honoured with permission to present you to the Marquis de
Rambouillet, whose interest and protection I beg you to deserve, for he
is a true Frenchman and a patriot whom I respect.'

M. de Rambouillet saluted me politely. 'Of a Brittany family, I think?'
he said.

I assented; and he replied with something complimentary. But afterwards
he continued to look at me in silence with a keenness and curiosity I
did not understand. At last, when M. de Rosny's impatience had reached
a high pitch, the marquis seemed impelled to add something. 'You quite
understand M. de Rosny?' he said. 'Without saying anything disparaging
of M. de Marsac, who is, no doubt, a man of honour'--and he bowed to me
very low--'this is a delicate matter, and you will introduce no one into
it, I am sure, whom you cannot trust as yourself.'

'Precisely,' M. de Rosny replied, speaking drily, yet with a grand
air which fully matched his companion's. 'I am prepared to trust this
gentleman not only with my life but with my honour.'

'Nothing more remains to be said then,' the marquis rejoined, bowing
to me again. 'I am glad to have been the occasion of a declaration so
flattering to you, sir.'

I returned his salute in silence, and obeying M. de Rosny's muttered
direction put on, my cloak and sword. M. de Rosny took up his pistols.

'You will have no need of those,' the Marquis said with a high glance.

'Where we are going, no,' my companion answered, calmly continuing to
dispose them about him. 'But the streets are dark and not too safe.'

M. de Rambouillet laughed. 'That is the worst of you Huguenots,' he
said. 'You never know when to lay suspicion aside.'

A hundred retorts sprang to my lips. I thought of the Bartholomew, of
the French fury of Antwerp, of half a dozen things which make my blood
boil to this day. But M. de Rosny's answer was the finest of all.
'That is true, I am afraid,' he said quietly. 'On the other hand, you
Catholics--take the late M. de Guise for instance--have the habit of
erring on the other side, I think, and sometimes trust too far.'

The marquis, without making any answer to this home-thrust, led the way
out, and we followed, being joined at the door of the house by a couple
of armed lackeys, who fell in behind us. We went on foot. The night was
dark, and the prospect out of doors was not cheering. The streets were
wet and dirty, and notwithstanding all our care we fell continually into
pitfalls or over unseen obstacles. Crossing the PARVIS of the cathedral,
which I remembered, we plunged in silence into an obscure street near
the river, and so narrow that the decrepit houses shut out almost
all view of the sky. The gloom of our surroundings, no less than my
ignorance of the errand on which we were bound, filled me with anxiety
and foreboding. My companions keeping strict silence, however, and
taking every precaution to avoid being recognised, I had no choice but
to do likewise.

I could think, and no more. I felt myself borne along by an irresistible
current, whither and for what purpose I could not tell; an experience to
an extent strange at my age the influence of the night and the weather.
Twice we stood aside to let a party of roisterers go by, and the
excessive care M. de Rambouillet evinced on these occasions to avoid
recognition did not tend to reassure me or make me think more lightly of
the unknown business on which I was bound.

Reaching at last an open space, our leader bade us in a low voice be
careful and follow him closely. We did so and crossed in this way and in
single file a narrow plank or wooden bridge; but whether water ran below
or a dry ditch only, I could not determine. My mind was taken up at the
moment with the discovery which I had just made, that the dark building,
looming huge and black before us with a single light twinkling here and
there at great heights, was the Castle of Blois.



CHAPTER XV. VILAIN HERODES.

All the distaste and misliking I had expressed earlier in the day for
the Court of Blois recurred with fresh force in the darkness and gloom;
and though, booted and travel-stained as we were, I did not conceive it
likely that we should be obtruded on the circle about the king, I felt
none the less an oppressive desire to be through with our adventure, and
away from the ill-omened precincts in which I found myself. The darkness
prevented me seeing the faces of my companions; but on M. de Rosny, who
was not quite free himself, I think, from the influences of the time
and place, twitching my sleeve to enforce vigilance, I noted that the
lackeys had ceased to follow us, and that we three were beginning
to ascend a rough staircase cut in the rock. I gathered, though the
darkness limited my view behind as well as in front to a few twinkling
lights, that we were mounting the scarp from the moat; to the side wall
of the castle; and I was not surprised when the marquis muttered to us
to stop, and knocked softly on the wood of a door.

M. de Rosny might have spared the touch he had laid on my sleeve, for by
this time I was fully and painfully sensible of the critical position in
which we stood, and was very little likely to commit an indiscretion. I
trusted he had not done so already! No doubt--it flashed across me while
we waited--he had taken care to safeguard himself. But how often, I
reflected, had all safeguards been set aside and all precautions eluded
by those to whom he was committing himself! Guise had thought himself
secure in this very building, which we were about to enter. Coligny had
received the most absolute of safe-conducts from those to whom we
were apparently bound. The end in either case had been the same--the
confidence of the one proving of no more avail than the wisdom of the
other. What if the King of France thought to make his peace with his
Catholic subjects--offended by the murder of Guise--by a second murder
of one as obnoxious to them as he was precious to their arch-enemy in
the South? Rosny was sagacious indeed; but then I reflected with sudden
misgiving that he was young, ambitious, and bold.

The opening of the door interrupted without putting an end to this
train of apprehension. A faint light shone out; so feebly as to illumine
little more than the stairs at our feet. The marquis entered at once, M.
de Rosny followed, I brought up the rear; and the door was closed by a
man who stood behind it. We found ourselves crowded together at the foot
of a very narrow staircase, which the doorkeeper--a stolid pikeman in a
grey uniform, with a small lanthorn swinging from the crosspiece of
his halberd--signed to us to ascend. I said a word to him, but he only
stared in answer, and M. de Rambouillet, looking back and seeing what I
was about, called to me that it was useless, as the man was a Swiss and
spoke no French.

This did not tend to reassure me; any more than did the chill roughness
of the wall which my hand touched as I groped upwards, or the smell
of bats which invaded my nostrils and suggested that the staircase was
little used and belonged to a part of the castle fitted for dark and
secret doings.

We stumbled in the blackness up the steps, passing one door and then a
second before M. de Rambouillet whispered to us to stand, and knocked
gently at a third.

The secrecy, the darkness, and above all the strange arrangements made
to receive us, filled me with the wildest conjectures. But when the
door opened and we passed one by one into a bare, unfurnished, draughty
gallery, immediately, as I judged, under the tiles, the reality agreed
with no one of my anticipations. The place was a mere garret, without a
hearth, without a single stool. Three windows, of which one was roughly
glazed, while the others were filled with oiled paper, were set in one
wall; the others displaying the stones and mortar without disguise or
ornament. Beside the door through which we had entered stood a silent
figure in the grey uniform I had seen below, his lanthorn on the floor
at his feet. A second door at the farther end of the gallery, which
was full twenty paces long, was guarded in like manner. A couple of
lanthorns stood in the middle of the floor, and that was all.

Inside the door, M. de Rambouillet with his finger on his lip stopped
us, and we stood a little group of three a pace in front of the sentry,
and with the empty room before us. I looked at M. de Rosny, but he was
looking at Rambouillet. The marquis had his back towards me, the sentry
was gazing into vacancy; so that baffled in my attempt to learn anything
from the looks of the other actors in the scene, I fell back on my ears.
The rain dripped outside and the moaning wind rattled the casements; but
mingled with these melancholy sounds--which gained force, as such things
always do, from the circumstances in which we were placed and our own
silence--I fancied I caught the distant hum of voices and music and
laughter. And that, I know not why, brought M. de Guise again to my
mind.

The story of his death, as I had heard it from that accursed monk in the
inn on the Claine, rose up in all its freshness, with all its details.
I started when M. de Rambouillet coughed. I shivered when Rosny shifted
his feet. The silence grew oppressive. Only the stolid men in grey
seemed unmoved, unexpectant; so that I remember wondering whether it was
their nightly duty to keep guard over an empty garret, the floor strewn
with scraps of mortar and ends of tiles.

The interruption, when it came at last, came suddenly. The sentry at the
farther end of the gallery started and fell back a pace. Instantly the
door beside him opened and a man came in, and closing it quickly behind
him, advanced up the room with an air of dignity, which even his strange
appearance and attire could not wholly destroy.

He was of good stature and bearing, about forty years old as I judged,
his wear a dress of violet velvet with black points cut in the extreme
of the fashion. He carried a sword but no ruff, and had a cup and ball
of ivory--a strange toy much in vogue among the idle--suspended from his
wrist by a ribbon. He was lean and somewhat narrow, but so far I found
little fault with him. It was only when my eye reached his face, and
saw it rouged like a woman's and surmounted by a little turban, that a
feeling of scarcely understood disgust seized me, and I said to myself,
'This is the stuff of which kings' minions are made!'

To my surprise, however, M. de Rambouillet went to meet him with the
utmost respect, sweeping the dirty floor with his bonnet, and bowing
to the very ground. The newcomer acknowledged his salute with negligent
kindness. Remarking pleasantly 'You have brought a friend, I think?' he
looked towards us with a smile.

'Yes, sire, he is here,' the marquis answered, stepping aside a little.
And with the word I understood that this was no minion, but the king
himself: Henry, the Third of the name, and the last of the great House
of Valois, which had ruled France by the grace of God for two centuries
and a half! I stared at him, and stared at him, scarcely believing what
I saw. For the first time in my life I was in the presence of the king!

Meanwhile M. de Rosny, to whom he was, of course, no marvel, had gone
forward and knelt on one knee. The king raised him graciously, and with
an action which, viewed apart from his woman's face and silly turban,
seemed royal and fitting. 'This is good of you, Rosny,' he said. 'But it
is only what I expected of you.'

'Sire,' my companion answered, 'your Majesty has no more devoted servant
than myself, unless it be the king my master.'

'By my faith,' Henry answered with energy--'and if I am not a good
churchman, whatever those rascally Parisians say, I am nothing--by my
faith, I think I believe you!'

'If your Majesty would believe me in that and in some other things
also,' M. de Rosny answered, 'it would be very well for France.' Though
he spoke courteously, he threw so much weight and independence into
his words that I thought of the old proverb, 'A good master, a bold
servant.'

'Well, that is what we are here to see,' the king replied. 'But one
tells me one thing,' he went on fretfully, 'and one another, and which
am I to believe?'

'I know nothing of others, sire,' Rosny answered with the same spirit.
'But my master has every claim to be believed. His interest in the
royalty of France is second only to your Majesty's. He is also a king
and a kinsman, and it erks him to see rebels beard you, as has happened
of late.'

'Ay, but the chief of them?' Henry exclaimed, giving way to sudden
excitement and stamping furiously on the floor. 'He will trouble me no
more. Has my brother heard of THAT? Tell me, sir, has that news reached
him?'

'He has heard it, sire.'

'And he approved? He approved, of course?'

'Beyond doubt the man was a traitor,' M. de Rosny answered delicately.
'His life was forfeit, sire. Who can question it?'

'And he has paid the forfeit,' the king rejoined, looking down at
the floor and immediately falling into a moodiness as sudden as his
excitement. His lips moved. He muttered something inaudible, and began
to play absently with his cup and ball, his mind occupied apparently
with a gloomy retrospect. 'M. de Guise, M. de Guise,' he murmured at
last, with a sneer and an accent of hate which told of old humiliations
long remembered. 'Well, damn him, he is dead now. He is dead. But being
dead he yet troubles us. Is not that the verse, father? Ha!' with a
start, 'I was forgetting. But that is the worst wrong he has done me,'
he continued, looking up and growing excited again. 'He has cut me off
from Mother Church. There is hardly a priest comes near me now, and
presently they will excommunicate me. And, as I hope for salvation, the
Church has no more faithful son than me.'

I believe he was on the point, forgetting M. de Rosny's presence there
and his errand, of giving way to unmanly tears, when M. de Rambouillet,
as if by accident, let the heel of his scabbard fall heavily on the
floor. The king started, and passing his hand once or twice across his
brow, seemed to recover himself. 'Well,' he said, 'no doubt we shall
find a way out of our difficulties.'

'If your Majesty,' Rosny answered respectfully, 'would accept the aid my
master proffers, I venture to think that they would vanish the quicker.'

'You think so,' Henry rejoined. 'Well, give me your shoulder. Let us
walk a little.' And, signing to Rambouillet to leave him, he began to
walk up and down with M. de Rosny, talking familiarly with him in an
undertone.

Only such scraps of the conversation as fell from them when they turned
at my end of the gallery now reached me. Patching these together,
however, I managed to understand somewhat. At one turn I heard the king
say, 'But then Turenne offers--' At the next, 'Trust him? Well, I do not
know why I should not. He promises--' Then 'A Republic, Rosny? That
his plan? Pooh! he dare not. He could not. France is a kingdom by the
ordinance of God in my family.'

I gathered from these and other chance words, which I have since
forgotten, that M. de Rosny was pressing the king to accept the help of
the King of Navarre, and warning him against the insidious offers of the
Vicomte de Turenne. The mention of a Republic, however, seemed to excite
his Majesty's wrath rather against Rosny for presuming to refer to such
a thing than against Turenne, to whom he refused to credit it. He paused
near my end of the promenade.

'Prove it!' he said angrily. 'But can you prove it? Can you prove it?
Mind you, I will take no hearsay evidence, sir. Now, there is Turenne's
agent here--you did not know, I dare say, that he had an agent here?'

'You refer, sire, to M. de Bruhl,' Rosny answered, without hesitation.
'I know him, sire.'

'I think you are the devil,' Henry answered, looking curiously at him.
'You seem to know most things. But mind you, my friend, he speaks me
fairly, and I will not take this on hearsay even from your master.
Though,' he added after pausing a moment, 'I love him.'

'And he, your Majesty. He desires only to prove it.'

'Yes, I know, I know,' the king answered fretfully. 'I believes he does.
I believe he does wish me well. But there will be a devil of an outcry
among my people. And Turenne gives fair words too. And I do not know,'
he continued, fidgeting with his cup and ball, 'that it might not suit
me better to agree with him, you see.'

I saw M. de Rosny draw himself up. 'Dare I speak openly to you, sire,'
he said, with less respect and more energy than he had hitherto used.
'As I should to my master?'

'Ay, say what you like,' Henry answered. But he spoke sullenly, and it
seemed to me that he looked less pleasantly at his companion.

'Then I will venture to utter what is in your Majesty's mind,' my patron
answered steadfastly. 'You fear, sire, lest, having accepted my master's
offer and conquered your enemies, you should not be easily rid of him.'

Henry looked relieved. 'Do you call that diplomacy?' he said with a
smile. 'However, what if it be so? What do you say to it? Methinks I
have heard an idle tale about a horse which would hunt a stag; and for
the purpose set a man upon its back.'

'This I say, sire, first,' Rosny answered very earnestly. 'That the King
of Navarre is popular only with one-third of the kingdom, and is only
powerful when united with you. Secondly, sire, it is his interest to
support the royal power, to which he is heir. And, thirdly, it must be
more to your Majesty's honour to accept help from a near kinsman than
from an ordinary subject, and one who, I still maintain, sire, has no
good designs in his mind.'

'The proof' Henry said sharply. 'Give me that!'

'I can give it in a week from this day.'

'It must be no idle tale, mind you,' the king continued suspiciously.

'You shall have Turenne's designs, sire, from one who had them from his
own mouth.'

The king looked startled, but after a pause turned and resumed his walk.
'Well,' he said, 'if you do that, I on my part--'

The rest I lost, for the two passing to the farther end of the gallery,
came to a standstill there, balking my curiosity and Rambouillet's also.
The marquis, indeed, began to betray his impatience, and the great clock
immediately over our heads presently striking the half-hour after ten,
he started and made as if he would have approached the king. He checked
the impulse, however, but still continued to fidget uneasily, losing his
reserve by-and-by so far as to whisper to me that his Majesty would be
missed.

I had been, up to this point, a silent and inactive spectator of a
scene which appealed to my keenest interests and aroused my most ardent
curiosity. Surprise following surprise, I had begun to doubt my own
identity; so little had I expected to find myself first in the presence
of the Most Christian King--and that under circumstances as strange and
bizarre as could well be imagined--and then an authorised witness at
a negotiation upon which the future of all the great land of France
stretching for so many hundred leagues on every side of us, depended. I
say I could scarcely believe in my own identity; or that I was the same
Gaston de Marsac who had slunk, shabby and out-at-elbows, about St. Jean
d'Angely. I tasted the first sweetness of secret power, which men say is
the sweetest of all and the last relinquished; and, the hum of
distant voices and laughter still reaching me at intervals, I began to
understand why we had been admitted with, so much precaution, and to
comprehend the gratification of M. de Rosny when the promise of this
interview first presented to him the hope of effecting so much for his
master and for France.

Now I was to be drawn into the whirlpool itself. I was still travelling
back over the different stages of the adventure which had brought me to
this point, when I was rudely awakened by M. de Rosny calling my name
in a raised voice. Seeing, somewhat late, that he was beckoning to me
to approach, I went forward in a confused and hasty fashion; kneeling
before the king as I had seen him kneel, and then rising to give ear to
his Majesty's commands. Albeit, having expected nothing less than to be
called upon, I was not in the clearest mood to receive them. Nor was my
bearing such as I could have wished it to be.

M. de Rosny tells me that you desire a commission at Court, sir,' the
king said quickly.

'I, sire?' I stammered, scarcely able to believe my ears. I was so
completely taken aback that I could say no more, and I stopped there
with my mouth open.

'There are few things I can deny M. de Rosny,' Henry continued, speaking
very rapidly, 'and I am told that you are a gentleman of birth and
ability. Out of kindness to him, therefore, I grant you a commission to
raise twenty men for my service. Rambouillet,' he continued, raising
his voice slightly, 'you will introduce this gentleman to me publicly
to-morrow, that; I may carry into effect my intention on his behalf. You
may go now, sir. No thanks. And M. de Rosny,' he added, turning to my
companion and speaking with energy, 'have a care for my sake that you
are not recognised as you go. Rambouillet must contrive something to
enable you to leave without peril. I should be desolated if anything
happened to you, my friend, for I could not protect you. I give you my
word if Mendoza or Retz found you in Blois I could not save you from
them unless you recanted.'

'I will not trouble either your Majesty or my conscience,' M. de Rosny
replied, bowing low, 'if my wits can help me.'

'Well, the saints keep you,' the king answered piously, going towards
the door by which he had entered; 'for your master and I have both need
of you. Rambouillet, take care of him as you love me. And come early in
the morning to my closet and tell me how it has fared with him.'

We all stood bowing while he withdrew, and only turned to retire when
the door closed behind him. Burning with indignation and chagrin as
I was at finding myself disposed of in the way I have described, and
pitchforked, whether I would or no, into a service I neither fancied
nor desired, I still managed for the present to restrain myself; and,
permitting my companions to precede me, followed in silence, listening
sullenly to their jubilations. The marquis seemed scarcely less pleased
than M. de Rosny; and as the latter evinced a strong desire to lessen
any jealousy the former might feel, and a generous inclination to
attribute to him a full share of the credit gained, I remained the
only person dissatisfied with the evening's events. We retired from the
chateau with the same precautions which had marked our entrance, and
parting with M. de Rambouillet at the door of our lodging--not without
many protestations of esteem on his part and of gratitude on that of
M. de Rosny--mounted to the first-floor in single file and in silence,
which I was determined not to be the first to break.

Doubtless M. de Rosny knew my thoughts, for, speedily dismissing Maignan
and Simon, who were in waiting, he turned to me without preface. 'Come,
my friend,' he said, laying his hand on my shoulder and looking me in
the face in a way which all but disarmed me at once, 'do not let us
misunderstand one another. You think you have cause to be angry with me.
I cannot suffer that, for the King of Navarre had never greater need of
your services than now.'

'You have played me an unworthy trick, sir,'I answered, thinking he
would cozen me with fair speeches.

'Tut, tut!' he replied. 'You do not understand.'

'I understand well enough,' I answered, with bitterness, 'that, having
done the King of Navarre's work, he would now be rid of me.'

'Have I not told you,' M. de Rosny replied, betraying for the first time
some irritation, 'that he has greater need of your services than ever?
Come, man, be reasonable, or, better still, listen to me.' And turning
from me, he began to walk up and down the room, his hands behind him.
'the King of France--I want to make it as clear to you as possible--'
he said, 'cannot make head against the League without help, and,
willy-nilly, must look for it to the Huguenots whom he has so long
persecuted. The King of Navarre, their acknowledged leader, has offered
that help; and so, to spite my master, and prevent a combination so
happy for France, has M. de Turenne, who would fain raise the faction he
commands to eminence, and knows well how to make his profit out of the
dissensions of his country. Are you clear so far, sir?'

I assented. I was becoming absorbed in spite of myself.

'Very well,' he resumed. 'This evening--never did anything fall out more
happily than Rambouillet's meeting with me--he is a good man!--I
have brought the king to this: that if proof of the selfish nature of
Turenne's designs be laid before him he will hesitate no longer. That
proof exists. A fortnight ago it was here; but it is not here now.'

'That is unlucky!' I exclaimed. I was so much interested in his story,
as well as flattered by the confidence he was placing in me, that my
ill-humour vanished. I went and stood with my shoulder against the
mantelpiece, and he, passing to and fro between me and the light,
continued his tale.

'A word about this proof,' he said. 'It came into the King of Navarre's
hands before its full value was known to us, for that only accrued to
it on M. de Guise's death. A month ago it--this piece of evidence I
mean--was at Chize. A fortnight or so ago it was here in Blois. It
is now, 'M. de Marsac,' he continued, facing me suddenly as he came
opposite me, 'in my house at Rosny.'

I started. 'You mean Mademoiselle de la Vire?' I cried.

'I mean Mademoiselle de la Vire!' he answered, 'who, some month or two
ago, overheard M. de Turenne's plans, and contrived to communicate
with the King of Navarre. Before the latter could arrange a private
interview, however, M. de Turenne got wind of her dangerous knowledge,
and swept her off to Chize. The rest you know, M. de Marsac, if any man
knows it.'

'But what will you do?' I asked. 'She is at Rosny.'

'Maignan, whom I trust implicitly, as far as his lights go, will start
to fetch her to-morrow. At the same hour I start southwards. You, M.
de Marsac, will remain here as my agent, to watch over my interests,
to receive Mademoiselle on her arrival, to secure for her a secret
interview with the king, to guard her while she remains here. Do you
understand?'

Did I understand? I could not find words in which to thank him. My
remorse and gratitude, my sense of the wrong I had done him, and of the
honour he was doing me, were such that I stood mute before him as I had
stood before the king. 'You accept, then?' he said, smiling. 'You do not
deem the adventure beneath you, my friend?'

'I deserve your confidence so little, sir,' I answered, stricken to the
ground, 'that I beg you to speak, while I listen. By attending exactly
to your instructions I may prove worthy of the trust reposed in me. And
only so.'

He embraced me again and again, with a kindness which moved me almost
to tears. 'You are a man after my own heart,' he said, 'and if God wills
I will make your fortune. Now listen, my friend. To-morrow at Court, as
a stranger and a man introduced by Rambouillet, you will be the cynosure
of all eyes. Bear yourself bravely. Pay court to the women, but attach
yourself to no one in particular. Keep aloof from Retz and the Spanish
faction, but beware especially of Bruhl. He alone will have your secret,
and may suspect your design. Mademoiselle should be here in a week;
while she is with you, and until she has seen the king, trust no one,
suspect everyone, fear all things. Consider the battle won only when the
king says, "I am satisfied."'

Much more he told me, which served its purpose and has been forgotten.
Finally he honoured me by bidding me share his pallet with him, that we
might talk without restraint, and that if anything occurred to him in
the night he might communicate it to me.

'But will not Bruhl denounce me as a Huguenot?' I asked him.

'He will not dare to do so,' M. de Rosny answered, 'both as a Huguenot
himself, and as his master's representative; and, further, because it
would displease the king. No, but whatever secret harm one man can
do another, that you have to fear. Maignan, when he returns with
mademoiselle, will leave two men with you; until they come I should
borrow a couple of stout fellows from Rambouillet. Do not go out alone
after dark, and beware of doorways, especially your own.'

A little later, when I thought him asleep, I heard him chuckle; and
rising on my elbow I asked him what it was. 'Oh, it is your affair,'
he answered, still laughing silently, so that I felt the mattress shake
under him. 'I don't envy you one part of your task, my friend.'

'What is that?' I said suspiciously.

'Mademoiselle,' he answered, stifling with difficulty a burst of
laughter. And after that he would not say another word, bad, good, or
indifferent, though I felt the bed shake more than once, and knew that
he was digesting his pleasantry.



CHAPTER XVI. IN THE KING'S CHAMBER.

M. de Rosny had risen from my side and started on his journey when I
opened my eyes in the morning, and awoke to the memory of the task which
had been so strangely imposed upon me; and which might, according as
the events of the next fortnight shaped themselves, raise me to high
position or put an end to my career. He had not forgotten to leave
a souvenir behind him, for I found beside my pillow a handsome
silver-mounted pistol, bearing the letter 'R.' and a coronet; nor had
I more than discovered this instance of his kindness before Simon Fleix
came in to tell me that M. de Rosny had left two hundred crowns in his
hands for me.

'Any message with it?' I asked the lad.

'Only that; he had taken a keepsake in exchange,' Simon answered,
opening the window as he spoke.

In some wonder I began to search, but I could not discover that anything
was missing until I came to put on my doublet, when I found that the
knot of ribbon which mademoiselle had flung to me at my departure from
Rosny was gone from the inside of the breast, where I had pinned it for
safety with a long thorn. The discovery that M. de Rosny had taken this
was displeasing to me on more than one account. In the first place,
whether mademoiselle had merely wished to plague me (as was most
probable) or not, I was loth to lose it, my day for ladies' favours
being past and gone; in the second, I misdoubted the motive which
had led him to purloin it, and tormented myself with thinking of the
different constructions he might put upon it, and the disparaging view
of my trust worthiness which it might lead him to take. I blamed myself
much for my carelessness in leaving it where a chance eye might rest
upon it; and more when, questioning Simon further, I learned that M.
de Rosny had added, while mounting at the door, 'Tell your master, safe
bind, safe find; and a careless lover makes a loose mistress.'

I felt my cheek burn in a manner unbecoming my years while Simon with
some touch of malice repeated this; and I made a vow on the spot, which
I kept until I was tempted to break it, to have no more to do with such
trifles. Meanwhile, I had to make the best of it; and brisking up, and
bidding Simon, who seemed depressed by the baron's departure, brisk up
also, I set about my preparations for making such a figure at Court
as became me: procuring a black velvet suit, and a cap and feather to
match; item, a jewelled clasp to secure the feather; with a yard or two
of lace and two changes of fine linen.

Simon had grown sleek at Rosny, and losing something of the wildness
which had marked him, presented in the dress M. de Rosny had given him
a very creditable appearance; being also, I fancy, the only equerry in
Blois who could write. A groom I engaged on the recommendation of M. de
Rambouillet's master of the horse; and I gave out also that I required a
couple of valets. It needed only an hour under the barber's hands and a
set of new trappings for the Cid to enable me to make a fair show, such
as might be taken to indicate a man of ten or twelve thousand livres a
year.

In this way I expended a hundred and fifteen crowns reflecting that
this was a large sum, and that I must keep some money for play, I was
glad to learn that in the crowded state of the city even men with high
rank were putting up with poor lodging; I determined, therefore, to
combine economy with a scheme which I had in my head by taking the rooms
in which my mother died, with one room below them. This I did, hiring
such furniture as I needed, which was not a great deal. To Simon Fleix,
whose assistance in these matters was invaluable, I passed on much of M.
de Rosny's advice, bidding him ruffle it with the best in his station,
and inciting him to labour for my advancement by promising to make his
fortune whenever my own should be assured. I hoped, indeed, to derive
no little advantage from the quickness of wit; which had attracted M. de
Rosny's attention; although I did not fail to take into account at the
same time that the lad was wayward and fitful, prone at one time to
depression, and at another to giddiness, and equally uncertain in either
mood.

M. de Rambouillet being unable to attend the LEVEE, had appointed me to
wait upon him at six in the evening; at which hour I presented myself at
his lodgings, attended by Simon Fleix. I found him in the midst of
half a dozen gentlemen whose habit it was to attend him upon all public
occasions; and these gallants, greeting me with the same curious and
suspicious glances which I have seen hounds bestow on a strange dog
introduced into their kennel, I was speedily made to feel that it is one
thing to have business at Court, and another to be well received there.

M. de Rambouillet, somewhat to my surprise, did nothing to remove
this impression. On all ordinary occasions a man of stiff and haughty
bearing, and thoroughly disliking, though he could not prevent, the
intrusion of a third party into a transaction which promised an infinity
of credit, he received me so coldly and with so much reserve as for the
moment to dash my spirits and throw me back on myself.

During the journey to the castle, however, which we performed on foot,
attended by half a dozen armed servants bearing torches, I had time to
recall M. de Rosny's advice, and to bethink me of the intimacy which
that great man had permitted me; with so much effect in the way of
heartening me, that as we crossed the courtyard of the castle I
advanced myself, not without some murmuring on the part of others, to
Rambouillet's elbow, considering that as I was attached to him by the
king's command, this was my proper place. I had no desire to quarrel,
however, and persisted for some time in disregarding the nudges and
muttered words which were exchanged round me, and even the efforts which
were made as we mounted the stairs to oust me from my position. But
a young gentleman, who showed himself very forward in these attempts,
presently stumbling against me, I found it necessary to look at him.

'Sir,' he said, in a small and lisping voice, 'you trod on my toe.'

Though I had not done so, I begged his pardon very politely. But as his
only acknowledgment of this courtesy consisted in an attempt to get his
knee in front of mine--we were mounting very slowly, the stairs being
cumbered with a multitude of servants, who stood on either hand--I did
tread on his toe, with a force and directness which made him cry out.

'What is the matter?' Rambouillet asked, looking back hastily.

'Nothing, M. le Marquis,' I answered, pressing on steadfastly.

'Sir,' my young friend said again, in the same lisping voice, 'you trod
on my toe.'

'I believe I did, sir,' I answered.

'You have not yet apologised,' he murmured gently in my ear.

'Nay, there you are wrong,' I rejoined bluntly, 'for it is always my
habit to apologise first and tread afterwards.'

He smiled as at a pleasant joke; and I am bound to say that his bearing
was so admirable that if he had been my son I could have hugged him.
'Good!' he answered. 'No doubt your sword is as sharp as your wits,
sir. I see,' he continued, glancing naively at my old scabbard--he
was himself the very gem of a courtier, a slender youth with a
pink-and-white complexion, a dark line for a moustache, and a pearl-drop
in his ear--'it is longing to be out. Perhaps you will take a turn in
the tennis-court to-morrow?'

'With pleasure, sir,' I answered, 'if you have a father, or your elder
brother is grown up.'

What answer he would have made to this gibe I do not know, for at that
moment we reached the door of the ante-chamber; and this being narrow,
and a sentry in the grey uniform of the Swiss Guard compelling all to
enter in single file, my young friend was forced to fall back, leaving
me free to enter alone, and admire at my leisure a scene at once
brilliant and sombre.

The Court being in mourning for the Queen-mother, black predominated
in the dresses of those present, and set off very finely the gleaming
jewels and gemmed sword-hilts which were worn by the more important
personages. The room was spacious and lofty, hung with arras, and lit by
candles burning in silver sconces; it rang as we entered with the shrill
screaming of a parrot, which was being teased by a group occupying the
farther of the two hearths. Near them play was going on at one table,
and primero at a second. In a corner were three or four ladies, in
a circle about a red-faced, plebeian-looking man, who was playing at
forfeits with one of their number; while the middle of the room
seemed dominated by a middle-sized man with a peculiarly inflamed and
passionate countenance, who, seated on a table, was inveighing against
someone or something in the most violent terms, his language being
interlarded with all kinds of strange and forcible oaths. Two or three
gentlemen, who had the air of being his followers, stood about him,
listening between submission and embarrassment; while beside the nearer
fireplace, but at some distance from him, lounged a nobleman, very
richly dressed, and wearing on his breast the Cross of the Holy Ghost;
who seemed to be the object of his invective, but affecting to ignore it
was engaged in conversation with a companion. A bystander muttering that
Crillon had been drinking, I discovered with immense surprise that the
declaimer on the table was that famous soldier; and I was still looking
at him in wonder--for I had been accustomed all my life to associate
courage with modesty--when, the door of the chamber suddenly opening, a
general movement in that direction took place. Crillon, disregarding all
precedency, sprang from his table and hurried first to the threshold.
The Baron de Biron, on the other hand--for the gentleman by the fire was
no other--waited, in apparent ignorance of the slight which was being
put upon him, until M. de Rambouillet came up; then he went forward
with him. Keeping close to my patron's elbow, I entered the chamber
immediately behind him.

Crillon had already seized upon the king, and, when we entered, was
stating his grievance is a voice not much lower than that which he had
used outside. M. de Biron, seeing this, parted from the marquis, and,
going aside with his former companion, sat down on a trunk against the
wall; while Rambouillet, followed by myself and three or four gentlemen
of his train, advanced to the king, who was standing near the alcove.
His Majesty seeing him, and thankful, I think, for the excuse, waved
Crillon off. 'Tut, tut! You told me all that this morning,' he said
good-naturedly. 'And here is Rambouillet, who has, I hope, something
fresh to tell. Let him speak to me. Sanctus! Don't look at me as if
you would run me through, man. Go and quarrel with someone of your own
size.'

Crillon at this retired grumbling, and Henry, who had just risen from
primero with the Duke of Nevers, nodded to Rambouillet. 'Well, my
friend, anything fresh?' he cried. He was more at his ease and looked
more cheerful than at our former interview; yet still care and suspicion
lurked about his peevish mouth, and in the hollows under his gloomy
eyes. 'A new guest, a new face, or a new game--which have you brought?'

'In a sense, sire, a new face,' the marquis answered, bowing, and
standing somewhat aside that I might have place.

'Well, I cannot say much for the pretty baggage,' quoth the king
quickly. And amid a general titter he extended his hand to me. 'I'll
be sworn, though,' he continued, as I rose from my knee, 'that you want
something, my friend?'

'Nay, sire,' I answered, holding up my head boldly--for Crillon's
behaviour had been a further lesson to me--'I have, by your leave, the
advantage. For your Majesty has supplied me with a new jest. I see many
new faces round me, and I have need only of a new game. If your Majesty
would be pleased to grant me--'

'There! Said I not so?' cried the king, raising his hand with a laugh.
'He does want something. But he seems not undeserving. What does he
pray, Rambouillet?'

'A small command,' M. de Rambouillet answered, readily playing his
part. 'And your Majesty would oblige me if you could grant the Sieur de
Marsac's petition. I will answer for it he is a man of experience.'

'Chut! A small command?' Henry ejaculated, sitting down suddenly in
apparent ill-humour. 'It is what everyone wants--when they do not want
big ones. Still, I suppose,' he continued, taking up a comfit-box, which
lay beside him, and opening it, 'if you do not get what you want for him
you will sulk like the rest, my friend.'

'Your Majesty has never had cause to complain of me,' quoth the Marquis,
forgetting his role, or too proud to play it.

'Tut, tut, tut, tut! Take it, and trouble me no more,' the king
rejoined. 'Will pay for twenty men do for him? Very well then. There,
M. de Marsac,' he continued, nodding at me and yawning, 'your request
is granted. You will find some other pretty baggages over there. Go
to them. And now, Rambouillet,' he went on, resuming his spirits as he
turned to matters of more importance, 'here is a new sweetmeat Zamet has
sent me. I have made Zizi sick with it. Will you try it? It is flavoured
with white mulberries.'

Thus dismissed, I fell back; and stood for a moment, at a loss whither
to turn, in the absence of either friends or acquaintances. His Majesty,
it is true, had bidden me go to certain pretty baggages, meaning,
apparently, five ladies who were seated at the farther end of the room,
diverting themselves with as many cavaliers; but the compactness of this
party, the beauty of the ladies, and the merry peals of laughter which
proceeded from them, telling of a wit and vivacity beyond the ordinary,
sapped the resolution which had borne me well hitherto. I felt that
to attack such a phalanx, even with a king's good will, was beyond the
daring of a Crillon, and I looked round to see whether I could not amuse
myself in some more modest fashion.

The material was not lacking. Crillon, still mouthing out his anger,
strode up and down in front of the trunk on which M. de Biron was
seated; but the latter was, or affected to be, asleep. 'Crillon is for
ever going into rages now,' a courtier beside me whispered.

'Yes,' his fellow answered, with a shrug of the shoulder; 'it is a pity
there is no one to tame him. But he has such a long reach, morbleu!'

'It is not that so much as the fellow's fury,' the first speaker
rejoined under his breath. 'He fights like a mad thing; fencing is no
use against him.'

The other nodded. For a moment the wild idea of winning renown by taming
M. de Crillon occurred to me as I stood alone in the middle of the
floor; but it had not more than passed through my brain when I felt
my elbow touched, and turned to find the young gentleman whom I had
encountered on the stairs standing by my side.

'Sir,' he lisped, in the same small voice, 'I think you trod on my toe a
while ago?'

I stared at him, wondering what he meant by this absurd repetition.
'Well, sir,' I answered drily, 'and if I did?'

'Perhaps,' he said, stroking his chin with his jewelled fingers,
'pending our meeting to-morrow, you would allow me to consider it as a
kind of introduction?'

'If it please you,' I answered, bowing stiffly, and wondering what he
would be at.

'Thank you,' he answered. 'It does please me, under the circumstances;
for there is a lady here who desires a word with you. I took up her
challenge. Will you follow me?'

He bowed, and turned in his languid fashion. I, turning too, saw, with
secret dismay, that the five ladies, referred to above, were all now
gazing at me, as expecting my approach; and this with such sportive
glances as told only too certainly of some plot already in progress or
some trick to be presently played me. Yet I could not see that I had any
choice save to obey, and, following my leader with as much dignity as I
could compass, I presently found myself bowing before the lady who sat
nearest, and who seemed to be the leader of these nymphs.

'Nay, sir,' she said, eyeing me curiously, yet with a merry face, 'I do
not need you; I do not look so high!'

Turning in confusion to the next, I was surprised to see before me the
lady whose lodging I had invaded in my search for Mademoiselle de la
Vire--she, I mean, who, having picked up the velvet; knot, had dropped
it so providentially where Simon Fleix found it. She looked at me
blushing and laughing, and the young gentleman, who had done her errand,
presenting me by name, she asked me, while the others listened, whether
I had found my mistress.

Before I could answer, the lady to whom I had first addressed myself
interposed. 'Stop, sir!' she cried. What is this--a tale, a jest, a
game, or a forfeit?'

'An adventure, madam,' I answered, bowing low.

'Of gallantry, I'll be bound,' she exclaimed. 'Fie, Madame de Bruhl, and
you but six months married!'

Madame de Bruhl protested, laughing, that she had no more to do with it
than Mercury. 'At the worst,' she said, 'I carried the POULETS! But I
can assure you, duchess, this gentleman should be able to tell us a very
fine story, if he would.'

The duchess and all the other ladies clapping their hands at this, and
crying out that the story must and should be told, I found myself in
a prodigious quandary; and one wherein my wits derived as little
assistance as possible from the bright eyes and saucy looks which
environed me. Moreover, the commotion attracting other listeners, I
found my position, while I tried to extricate myself, growing each
moment worse, so that I began to fear that as I had little imagination
I should perforce have to tell the truth. The mere thought of this
threw me into a cold perspiration, lest I should let slip something of
consequence, and prove myself unworthy of the trust which M. de Rosny
had reposed in me.

At the moment when, despairing of extricating myself, I was stooping
over Madame de Bruhl begging her to assist me, I heard, amid the babel
of laughter and raillery which surrounded me--certain of the courtiers
having already formed hands in a circle and sworn I should not depart
without satisfying the ladies--a voice which struck a chord in my
memory. I turned to see who the speaker was, and encountered no other
than M. de Bruhl himself; who, with a flushed and angry face, was
listening to the explanation which a friend was pouring into his ear.
Standing at the moment with my knee on Madame de Bruhl's stool, and
remembering very well the meeting on the stairs, I conceived in a flash
that the man was jealous; but whether he had yet heard my name, or had
any clew to link me with the person who had rescued Mademoiselle de la
Vire from his clutches, I could not tell. Nevertheless his presence led
my thoughts into a new channel. The determination to punish him began to
take form in my mind, and very quickly I regained my composure. Still I
was for giving him one chance. Accordingly I stooped once more to Madame
de Bruhl's ear, and begged her to spare me the embarrassment of telling
my tale. But then, finding her pitiless, as I expected, and the rest of
the company growing more and more insistent, I hardened my heart to go
through with the fantastic notion which had occurred to me.

Indicating by a gesture that I was prepared to obey, and the duchess
crying for a hearing, this was presently obtained, the sudden silence
adding the king himself to my audience. 'What is it?' he asked, coming
up effusively, with a lap-dog in his arms. 'A new scandal, eh?'

'No, sire, a new tale-teller,' the duchess answered pertly. 'If your
Majesty will sit, we shall hear him the sooner.'

He pinched her ear and sat down in the chair which a page presented.
'What! is it Rambouillet's GRISON again?' he said with some surprise.
'Well, fire away, man. But who brought you forward as a Rabelais?'

There was a general cry of 'Madame de Bruhl!' whereat that lady shook
her fair hair, about her face, and cried out for someone to bring her a
mask.

'Ha, I see!' said the king drily, looking pointedly at M. de Bruhl, who
was as black as thunder. 'But go on, man.'

The king's advent, by affording me a brief respite, had enabled me to
collect my thoughts, and, disregarding the ribald interruptions, which
at first were frequent, I began as follows: 'I am no Rabelais, sire,' I
said, 'but droll things happen to the most unlikely. Once upon a time it
was the fortune of a certain swain, whom I will call Dromio, to arrive
in a town not a hundred miles from Blois, having in his company a nymph
of great beauty, who had been entrusted to his care by her parents. He
had not more than lodged her in his apartments, however, before she
was decoyed away by a trick, and borne off against her will by a young
gallant, who had seen her and been smitten by her charms. Dromio,
returning, and finding his mistress gone, gave way to the most poignant
grief. He ran up and down the city, seeking her in every place, and
filling all places with his lamentations; but for a time in vain, until
chance led him to a certain street, where, in an almost incredible
manner, he found a clew to her by discovering underfoot a knot of
velvet, bearing Phyllida's name wrought on it in delicate needlework,
with the words, "A moi!"'

'Sanctus!' cried the king, amid a general murmur of surprise, 'that
is well devised! Proceed, sir. Go on like that, and we will make your
twenty men twenty-five.'

'Dromio,' I continued, 'at sight of this trifle experienced the most
diverse emotions, for while he possessed in it a clew to his mistress's
fate, he had still to use it so as to discover the place whither she had
been hurried. It occurred to him at last to begin his search with the
house before which the knot had lain. Ascending accordingly to the
second-floor, he found there a fair lady reclining on a couch, who
started up in affright at his appearance. He hastened to reassure
her, and to explain the purpose of his coming, and learned after a
conversation with which I will not trouble your Majesty, though it
was sufficiently diverting, that the lady had found the velvet knot in
another part of the town, and had herself dropped it again in front of
her own house.'

'Pourquoi?' the king asked, interrupting me.

'The swain, sire,' I answered, 'was too much taken up with his own
troubles to bear that in mind, even if he learned it. But this delicacy
did not save him from misconception, for as he descended from the lady's
apartment he met her husband on the stairs.'

'Good!' the king exclaimed, rubbing his hands in glee. 'The husband!'
And under cover of the gibe and the courtly laugh which followed it M.
de Bruhl's start of surprise passed unnoticed save by me.

'The husband,' I resumed, 'seeing a stranger descending his staircase,
was for stopping him and learning the reason of his presence; But
Dromio, whose mind was with Phyllida, refused to stop, and, evading his
questions, hurried to the part of the town where the lady had told him
she found the velvet knot. Here, sire, at the corner of a lane running
between garden-walls, he found a great house, barred and gloomy, and
well adapted to the abductor's purpose. Moreover, scanning it on every
side, he presently discovered, tied about the bars of an upper window,
a knot of white linen, the very counterpart of that velvet one which he
bore in his breast. Thus he knew that the nymph was imprisoned in that
room!'

'I will make it twenty-five, as I am a good Churchman!' his Majesty
exclaimed, dropping the little dog he was nursing into the duchess's
lap, and taking out his comfit-box. 'Rambouillet,' he added languidly,
'your friend is a treasure!'

I bowed my acknowledgments, and took occasion as I did so to step a
pace aside, so as to command a view of Madame de Bruhl, as well as her
husband. Hitherto madame, willing to be accounted a part in so pretty
a romance, and ready enough also, unless I was mistaken, to cause her
husband a little mild jealousy, had listened to the story with a certain
sly demureness. But this I foresaw would not last long; and I felt
something like compunction as the moment for striking the blow
approached. But I had now no choice. 'The best is yet to come, sire,' I
went on, 'as I think you will acknowledge in a moment. Dromio, though
he had discovered his mistress, was still in the depths of despair. He
wandered round and round the house, seeking ingress and finding none,
until at length, sunset approaching, and darkness redoubling his fears
for the nymph, fortune took pity on him. As he stood in front of the
house he saw the abductor come out, lighted by two servants. Judge of
his surprise, sire,' I continued, looking round and speaking slowly, to
give full effect to my words, 'when he recognised in him no other than
the husband of the lady who, by picking up and again dropping the velvet
knot, had contributed so much to the success of his search!'

'Ha! these husbands!' cried the king. And slapping his knee in an
ecstasy at his own acuteness, he laughed in his seat till he rolled
again. 'These husbands! Did I not say so?'

The whole Court gave way to like applause, and clapped their hands as
well, so that few save those who stood nearest took notice of Madame de
Bruhl's faint cry, and still fewer understood why she rose up suddenly
from her stool and stood gazing at her husband with burning cheeks and
clenched hands. She took no heed of me, much less of the laughing crowd
round her, but looked only at him with her soul in her eyes. He, after
uttering one hoarse curse, seemed to have no thought for any but me. To
have the knowledge that his own wife had baulked him brought home to him
in this mocking fashion, to find how little a thing had tripped him that
day, to learn how blindly he had played into the hands of fate, above
all to be exposed at once to his wife's resentment and the ridicule of
the Court--for he could not be sure that I should not the next moment
disclose his name--all so wrought on him that for a moment I thought he
would strike me in the presence.

His rage, indeed, did what I had not meant to do. For the king, catching
sight of his face, and remembering that Madame de Bruhl had elicited the
story, screamed suddenly, 'Haro!' and pointed ruthlessly at him with his
finger. After that I had no need to speak, the story leaping from eye to
eye, and every eye settling on Bruhl, who sought in vain to compose his
features. Madame, who surpassed him, as women commonly do surpass men,
in self-control, was the first to recover herself, and sitting down as
quickly as she had risen, confronted alike her husband and her rivals
with a pale smile.

For a moment curiosity and excitement kept all breathless, the eye
alone busy. Then the king laughed mischievously. 'Come, M. de Bruhl,' he
cried, 'perhaps you will finish the tale for us?' And he threw himself
back in his chair, a sneer on his lips.

'Or why not Madame de Bruhl?' said the duchess, with her head on one
side and her eyes glittering over her fan. 'Madame would, I am sure,
tell it so well.'

But madame only shook her head, smiling always that forced smile. For
Bruhl himself, glaring from face to face like a bull about to charge,
I have never seen a man more out of countenance, or more completely
brought to bay. His discomposure, exposed as he was to the ridicule
of all present, was such that the presence in which he stood scarcely
hindered him from some violent attack; and his eyes, which had wandered
from me at the king's word, presently returning to me again, he so far
forgot himself as to raise his hand furiously, uttering at the same time
a savage oath.

The king cried out angrily, 'Have a care, sir!' But Bruhl only heeded
this so far as to thrust aside those who stood round him and push his
way hurriedly through the circle.

'Arnidieu!' cried the king, when he was gone. 'This is fine conduct! I
have half a mind to send after him and have him put where his hot blood
would cool a little. Or--'

He stopped abruptly, his eyes resting on me. The relative positions of
Bruhl and myself as the agents of Rosny and Turenne occurred to him for
the first time, I think, and suggested the idea, perhaps, that I had
laid a trap for him, and that he had fallen into it. At any rate his
face grew darker and darker, and at last, 'A nice kettle of fish this is
you have prepared for us, sir!' he muttered, gazing at me gloomily.

The sudden change in his humour took even courtiers by surprise. Faces
a moment before broad with smiles grew long again. The less important
personages looked uncomfortably at one another, and with one accord
frowned on me. 'If your Majesty would please to hear the end of the
story at another time?' I suggested humbly, beginning to wish with all
my heart that I had never said a word.

'Chut!' he answered, rising, his face still betraying his perturbation,
'Well, be it so. For the present you may go, sir. Duchess, give me
Zizi, and come to my closet. I want you to see my puppies. Retz, my good
friend, do you come too. I have something to say to you. Gentlemen, you
need not wait. It is likely I shall be late.'

And, with the utmost abruptness, he broke up the circle.



CHAPTER XVII. THE JACOBIN MONK.

Had I needed any reminder of the uncertainty of Court favour, or an
instance whence I might learn the lesson of modesty, and so stand in
less danger of presuming on my new and precarious prosperity, I had it
in this episode, and in the demeanour of the company round me. On the
circle breaking up in confusion, I found myself the centre of general
regard, but regard of so dubious a character, the persons who would have
been the first to compliment me had the king retired earlier, standing
farthest aloof now, that I felt myself rather insulted than honoured by
it. One or two, indeed, of the more cautious spirits did approach me;
but it was with the air of men providing against a danger particularly
remote, their half-hearted speeches serving only to fix them in my
memory as belonging to a class, especially abhorrent to me--the class, I
mean, of those who would run at once with the hare and the hounds.

I was rejoiced to find that on one person, and that the one whose
disposition towards me was, next to the king's, of first importance,
this episode had produced a different impression, Feeling, as I made for
the door, a touch on my arm, I turned to find M. de Rambouillet at my
elbow, regarding me with a glance of mingled esteem and amusement; in
fine, with a very different look from that which had been my welcome
earlier in the evening. I was driven to suppose that he was too great a
man, or too sure of his favour with the king, to be swayed by the
petty motives which actuated the Court generally, for he laid his hand
familiarly on my shoulder, and walked on beside me.

'Well my friend,' he said,' you have distinguished yourself finely! I
do not know that I ever remember a pretty woman making more stir in one
evening. But if you are wise you will not go home alone to-night.'

'I have my sword, M. le Marquis,' I answered, somewhat proudly. 'Which
will avail you little against a knife in the back!' he retorted drily.
'What attendance have you?'

'My equerry, Simon Fleix, is on the stairs.'

'Good, so far, but not enough,' he replied, as we reached the head of
the staircase. 'You had better come home with me now, and two or three
of my fellows shall go on to your lodging with you. Do you know, my
friend,' he continued, looking at me keenly, 'you are either a very
clever or a very foolish man?'

I made answer modestly. 'Neither the one, I fear, nor the other, I hope
sir,' I said.

'Well, you have done a very pertinent thing,' he replied, 'for good or
evil. You have let the enemy know what he has to expect, and he is not
one, I warn you, to be despised. But whether you have been very wise or
very foolish in declaring open war remains to be seen.'

'A week will show,' I answered.

He turned and looked at me. 'You take it coolly,' he said.

'I have been knocking about the world for forty years, marquis,' I
rejoined.

He muttered something about Rosny having a good eye, and then stopped to
adjust his cloak. We were by this time in the street. Making me go hand
in hand with him, he requested the other gentlemen to draw their swords;
and the servants being likewise armed and numbering half a score or
more, with pikes and torches, we made up a very formidable party,
and caused, I think, more alarm as we passed through the streets to
Rambouillet's lodging than we had any reason to feel. Not that we had it
all to ourselves, for the attendance at Court that evening being large,
and the circle breaking up as I have described more abruptly than usual,
the vicinity of the castle was in a ferment, and the streets leading
from it were alive with the lights and laughter of parties similar to
our own.

At the door of the marquis's lodging I prepared to take leave of him
with many expressions of gratitude, but he would have me enter and
sit down with him to a light refection, which it was his habit to take
before retiring. Two of his gentlemen sat down with us, and a valet, who
was in his confidence, waiting on us, we made very merry over the scene
in the presence. I learned that M. de Bruhl was far from popular at
Court; but being known to possess some kind of hold over the king, and
enjoying besides a great reputation for recklessness and skill with the
sword, he had played a high part for a length of time, and attached to
himself, especially since the death of Guise, a considerable number of
followers.

'The truth is,' one of the marquis's gentlemen, who was a little heated
with wine, observed, 'there is nothing at this moment which a bold and
unscrupulous man may not win in France!'

'Nor a bold and Christian gentleman for France!' replied M. de
Rambouillet with, some asperity. 'By the way,' he continued, turning
abruptly to the servant, 'where is M. Francois?'

The valet answered that he had not returned with us from the castle. The
Marquis expressed himself annoyed at this, and I gathered, firstly, that
the missing man was his near kinsman, and, secondly, that he was also
the young spark who had been so forward to quarrel with me earlier in
the evening. Determining to refer the matter, should it become pressing,
to Rambouillet for adjustment, I took leave of him, and attended by
two of his servants, whom he kindly transferred to my service for the
present, I started towards my lodging a little before midnight.

The moon had risen while we were at supper, and its light, which
whitened the gables on one side of the street, diffused a glimmer below
sufficient to enable us to avoid the kennel. Seeing this, I bade the
men put out our torch. Frost had set in, and a keen wind was blowing,
so that we were glad to hurry on at a good pace; and the streets being
quite deserted at this late hour, or haunted only by those who had come
to dread the town marshal, we met no one and saw no lights. I fell to
thinking, for my part, of the evening I had spent searching Blois for
Mademoiselle, and of the difference between then and now. Nor did I fail
while on this track to retrace it still farther to the evening of our
arrival at my mother's; whence, as a source, such kindly and gentle
thoughts welled up in my mind as were natural, and the unfailing
affection of that gracious woman required. These, taking the place for
the moment of the anxious calculations and stern purposes which had of
late engrossed me, were only ousted by something which, happening under
my eyes, brought me violently and abruptly to myself.

This was the sudden appearance of three men, who issued one by one from
an alley a score of yards in front of us, and after pausing a second
to look back the way they had come, flitted on in single file along
the street, disappearing, as far as the darkness permitted me to judge,
round a second corner. I by no means liked their appearance, and, as a
scream and the clash of arms rang out next moment from the direction in
which they had gone, I cried lustily to Simon Fleix to follow, and ran
on, believing from the rascals' movements that they were after no good,
but that rather some honest man was like to be sore beset.

On reaching the lane down which they had plunged, however, I paused a
moment, considering not so much its black-ness, which was intense,
the eaves nearly meeting overhead, as the small chance I had of
distinguishing between attackers and attacked. But Simon and the men
overtaking me, and the sounds of a sharp tussle still continuing,
I decided to venture, and plunged into the alley, my left arm well
advanced, with the skirt of my cloak thrown over it, and my sword drawn
back. I shouted as I ran, thinking that the knaves might desist on
hearing me; and this was what happened, for as I arrived on the scene of
action--the farther end of the alley--two men took to their heels, while
of two who remained, one lay at length in the kennel, and another rose
slowly from his knees.

'You are just in time, sir,' the latter said, breathing hard, but
speaking with a preciseness which sounded familiar. 'I am obliged to
you, sir, whoever you are. The villains had got me down, and in a few
minutes more would have made my mother childless. By the way, you have
no light, have you?' he continued, lisping like a woman.

One of M. de Rambouillet's men, who had by this time come up, cried out
that it was Monsieur Francois.

'Yes, blockhead!' the young gentleman answered with the utmost coolness.
'But I asked for a light, not for my name.

'I trust you are not hurt, sir?' I said, putting up my sword.

'Scratched only,' he answered, betraying no surprise on learning who it
was had come up so opportunely; as he no doubt did learn from my voice,
for he continued with a bow, a slight price to pay for the knowledge
that M. de Marsac is as forward on the field as on the stairs.'

I bowed my acknowledgments.

'This fellow,' I said, 'is he much hurt?'

'Tut, tut! I thought I had saved the marshal all trouble, M. Francois
replied. 'Is he not dead, Gil?'

The poor wretch made answer for himself, crying out piteously, and in
a choking voice, for a priest to shrive him. At that moment Simon
Fleix returned with our torch, which he had lighted at the nearest
cross-streets, where there was a brazier, and we saw by this light that
the man was coughing up blood, and might live perhaps half an hour.

'Mordieu! That comes of thrusting too high!' M. Francois muttered,
regretfully. An inch lower, and there would have been none of this
trouble! I suppose somebody must fetch one. Gil,' he continued, 'run,
man, to the sacristy in the Rue St. Denys, and get a Father. Or--stay!
Help to lift him under the lee of the wall there. The wind cuts like a
knife here.'

The street being on the slope of the hill, the lower part of the house
nearest us stood a few feet from the ground, on wooden piles, and the
space underneath it, being enclosed at the back and sides, was used as a
cart-house. The servants moved the dying man into this rude shelter, and
I accompanied them, being unwilling to leave the young gentleman alone.
Not wishing, however, to seem to interfere, I walked to the farther end,
and sat down on the shaft of a cart, whence I idly admired the strange
aspect of the group I had left, as the glare of the torch brought now
one and now another into prominence, and sometimes shone on M. Francois'
jewelled fingers toying with his tiny moustache, and sometimes on the
writhing features of the man at his feet.

On a sudden, and before Gil had started on his errand, I saw there was
a priest among them. I had not seen him enter, nor had I any idea whence
he came. My first impression was only that here was a priest, and that
he was looking at me--not at the man craving his assistance on the
floor, or at those who stood round him, but at me, who sat away in the
shadow beyond the ring of light!

This was surprising; but a second glance explained it, for then I saw
that he was the Jacobin monk who had haunted my mother's dying hours.
And, amazed as much at this strange RENCONTRE as at the man's boldness,
I sprang up and strode forwards, forgetting, in an impulse of righteous
anger, the office he came to do. And this the more as his face, still
turned to me, seemed instinct to my eyes with triumphant malice. As I
moved towards him, however, with a fierce exclamation on my lips, he
suddenly dropped his eyes and knelt. Immediately M. Francois cried
'Hush!' and the men turned to me with scandalised faces. I fell back.
Yet even then, whispering on his knees by the dying man, the knave was
thinking, I felt sure, of me, glorying at once in his immunity and the
power it gave him to tantalise me without fear.

I determined, whatever the result, to intercept him when all was over;
and on the man dying a few minutes later, I walked resolutely to the
open side of the shed, thinking it likely he might try to slip away as
mysteriously as he had come. He stood a moment speaking to M. Francois,
however, and then, accompanied by him, advanced boldly to meet me, a
lean smile on his face.

'Father Antoine,' M. d'Agen said politely,' tells me that he knows
you, M. de Marsac, and desires to speak to you, MAL-A-PROPOS as is the
occasion.'

'And I to him,' I answered, trembling with rage, and only restraining
by an effort the impulse which would have had me dash my hand in the
priest's pale, smirking face. 'I have waited long for this moment,' I
continued, eyeing him steadily, as M. Francois withdrew out of hearing,
'and had you tried to avoid me, I would have dragged you back, though
all your tribe were here to protect you.'

His presence so maddened me that I scarcely knew what I said. I felt my
breath come quickly, I felt the blood surge to my head, and it was
with difficulty I restrained myself when he answered with well-affected
sanctity, 'Like mother, like son, I fear, sir. Huguenots both.'

I choked with rage. What!' I said, 'you dare to threaten me as you
threatened my mother? Fool! know that only to-day for the purpose of
discovering and punishing you I took the rooms in which my mother died.'

'I know it,' he answered quietly. And then in a second, as by magic, he
altered his demeanour completely, raising his head and looking me in the
face. 'That, and so much besides, I know,' he continued, giving me, to
my astonishment, frown for frown, 'that if you will listen to me for a
moment, M. de Marsac, and listen quietly, I will convince you that the
folly is not on my side.'

Amazed at his new manner, in which there was none of the madness that
had marked him at our first meeting, but a strange air of authority,
unlike anything I had associated with him before, I signed to him to
proceed.

'You think that I am in your power?' he said, smiling.

'I think,' I retorted swiftly, 'that, escaping me now, you will have at
your heels henceforth a worse enemy than even your own sins.'

'Just so,' he answered, nodding. 'Well, I am going to show you that
the reverse is the case; and that you are as completely in my hands, to
spare or to break, as this straw. In the first place, you are here in
Blois, a Huguenot!'

'Chut!' I exclaimed contemptuously, affecting a confidence I was far
from feeling. 'A little while back that might have availed you. But we
are in Blois, not Paris. It is not far to the Loire, and you have to
deal with a man now, not with a woman. It is you who have cause to
tremble, not I.'

'You think to be protected,' he answered with a sour smile, 'even on
this side of the Loire, I see. But one word to the Pope's Legate, or to
the Duke of Nevers, and you would see the inside of a dungeon, if not
worse. For the king--'

'King or no king!' I answered, interrupting him with more assurance than
I felt, seeing that I remembered only too well Henry's remark that Rosny
must not look to him for protection, 'I fear you not a whit! And that
reminds me. I have heard you talk treason--rank, black treason, priest,
as ever sent man to rope, and I will give you up. By heaven I will!' I
cried, my rage increasing, as I discerned, more and more clearly, the
dangerous hold he had over me. 'You have threatened me! One word, and I
will send you to the gallows!'

'Sh!' he answered, indicating M. Francois by, a gesture of the hand.
'For your own sake, not mine. This is fine talking, but you have not
yet heard all I know. Would you like to hear how you have spent the last
month? Two days after Christmas, M. de Marsac, you left Chize with a
young lady--I can give you her name, if you please. Four days afterwards
you reached Blois, and took her to your mother's lodging. Next morning
she left you for M. de Bruhl. Two days later you tracked her to a house
in the Ruelle d'Arcy, and freed her, but lost her in the moment of
victory. Then you stayed in Blois until your mother's death, going a day
or two later to M. de Rosny's house by Mantes, where mademoiselle still
is. Yesterday you arrived in Blois with M. de Rosny; you went to his
lodging; you--'

'Proceed, I muttered, leaning forward. Under cover of my cloak I drew my
dagger half-way from its sheath. 'Proceed, sir, I pray,' I repeated with
dry lips.

'You slept there,' he continued, holding his ground, but shuddering
slightly, either from cold or because he perceived my movement and read
my design in my eyes.

'This morning you remained here in attendance on M. de Rambouillet.'

For the moment I breathed freely again, perceiving that though he knew
much, the one thing on which M. de Rosny's design turned had escaped
him. The secret interview with the king, which compromised alike Henry
himself and M. de Rambouillet, had apparently passed unnoticed and
unsuspected. With a sigh of intense relief I slid back the dagger, which
I had fully made up my mind to use had he known all, and drew my cloak
round me with a shrug of feigned indifference. I sweated to think what
he did know, but our interview with the king having escaped him, I
breathed again.

'Well, sir,' I said curtly, 'I have listened. And now, what is the
purpose of all this?'

'My purpose?' he answered, his eyes glittering. 'To show you that you
are in my power. You are the agent of M. de Rosny. I, the agent, however
humble, of the Holy Catholic League. Of your movements I know all. What
do you know of mine?'

'Knowledge,' I made grim answer, 'is not everything, sir priest.'

'It is more than it was,' he said, smiling his thin-lipped smile. 'It is
going to be more than it is. And I know much--about you, M. de Marsac.'

'You know too much!' I retorted, feeling his covert threats close round
me like the folds of some great serpent. 'But you are imprudent, I
think. Will you tell me what is to prevent me striking you through where
you stand, and ridding myself at a blow of so much knowledge?'

'The presence of three men, M. de Marsac,' he answered lightly, waving
his hand towards M. Francois and the others, 'every one of whom would
give you up to justice. You forget that you are north of the Loire,
and that priests are not to be massacred here with impunity, as in your
lawless south-country. However, enough. The night is cold, and M. d'Agen
grows suspicious as well as impatient. We have, perhaps, spoken too
long already. Permit me--he bowed and drew back a step--'to resume this
discussion to-morrow.'

Despite his politeness and the hollow civility with which he thus
sought; to close the interview, the light of triumph which shone in
his eyes, as the glare of the torch fell athwart them, no less than the
assured tone of his voice, told me clearly that he knew his power.
He seemed, indeed, transformed: no longer a slinking, peaceful clerk,
preying on a woman's fears, but a bold and crafty schemer, skilled and
unscrupulous, possessed of hidden knowledge and hidden resources; the
personification of evil intellect. For a moment, knowing all I knew, and
particularly the responsibilities which lay before me, and the interests
committed to my hands, I quailed, confessing myself unequal to him.
I forgot the righteous vengeance I owed him; I cried out helplessly
against the ill-fortune which had brought him across my path. I saw
myself enmeshed and fettered beyond hope of escape, and by an effort
only controlled the despair I felt.

'To-morrow?' I muttered hoarsely. 'At what time?'

He shook his head with a cunning smile. 'A thousand thanks, but I will
settle that myself!' he answered. 'Au revoir!' and uttering a word of
leave-taking to M. Francois d'Agen, he blessed the two servants, and
went out into the night.



CHAPTER XVIII. THE OFFER OF THE LEAGUE.

When the last sound of his footsteps died away, I awoke as from an evil
dream, and becoming conscious of the presence of M. Francois and the
servants, recollected mechanically that I owed the former an apology for
my discourtesy in keeping him standing in the cold. I began to offer it;
but my distress and confusion of mind were such that in the middle of a
set phrase I broke off, and stood looking fixedly at him, my trouble so
plain that he asked me civilly if anything ailed me.

'No,' I answered, turning from him impatiently; 'nothing, nothing, sir.
Or tell me,' I continued, with an abrupt change of mind, 'who is that;
who has just left us?'

'Father Antoine, do you mean?'

'Ay, Father Antoine, Father Judas, call him what you like,' I rejoined
bitterly.

'Then if you leave the choice to me,' M. Francois answered with grave
politeness, 'I would rather call him something more pleasant, M. de
Marsac--James or John, let us say. For there is little said here which
does not come back to him. If walls have ears, the walls of Blois are
in his pay. But I thought you knew him,' he continued. 'He is secretary,
confidant, chaplain, what you will, to Cardinal Retz, and one of those
whom--in your ear--greater men court and more powerful men lean on. If I
had to choose between them, I would rather cross M. de Crillon.'

'I am obliged to you,' I muttered, checked as much by his manner as his
words.

'Not at all,' he answered more lightly. 'Any information I have is at
your disposal.'

However, I saw the imprudence of venturing farther, and hastened to
take leave of him, persuading him to allow one of M. de Rambouillet's
servants to accompany him home. He said that he should call on me in the
morning; and forcing myself to answer him in a suitable manner, I saw
him depart one way, and myself, accompanied by Simon Fleix, went off
another. My feet were frozen with long standing--I think the corpse we
left was scarce colder--but my head was hot with feverish doubts and
fears. The moon had sunk and the streets were dark. Our torch had burned
out, and we had no light. But where my followers saw only blackness and
vacancy, I saw an evil smile and a lean visage fraught with menace and
exultation.

For the more closely I directed my mind to the position in which I
stood, the graver it seemed. Pitted against Bruhl alone, amid strange
surroundings and in an atmosphere of Court intrigue, I had thought my
task sufficiently difficult and the disadvantages under which I laboured
sufficiently serious before this interview. Conscious of a certain
rustiness and a distaste for finesse, with resources so inferior to
Bruhl's that even M. de Rosny's liberality had not done much to make up
the difference, I had accepted the post offered me rather readily than
sanguinely; with joy, seeing that it held out the hope of high reward,
but with no certain expectation of success. Still, matched with a man of
violent and headstrong character, I had seen no reason to despair; nor
any why I might not arrange the secret meeting between the king and
mademoiselle with safety, and conduct to its end an intrigue simple and
unsuspected, and requiring for its execution rather courage and caution
than address or experience.

Now, however, I found that Bruhl was not my only or my most dangerous
antagonist. Another was in the field--or, to speak more correctly, was
waiting outside the arena, ready to snatch the prize when we should have
disabled one another, From a dream of Bruhl and myself as engaged in
a competition for the king's favour, wherein neither could expose the
other nor appeal even in the last resort to the joint-enemies of his
Majesty and ourselves, I awoke to a very different state of things; I
awoke to find those enemies the masters of the situation, possessed of
the clue to our plans, and permitting them only as long as they seemed
to threaten no serious peril to themselves.

No discovery could be more mortifying or more fraught with terror. The
perspiration stood on my brow as I recalled the warning which M. de
Rosny had uttered against Cardinal Retz, or noted down the various
points of knowledge which were in Father Antoine's possession. He knew
every event of the last month, with one exception, and could tell, I
verily believed, how many crowns I had in my pouch. Conceding this, and
the secret sources of information he must possess, what hope had I of
keeping my future movements from him? Mademoiselle's arrival would be
known to him before she had well passed the gates; nor was it likely,
or even possible, that I should again succeed in reaching the king's
presence untraced and unsuspected. En fin, I saw myself, equally with
Bruhl, a puppet in this man's hands, my goings out and my comings in
watched and reported to him, his mercy the only bar between myself
and destruction. At any moment I might be arrested as a Huguenot, the
enterprise in which I was engaged ruined, and Mademoiselle de la Vire
exposed to the violence of Bruhl or the equally dangerous intrigues of
the League.

Under these circumstances I fancied sleep impossible; but habit and
weariness are strong persuaders, and when I reached my lodging I slept
long and soundly, as became a man who had looked danger in the face more
than once. The morning light too brought an accession both of courage
and hope. I reflected on the misery of my condition at St. Jean
d'Angely, without friends or resources, and driven to herd with such
a man as Fresnoy. And telling myself that the gold crowns which M. de
Rosny had lavished upon me were not for nothing, nor the more precious
friendship with which he had honoured me a gift that called for no
return, I rose with new spirit and a countenance which threw Simon
Fleix who had seen me lie down the picture of despair--into the utmost
astonishment.

'You have had good dreams,' he said, eyeing me jealously and with a
disturbed air.

'I had a very evil one last night,' I answered lightly, wondering a
little why he looked at me so, and why he seemed to resent my return
to hopefulness and courage. I might have followed this train of thought
further with advantage, since I possessed a clue to his state of mind;
but at that moment a summons at the door called him away to it, and
he presently ushered in M. d'Agen, who, saluting me with punctilious
politeness, had not said fifty words before he introduced the subject
of his toe--no longer, however, in a hostile spirit, but as the
happy medium which had led him to recognise the worth and sterling
qualities--so he was pleased to say--of his preserver.

I was delighted to find him in this frame of mind, and told him frankly
that the friendship with which his kinsman, M. de Rambouillet, honoured
me would prevent me giving him satisfaction save in the last resort.
He replied that the service I had done him was such as to render this
immaterial, unless I had myself cause of offence; which I was forward to
deny.

We were paying one another compliments after this fashion, while I
regarded him with the interest which the middle-aged bestow on the young
and gallant in whom they see their own youth and hopes mirrored, when
the door was again opened, and after a moment's pause admitted, equally,
I think, to the disgust of M. Francois, and myself, the form of Father
Antoine.

Seldom have two men more diverse stood, I believe, in a room together;
seldom has any greater contrast been presented to a man's eyes than that
opened to mine on this occasion. On the one side the gay young spark,
with his short cloak, his fine suit; of black-and-silver, his trim
limbs and jewelled hilt and chased comfit-box; on the other, the tall,
stooping monk, lean-jawed and bright-eyed, whose gown hung about him in
coarse, ungainly folds. And M. Francois' sentiment on first seeing the
other was certainly dislike. Is spite of this, however, he bestowed a
greeting on the new-comer which evidenced a secret awe, and in other
ways showed so plain a desire to please, that I felt my fears of the
priest return in force. I reflected that the talents which in such a
garb could win the respect of M. Francois d'Agen--a brilliant star among
the younger courtiers, and one of a class much given to thinking scorn
of their fathers' roughness--must be both great and formidable; and,
so considering, I received the monk with a distant courtesy which I had
once little thought to extend to him. I put aside for the moment the
private grudge I bore him with so much justice, and remembered only the
burden which lay on me in my contest with him.

I conjectured without difficulty that he chose to come at this time,
when M. Francois was with me, out of a cunning regard to his own safety;
and I was not surprised when M. Francois, beginning to make his adieux,
Father Antoine begged him to wait below, adding that he had something
of importance to communicate. He advanced his request in terms of
politeness bordering on humility; but I could clearly see that, in
assenting to it, M. d'Agen bowed to a will stronger than his own, and
would, had he dared to follow his own bent, have given a very different
answer. As it was he retired--nominally to give an order to his
lackey--with a species of impatient self-restraint which it was not
difficult to construe.

Left alone with me, and assured that we had no listeners, the monk was
not slow in coming to the point.

'You have thought over what I told you last night?' he said brusquely,
dropping in a moment the suave manner which he had maintained in M.
Francois's presence.

I replied coldly that I had.

'And you understand the position?' he continued quickly, looking at me
from under his brows as he stood before me, with one clenched fist on
the table. 'Or shall I tell you more? Shall I tell you how poor and
despised you were some weeks ago, M. de Marsac--you who now go in
velvet, and have three men at your back? Or whose gold it is has brought
you here, and made you, this? Chut! Do not let us trifle. You are here
as the secret agent of the King of Navarre. It is my business to learn
your plans and his intentions, and I propose to do so.'

'Well?' I said.

'I am prepared to buy them,' he answered; and his eyes sparkled as he
spoke, with a greed which set me yet more on my guard.

'For whom?' I asked. Having made up my mind that I must use the same
weapons as my adversary, I reflected that to express indignation, such
as might become a young man new to the world, could, help me not a whit.
'For whom?' I repeated, seeing that he hesitated.

'That is my business,' he replied slowly.

'You want to know too much and tell too little,' I retorted, yawning.

'And you are playing with me,' he cried, looking at me suddenly, with so
piercing a gaze and so dark a countenance that I checked a shudder with
difficulty. 'So much the worse for you, so much the worse for you!' he
continued fiercely. 'I am here to buy the information you hold, but if
you will not sell, there is another way. At an hour's notice I can ruin
your plans, and send you to a dungeon! You are like a fish caught in a
net not yet drawn. It thrusts its nose this way and that, and touches
the mesh, but is slow to take the alarm until the net is drawn--and then
it is too late. So it is with you, and so it is,' he added, falling
into the ecstatic mood which marked him at times, and left me in doubt
whether he were all knave or in part enthusiast, 'with all those who set
themselves against St. Peter and his Church!'

'I have heard you say much the same of the King of France,' I said
derisively.

'You trust in him?' he retorted, his eyes gleaming. 'You have been
up there, and seen his crowded chamber, and counted his forty-five
gentlemen and his grey-coated Swiss? I tell you the splendour you saw
was a dream, and will vanish as a dream. The man's strength and his
glory shall go from him, and that soon. Have you no eyes to see that
he is beside the question? There are but two powers in France--the Holy
Union, which still prevails, and the accursed Huguenot; and between them
is the battle.'

'Now you are telling me more,' I said.

He grew sober in a moment, looking at me with a vicious anger hard to
describe.

'Tut tut,' he said, showing his yellow teeth, 'the dead tell no tales.
And for Henry of Valois, he so loves a monk that you might better accuse
his mistress. But for you, I have only to cry "Ho! a Huguenot and a
spy!" and though he loved you more than he loved Quelus or Maugiron, he
dare not stretch out a finger to save you!'

I knew that he spoke the truth, and with difficulty maintained the air
of indifference with which I had entered on the interview.

'But what if I leave Blois?' I ventured, merely to see what he would
say.

He laughed. 'You cannot,' he answered. 'The net is round you, M. de
Marsac, and there are those at every gate who know you and have their
instructions. I can destroy you, but I would fain have your information,
and for that I will pay you five hundred crowns and let you go.'

'To fall into the hands of the King of Navarre?'

'He will disown you, in any case,' he answered eagerly. 'He had that
in his mind, my friend, when he selected an agent so obscure. He will
disown you. Ah, mon Dieu! had I been an hour quicker I had caught
Rosny--Rosny himself!'

'There is one thing lacking still,' I replied. 'How am I to be sure
that, when I have told you what I know, you will pay me the money or let
me go?'

'I will swear to it!' he answered earnestly, deceived into thinking I
was about to surrender. 'I will give you my oath, M. de Marsac!'

'I would as soon have your shoe-lace!' I exclaimed, the indignation I
could not entirely repress finding vent in that phrase. 'A Churchman's
vow is worth a candle--or a candle and a half, is it?' I continued
ironically. 'I must have some security a great deal more substantial
than that, father.'

'What?' he asked, looking at me gloomily.

Seeing an opening, I cudgelled my brains to think of any condition
which, being fulfilled, might turn the table on him and place him in my
power. But his position was so strong, or my wits so weak, that nothing
occurred to me at the time, and I sat looking at, him, my mind gradually
passing from the possibility of escape to the actual danger in which
I stood, and which encompassed also Simon Fleix, and, in a degree,
doubtless, M. de Rambouillet. In four or five days, too, Mademoiselle de
la Vire would arrive. I wondered if I could send any warning to her;
and then, again, I doubted the wisdom of interfering with M. de Rosny's
plans, the more as Maignan, who had gone to fetch mademoiselle, was of a
kind to disregard any orders save his master's.

'Well!' said the monk, impatiently recalling me to myself, 'what
security do you want?'

'I am not quite sure at this moment,' I made answer slowly. 'I am in a
difficult position. I must have some time to consider.'

'And to rid yourself of me, if it be possible,' he said with irony. 'I
quite understand. But I warn you that you are watched; and that wherever
you go and whatever you do, eyes which are mine are upon you.'

'I, too, understand,' I said coolly.

He stood awhile uncertain, regarding me with mingled doubt and
malevolence, tortured on the one hand by fear of losing the prize if
he granted delay, on the other of failing as utterly if he exerted his
power and did not succeed in subduing my resolution. I watched him, too,
and gauging his eagerness and the value of the stake for which he was
striving by the strength of his emotions, drew small comfort from the
sight. More than once it had occurred to me, and now it occurred to me
again, to extricate myself by a blow. But a natural reluctance to strike
an unarmed man, however vile and knavish, and the belief that he had
not trusted himself in my power without taking the fullest precautions,
withheld me. When he grudgingly, and with many dark threats, proposed to
wait three days--and not an hour more--for my answer, I accepted; for I
saw no other alternative open. And on these terms, but not without
some short discussion, we parted, and I heard his stealthy footstep go
sneaking down the stairs.



CHAPTER XIX. MEN CALL IT CHANCE.

If I were telling more than the truth, or had it in my mind to embellish
my adventures, I could, doubtless, by the exercise of a little ingenuity
make it appear that I owed my escape from Father Antoine's meshes to
my own craft; and tell, en fin, as pretty a story of plots and
counterplots as M. de Brantome has ever woven. Having no desire,
however, to magnify myself and, at this time of day, scarcely any
reason, I am fain to confess that the reverse was the case; and that
while no man ever did less to free himself than I did, my adversary
retained his grasp to the end, and had surely, but for a strange
interposition, effected my ruin. How relief came, and from what quarter,
I might defy the most ingenious person, after reading my memoirs to this
point, to say; and this not so much by reason of any subtle device, as
because the hand of Providence was for once directly manifest.

The three days of grace which the priest had granted I passed in anxious
but futile search for some means of escape, every plan I conceived dying
stillborn, and not the least of my miseries lying in the fact that I
could discern no better course than still to sit and think, and seemed
doomed to perpetual inaction. M. de Rambouillet being a strict Catholic,
though in all other respects a patriotic man, I knew better than to have
recourse to him; and the priest's influence over M. d'Agen I had myself
witnessed. For similar reasons I rejected the idea of applying to the
king; and this exhausting the list of those on whom I had any claim, I
found myself thrown on my own resources, which seemed limited--my wits
failing me at this pinch--to my sword and Simon Fleix.

Assured that I must break out of Blois if I would save not myself only,
but others more precious because entrusted to my charge, I thought it no
disgrace to appeal to Simon; describing in a lively fashion the danger
which threatened us, and inciting the lad by every argument which I
thought likely to have weight with him to devise some way of escape.

Now is the time, my friend,' I said, 'to show your wits, and prove that
M. de Rosny, who said you had a cunning above the ordinary, was right.
If your brain can ever save your head, now is the time! For I tell you
plainly, if you cannot find some way to outmanoeuvre this villain before
to-morrow, I am spent. You can judge for yourself what chance you will
have of going free.'

I paused at that, waiting for him to make some suggestion. To my chagrin
he remained silent, leaning his head on his hand, and studying the
table with his eyes in a sullen fashion; so that I began to regret
the condescension I had evinced in letting him be seated, and found it
necessary to remind him that he had taken service with me, and must do
my bidding.

'Well,' he said morosely, and without looking up, 'I am ready to do it.
But I do not like priests, and this one least of all. I know him, and I
will not meddle with him.'

'You will not meddle with him?' I cried, almost beside myself with
dismay.

'No, I won't,' he replied, retaining his listless attitude. 'I know him,
and I am afraid of him. I am no match for him.'

'Then M. de Rosny was wrong, was he?' I said, giving way to my anger.

'If it please you,' he answered pertly.

This was too much for me. My riding-switch lay handy, and I snatched
it up. Before he knew what I would be at, I fell upon him, and gave him
such a sound wholesome drubbing as speedily brought him to his senses.
When he cried for mercy--which he did not for a good space, being still
possessed by the peevish devil which had ridden him ever since his
departure from Rosny--I put it to him again whether M. de Rosny was not
right. When he at last admitted this, but not till then, I threw the
whip away and let him go, but did not cease to reproach him as he
deserved.

'Did you think,' I said, 'that I was going to be ruined because you
would not use your lazy brains? That I was going to sit still, and let
you sulk, while mademoiselle walked blindfold into the toils? Not at
all, my friend!'

'Mademoiselle!' he exclaimed, looking at me with a sudden change of
countenance, end ceasing to rub himself and scowl, as he had been doing.
'She is not here, and is in no danger.'

'She will be here to-morrow, or the next day,' I said.

You did not tell me that!' he replied, his eyes glittering. 'Does Father
Antoine know it?'

'He will know it the moment she enters the town,' I answered.

Noting the change which the introduction of mademoiselle's name into the
affair had wrought in him, I felt something like humiliation. But at the
moment I had no choice; it was my business to use such instruments as
came to my hand, and not, mademoiselle's safety being at stake, to pick
and choose too nicely. In a few minutes our positions were reversed. The
lad had grown as hot as I cold, as keenly excited as I critical. When
he presently came to a stand in front of me, I saw a strange likeness
between his face and the priest's; nor was I astonished when he
presently made just such a proposal as I should have expected from
Father Antoine himself.

'There is only one thing for it,' he muttered, trembling all over. 'He
must be got rid of!'

'Fine talking!' I said, contemptuously. 'If he were a soldier he might
be brought to it. But he is a priest, my friend, and does not fight.'

'Fight? Who wants him to fight?' the lad answered, his face dark, his
hands moving restlessly. 'It is the easier done. A blow in the back, and
he will trouble us no more.'

'Who is to strike it?' I asked drily.

Simon trembled and hesitated; but presently, heaving a deep sigh, he
said, 'I will.'

'It might not be difficult,' I muttered, thinking it over.

'It would be easy,' he answered under his breath. His eyes shone, his
lips were white, and his long dark hair hung wet over his forehead.

I reflected, and the longer I did so the more feasible seemed the
suggestion. A single word, and I might sweep from my path the man whose
existence threatened mine; who would not meet me fairly, but, working
against me darkly and treacherously, deserved no better treatment at my
hands than that which a detected spy receives. He had wronged my mother;
he would fain destroy my friends!

And, doubtless, I shall be blamed by some and ridiculed by more for
indulging in scruples at such a time. But I have all my life long been
prejudiced against that form of underhand violence which I have heard
old men contend came into fashion in our country in modern times, and
which certainly seems to be alien from the French character. Without
judging others too harshly, or saying that the poniard is never
excusable--for then might some wrongs done to women and the helpless
go without remedy--I have set my face against its use as unworthy of a
soldier. At the time, moreover, of which I am now writing the extent to
which our enemies had lately resorted to it tended to fix this feeling
with peculiar firmness in my mind; and, but for the very desperate
dilemma in which I stood at the moment--and not I alone--I do not think
that I should have entertained Simon's proposal for a minute.

As it was, I presently answered him in a way which left him in no doubt
of my sentiments. 'Simon, my friend,' I said--and I remember I was a
little moved--'you have something still to learn, both as a soldier and
a Huguenot. Neither the one nor the other strikes at the back.'

'But if he will not fight?' the lad retorted rebelliously. 'What then?'

It was so clear that our adversary gained an unfair advantage in this
way that I could not answer the question. I let it pass, therefore, and
merely repeating my former injunction, bade Simon think out another way.

He promised reluctantly to do so, and, after spending some moments in
thought, went out to learn whether the house was being watched.

When he returned, his countenance wore so new an expression that I saw
at once that something had happened. He did not meet my eye, however,
and did not explain, but made as if he would go out again, with
something of confusion in his manner. Before finally disappearing,
however, he seemed to change his mind once more; for, marching up to me
where I stood eyeing him with the utmost astonishment, he stopped before
me, and suddenly drawing out his hand, thrust something into mine.

'What is it, man?' I said mechanically.

'Look!' he answered rudely, breaking silence for the first time. 'You
should know. Why ask me? What have I to do with it?'

I looked then, and saw that he had given me a knot of velvet precisely
similar is shape, size, and material to that well-remembered one which
had aided me so opportunely in my search for mademoiselle. This differed
from that a little in colour, but in nothing else, the fashion of the
bow being the same, and one lappet hearing the initials 'C. d. l. V.,'
while the other had the words, 'A moi.' I gazed at it in wonder. 'But,
Simon,' I said, 'what does it mean? Where did you get it?'

'Where should I get it?' he answered jealously. Then, seeming to
recollect himself, he changed his tone. 'A woman gave it to me in the
street,' he said.

I asked him what woman.

'How should I know?' he answered, his eyes gleaming with anger. 'It was
a woman in a mask.'

'Was it Fanchette?' I said sternly.

'It might have been. I do not know,' he responded.

I concluded at first that mademoiselle and her escort had arrived in the
outskirts of the city, and that Maignan had justified his reputation
for discretion by sending in to learn from me whether the way was clear
before he entered. In this notion I was partly confirmed and partly
shaken by the accompanying message; which Simon, from whom every scrap
of information had to be dragged as blood from a stone, presently
delivered.

'You are to meet the sender half an hour after sunset to-morrow
evening,' he said, 'on the Parvis at the north-east corner of the
cathedral.'

'To-morrow evening?'

'Yes, when else?' the lad answered ungraciously. 'I said to-morrow
evening.'

I thought this strange. I could understand why Maignan should prefer to
keep his charge outside the walls until he heard from me, but not why
he should postpone a meeting so long. The message, too, seemed
unnecessarily meagre, and I began to think Simon was still withholding
something.

'Was that all?' I asked him.

'Yes, all,' he answered, 'except--'

'Except what?' I said sternly.

'Except that the woman showed me the gold token Mademoiselle de la
Vire used to carry,' he answered reluctantly, 'and said, if you wanted
further assurance that would satisfy you.'

'Did you see the coin?' I cried eagerly.

'To be sure,' he answered.

'Then, mon dieu!' I retorted, 'either you are deceiving me, or the woman
you saw deceived you. For mademoiselle has not got the token! I have it
here, in my possession! Now, do you still say you saw it, man?'

'I saw one like it,' he answered, trembling, his face damp. 'That I will
swear. And the woman told me what I have told you. And no more.'

'Then it is clear,' I answered, 'that mademoiselle has nothing to do
with this, and is doubtless many a league away. This is one of M. de
Bruhl's tricks. Fresnoy gave him the token he stole from me. And I
told him the story of the velvet knot myself. This is a trap; and had
I fallen into it, and gone to the Parvis to-morrow evening, I had never
kept another assignation, my lad.'

Simon looked thoughtful. Presently he said, with a crestfallen air, 'You
were to go alone. The woman said that.'

Though I knew well why he had suppressed this item, I forbore to blame
him. 'What was the woman like?' I said.

'She had very much of Franchette's figure,' he answered. He could not
go beyond that. Blinded by the idea that the woman was mademoiselle's
attendant, and no one else, he had taken little heed of her, and could
not even say for certain that she was not a man in woman's clothes.

I thought the matter over and discussed it with him; and was heartily
minded to punish M. de Bruhl, if I could discover a way of turning his
treacherous plot against himself. But the lack of any precise knowledge
of his plans prevented me stirring in the matter; the more as I felt no
certainty that I should be master of my actions when the time came.

Strange to say the discovery of this movement on the part of Bruhl, who
had sedulously kept himself in the background since the scene in the
king's presence, far from increasing my anxieties, had the effect of
administering a fillip to my spirits; which the cold and unyielding
pressure of the Jacobin had reduced to a low point. Here was something I
could understand, resist, and guard against. The feeling that I had
once more to do with a man of like aims and passions with myself quickly
restored me to the use of my faculties; as I have heard that a swordsman
opposed to the powers of evil regains his vigour on finding himself
engaged with a mortal foe. Though I knew that the hours of grace were
fast running to a close, and that on the morrow the priest would call
for an answer, I experienced that evening an unreasonable lightness and
cheerfulness. I retired to rest with confidence, and slept in comfort,
supported in part, perhaps, by the assurance that in that room where my
mother died her persecutor could have no power to harm me.

Upon Simon Fleix, on the other hand, the discovery that Bruhl was
moving, and that consequently peril threatened us from a new quarter,
had a different effect. He fell into a state of extreme excitement, and
spent the evening and a great part of the night in walking restlessly
up and down the room, wrestling with the fears and anxieties which beset
us, and now talking fast to himself, now biting his nails in an agony
of impatience. In vain I adjured him not to meet troubles halfway; or,
pointing to the pallet which he occupied at the foot of my couch, bade
him, if he could not devise a way of escape, at least to let the matter
rest until morning. He had no power to obey, but, tortured by the vivid
anticipations which it was his nature to entertain, he continued to
ramble to and fro in a fever of the nerves, and had no sooner lain
down than be was up again. Remembering, however, how well he had borne
himself on the night of mademoiselle's escape from Blois, I refrained
from calling him a coward; and contented myself instead with the
reflection that nothing sits worse on a fighting-man than too much
knowledge--except, perhaps, a lively imagination.

I thought it possible that mademoiselle might arrive next day before
Father Antoine called to receive his answer. In this event I hoped to
have the support of Maignan's experience. But the party did not arrive.
I had to rely on myself and my own resources, and, this being so,
determined to refuse the priest's offer, but in all other things to be
guided by circumstances.

About noon he came, attended, as was his practice, by two friends,
whom he left outside. He looked paler and more shadowy than before, I
thought, his hands thinner, and his cheeks more transparent. I could
draw no good augury, however, from these, signs of frailty, for the
brightness of his eyes and the unusual elation of his manner told
plainly of a spirit assured of the mastery. He entered the room with an
air of confidence, and addressed me in a tone of patronage which left me
in no doubt of his intentions; the frankness with which he now laid bare
his plans going far to prove that already he considered me no better
than his tool.

I did not at once undeceive him, but allowed him to proceed, and even
to bring out the five hundred crowns which he had promised me, and the
sight of which he doubtless supposed would clench the matter.

Seeing this he became still less reticent, and spoke so largely that I
presently felt myself impelled to ask him if he would answer a question.

'That is as may be, M. de Marsac,' he answered lightly. 'You may ask
it.'

'You hint at great schemes which you have in hand, father,' I said.
'You speak of France and Spain and Navarre, and kings and Leagues and
cardinals! You talk of secret strings, and would have me believe that if
I comply with your wishes I shall find you as powerful a patron as M. de
Rosny. But--one moment, if you please,' I continued hastily, seeing that
he was about to interrupt me with such eager assurances as I had already
heard; 'tell me this. With so many irons in the fire, why did you
interfere with one old gentlewoman--for the sake of a few crowns?'

'I will tell you even that,' he answered, his face flushing at my tone.
'Have you ever heard of an elephant? Yes. Well, it has a trunk, you
know, with which it can either drag an oak from the earth or lift
a groat from the ground. It is so with me. But again you ask,' he
continued with an airy grimace, 'why I wanted a few crowns. Enough that
I did. There are going to be two things in the world, and two only, M.
de Marsac: brains and money. The former I have, and had: the latter I
needed--and took.'

'Money and brains?' I said, looking at him thoughtfully.

'Yes,' he answered, his eyes sparkling, his thin nostrils beginning to
dilate. 'Give me these two, and I will rule France!'

'You will rule France?' I exclaimed, amazed beyond measure by his
audacity. 'You, man?'

'Yes, I,' he answered, with abominable coolness. 'I, priest, monk,
Churchman, clerk. You look surprised, but mark you, sir, there is a
change going on. Our time is coming, and yours is going. What hampers
our lord the king and shuts him up in Blois, while rebellions stalk
through France? Lack of men? No; but lack of money. Who can get the
money for him--you the soldier, or I the clerk? A thousand times, I!
Therefore, my time is coming, and before you die you will see a priest
rule France.'

'God forbid it should be you,' I answered scornfully.

'As you please,' he answered, shrugging his shoulders, and assuming in
a breath a mask of humility which sat as ill on his monstrous conceit
as ever nun's veil on a trooper. 'Yet it may even be I; by the favour of
the Holy Catholic Church, whose humble minister I am.'

I sprang up with a great oath at that, having no stomach for more of the
strange transformations, in which this man delighted, and whereof the
last had ever the air of being the most hateful. 'You villain!' I cried,
twisting my moustaches, a habit I have when enraged. 'And so you would
make me a stepping-stone to your greatness. You would bribe me--a
soldier and a gentleman. Go, before I do you a mischief. That is all
I have to say to you. Go! You have your answer. I will tell you
nothing--not a jot or a tittle. Begone from my room!'

He fell back a step in his surprise, and stood against the table biting
his nails and scowling at me, fear and chagrin contending with half a
dozen devils for the possession of his face. 'So you have been deceiving
me,' he said slowly, and at last.

'I have let you deceive yourself' I answered, looking at him with scorn,
but with little of the fear with which he had for a while inspired me.
'Begone, and do your worst.'

'You know what you are doing,' he said. 'I have that will hang you, M.
de Marsac--or worse.'

'Go!' I cried.

'You have thought of your friends,' he continued mockingly.

'Go!' I said.

'Of Mademoiselle de la Vire, if by any chance she fall into my hands?
It will not be hanging for her. You remember the two Foucauds?'--and he
laughed.

The vile threat, which I knew he had used to my mother, so worked upon
me that I strode forward unable to control myself longer. In another
moment I had certainly taken him by the throat and squeezed the life out
of his miserable carcase, had not Providence in its goodness intervened
to save me. The door, on which he had already laid his hand in terror,
opened suddenly. It admitted Simon, who, closing it; behind him, stood
looking from one to the other of us in nervous doubt; divided between
that respect for the priest which a training at the Sorbonne had
instilled into him, and the rage which despair arouses in the weakest.

His presence, while it checked me in my purpose, seemed to give Father
Antoine courage, for the priest stood his ground, and even turned to me
a second time, his face dark with spite and disappointment. 'Good,' he
said hoarsely. 'Destroy yourself if you will! I advise you to bar
your door, for in an hour the guards will be here to fetch you to the
question.'

Simon cried out at the threat, so that I turned and looked at the lad.
His knees were shaking, his hair stood on end.

The priest saw his terror and his own opportunity. 'Ay, in an hour,' he
continued slowly, looking at him with cruel eyes. 'In an hour, lad! You
must be fond of pain to court it, and out of humour with life to throw
it away. Or stay,' he continued abruptly, after considering Simon's
narrowly for a moment, and doubtless deducing from it a last hope, 'I
will be merciful. I will give you one more chance.'

'And yourself?' I said with a sneer.

'As you please,' he answered, declining to be diverted from the
trembling lad, whom his gaze seemed to fascinate. 'I will give you until
half an hour after sunset this evening to reconsider the matter. If you
make up your minds to accept my terms, meet me then. I leave to-night
for Paris, and I will give you until the last moment. But,' he continued
grimly, 'if you do not meet me, or, meeting me, remain obstinate--God do
so to me, and more also, if you see the sun rise thrice.'

Some impulse, I know not what, seeing that I had no thought of accepting
his terms or meeting him, led me to ask briefly, 'Where?'

'On the Parvis of the Cathedral,' he answered after a moment's
calculation. 'At the north-east corner, half an hour after sunset. It is
a quiet spot.'

Simon uttered a stifled exclamation. And then for a moment there was
silence in the room, while the lad breathed hard and irregularly, and I
stood rooted to the spot, looking so long and so strangely at the priest
that Father Antoine laid his hand again on the door and glanced uneasily
behind him. Nor was he content until he had hit on, as he fancied, the
cause of my strange regard.

'Ha!' he said, his thin lip curling in conceit at his astuteness, 'I
understand you think to kill me to-night? Let me tell you, this house is
watched. If you leave here to meet me with any companion--unless it be
M. d'Agen, whom I can trust, I shall be warned, and be gone before you
reach the rendezvous. And gone, mind you,' he added, with a grim smile,
'to sign your death-warrant.'

He went out with that, closing the door behind him; and we heard his
step go softly down the staircase. I gazed at Simon, and he at me, with
all the astonishment and awe which it was natural we should feel in
presence of so remarkable a coincidence.

For by a marvel the priest had named the same spot and the same time as
the sender of the velvet knot!

'He will go,' Simon said, his face flushed and his voice trembling, 'and
they will go.'

'And in the dark they will not know him,' I muttered. 'He is about my
height. They will take him for me!'

'And kill him!' Simon cried hysterically. 'They will kill him! He goes
to his death, monsieur. It is the finger of God.'



CHAPTER XX. THE KING'S FACE.

It seemed so necessary to bring home the crime to Bruhl should the
priest really perish in the trap laid for me, that I came near to
falling into one of those mistakes to which men of action are prone. For
my first impulse was to follow the priest to the Parvis, closely enough,
if possible, to detect the assassins in the act, and with sufficient
force, if I could muster it, to arrest them. The credit of dissuading
me from this course lies with Simon, who pointed out its dangers in
so convincing a manner that I was brought with little difficulty to
relinquish it.

Instead, acting on his advice, I sent him to M. d'Agen's lodging, to beg
that young gentleman to call upon me before evening. After searching
the lodging and other places in vain, Simon found M. d'Agen in the
tennis-court at the Castle, and, inventing a crafty excuse, brought him
to my lodging a full hour before the time.

My visitor was naturally surprised to find that I had nothing particular
to say to him. I dared not tell him what occupied my thoughts, and
for the rest invention failed me. But his gaiety and those pretty
affectations on which he spent an infinity of pains, for the purpose,
apparently, of hiding the sterling worth of a character deficient
neither in courage nor backbone, were united to much good nature.
Believing at last that I had sent for him in a fit of the vapours,
he devoted himself to amusing me and abusing Bruhl--a very favourite
pastime with him. And in this way he made out a call of two hours.

I had not long to wait for proof of Simon's wisdom in taking this
precaution. We thought it prudent to keep within doors after our guest's
departure, and so passed the night in ignorance whether anything had
happened or not. But about seven next morning one of the Marquis's
servants, despatched by M. d'Agen, burst in upon us with the news--which
was no news from the moment his hurried footstep sounded on the stairs
that Father Antoine had been set upon and killed the previous evening!

I heard this confirmation of my hopes with grave thankfulness; Simon
with so much emotion that when the messenger was gone he sat down on a
stool and began to sob and tremble as if he had lost his mother, instead
of a mortal foe. I took advantage of the occasion to read him a sermon
on the end of crooked courses; nor could I myself recall without a
shudder the man's last words to me; or the lawless and evil designs in
which he had rejoiced, while standing on the very brink of the pit which
was to swallow up both him and them in everlasting darkness.

Naturally, the uppermost feeling in my mind was relief. I was free once
more. In all probability the priest had kept his knowledge to himself,
and without him his agents would be powerless. Simon, it is true, heard
that the town was much excited by the event; and that many attributed
it to the Huguenots. But we did not suffer ourselves to be depressed
by this, nor had I any foreboding until the sound of a second hurried
footstep mounting the stairs reached our ears.

I knew the step in a moment for M. d'Agen's, and something ominous in
its ring brought me to my feet before he opened the door. Significant as
was his first hasty look round the room, he recovered at sight of me
all his habitual SANG-FROID. He saluted me, and spoke coolly, though
rapidly. But he panted, and I noticed in a moment that he had lost his
lisp.

'I am happy in finding you,' he said, closing the door carefully behind
him, 'for I am the bearer of ill news, and there is not a moment to
be lost. The king has signed an order for your instant consignment to
prison, M. de Marsac, and, once there, it is difficult to say what may
not happen.'

'My consignment?' I exclaimed. I may be pardoned if the news for a
moment found me unprepared.

'Yes,' he replied quickly. 'The king has signed it at the instance of
Marshal Retz.'

'But for what?' I cried in amazement.

'The murder of Father Antoine. You will pardon me,' he continued
urgently, 'but this is no time for words. The Provost-Marshal is even
now on his way to arrest you. Your only hope is to evade him, and gain
an audience of the king. I have persuaded my uncle to go with you,
and he is waiting at his lodgings. There is not a moment to be
lost, however, if you would reach the king's presence before you are
arrested.'

'But I am innocent!' I cried.

'I know it,' M. d'Agen answered, 'and can prove it. But if you cannot
get speech of the king innocence will avail you nothing. You have
powerful enemies. Come without more ado, M. de Marsac, I pray,' he
added.

His manner, even more than his words, impressed me with a sense of
urgency; and postponing for a time my own judgment, I hurriedly thanked
him for his friendly offices. Snatching up my sword, which lay on a
chair, I buckled it on; for Simon's fingers trembled so violently he
could give me no help. This done I nodded to M. d'Agen to go first, and
followed him from the room, Simon attending us of his own motion. It
would be then about eleven o'clock in the forenoon.

My companion ran down the stairs without ceremony, and so quickly it was
all I could do to keep up with him. At the outer door he signed me to
stand, and darting himself into the street, he looked anxiously in the
direction of the Rue St. Denys. Fortunately the coast was still clear,
and he beckoned to me to follow him. I did so and starting to walk in
the opposite direction as fast as we could, in less than a minute we had
put a corner between us and the house.

Our hopes of escaping unseen, however, were promptly dashed. The house,
I have said, stood in a quiet by-street, which was bounded on the
farther side by a garden-wall buttressed at intervals. We had scarcely
gone a dozen paces from my door when a man slipped from the shelter of
one of these buttresses, and after a single glance at us, set off to run
towards the Rue St. Denys.

M. d'Agen looked back and nodded. 'There goes the news,' he said. 'They
will try to cut us off, but I think we have the start of them.'

I made no reply, feeling that I had resigned myself entirely into his
hands. But as we passed through the Rue de Valois, in part of which a
market was held at this hour, attracting a considerable concourse of
peasants and others, I fancied I detected signs of unusual bustle and
excitement. It seemed unlikely that news of the priest's murder should
affect so many people and to such a degree, and I asked M. d'Agen what
it meant.

'There is a rumour abroad,' he answered, without slackening speed, 'that
the king intends to move south to Tours at once.'

I muttered my surprise and satisfaction. 'He will come to terms with the
Huguenots then?' I said.

'It looks like it,' M. d'Agen rejoined. 'Retz's party are in an
ill-humour on that account, and will wreak it on you if they get a
chance. On guard!' he added abruptly. 'Here are two of them!'

As he spoke we emerged from the crowd, and I saw, half a dozen paces
in front; of us, and coming to meet us, a couple of Court gallants,
attended by as many servants. They espied us at the same moment, and
came across the street, which was tolerably wide at that part, with the
evident intention of stopping us. Simultaneously, however, we crossed to
take their side, and so met them face to face in the middle of the way.

'M. d'Agen,' the foremost exclaimed, speaking in a haughty tone, and
with a dark side glance at me, 'I am sorry to see you in such company!
Doubtless you are not aware that this gentleman is the subject of an
order which has even now been issued to the Provost-Marshal.'

'And if so, sir? What of that?' my companion lisped in his silkiest
tone.

'What of that?' the other cried, frowning, and pushing slightly forward.

'Precisely,' M. d'Agen repeated, laying his hand on his hilt and
declining to give back. 'I am not aware that his Majesty has appointed
you Provost-Marshal, or that you have any warrant, M. Villequier,
empowering you to stop gentlemen in the public streets.'

M. Villequier reddened with anger. 'You are young, M. d'Agen,' he said,
his voice quivering, 'or I would make you pay dearly for that!'

'My friend is not young,' M. d'Agen retorted, bowing. 'He is a gentleman
of birth, M. Villequier; by repute, as I learned yesterday, one of the
best swordsmen in France, and no Gascon. If you feel inclined to arrest
him, do so, I pray. And I will have the honour of engaging your son.'

As we had all by this time our hands on our swords, there needed but a
blow to bring about one of those street brawls which were more common
then than now. A number of market-people, drawn to the spot by our
raised voices, had gathered round, and were waiting eagerly to see what
would happen. But Villeqier, as my companion perhaps knew, was a Gascon
in heart as well as by birth, and seeing our determined aspects, thought
better of it. Shrugging his shoulders with an affectation of disdain
which imposed on no one, he signalled to his servants to go on, and
himself stood aside.

'I thank you for your polite offer,' he said with an evil smile, 'and
will remember it. But as you say, sir, I am not the Provost-Marshal.'

Paying little heed to his words, we bowed, passed him, and hurried on.
But the peril was not over. Not only had the RENCONTRE cost us some
precious minutes, but the Gascon, after letting us proceed a little way,
followed us. And word being passed by his servants, as we supposed, that
one of us was the murderer of Father Antoine, the rumour spread through
the crowd like wildfire, and in a few moments we found ourselves
attended by a troop of CANAILLE who, hanging on our skirts, caused Simon
Fleix no little apprehension. Notwithstanding the contempt which M.
d'Agen, whose bearing throughout was admirable, expressed for them, we
might have found it necessary to turn and teach them a lesson had we not
reached M. de Rambouillet's in the nick of time; where we found the
door surrounded by half a dozen armed servants, at sight of whom our
persecutors fell back with the cowardice which is usually found in that
class.

If I had been tempted of late to think M. de Rambouillet fickle, I had
no reason to complain now; whether his attitude was due to M. d'Agen's
representations, or to the reflection that without me the plans he had
at heart must miscarry. I found him waiting within, attended by three
gentlemen, all cloaked and ready for the road; while the air of purpose,
which sat on his brow indicated that he thought the crisis no common
one. Not a moment was lost, even in explanations. Waving me to the door
again, and exchanging a few sentences with his nephew, he gave the word
to start, and we issued from the house in a body. Doubtless the fact
that those who sought to ruin me were his political enemies had some
weight with him; for I saw his face harden as his eyes met those of M.
de Villequier, who passed slowly before the door as we came out. The
Gascon, however, was not the man to interfere with so large a party, and
dropped back; while M. de Rambouillet, after exchanging a cold salute
with him, led the way towards the Castle at a round pace. His nephew and
I walked one on either side of him, and the others, to the number of ten
or eleven, pressed on behind in a compact body, our cortege presenting
so determined a front that the crowd, which had remained hanging about
the door, fled every way. Even some peaceable folk who found themselves
in our road took the precaution of slipping into doorways, or stood
aside to give us the full width of the street.

I remarked--and I think it increased my anxiety--that our leader
was dressed with more than usual care and richness, but, unlike his
attendants, wore no arms. He took occasion, as we hurried along, to give
me a word of advice. 'M. de Marsac,' he said, looking at me suddenly,
'my nephew has given me to understand that you place yourself entirely
in my hands.'

I replied that I asked for no better fortune, and, whatever the event,
thanked him from the bottom of my heart.

'Be pleased then to keep silence until I bid you speak,' he replied
sharply, for he was one of those whom a sudden stress sours and
exacerbates. 'And, above all, no violence without my orders. We are
about to fight a battle, and a critical one, but it must be won with our
heads. If we can we will keep you out of the Provost-Marshal's hands.'

And if not? I remembered the threats Father Antoine had used, and in
a moment I lost sight of the street with all its light and life and
movement. I felt no longer the wholesome stinging of the wind. I tasted
instead a fetid air, and saw round me a narrow cell and masked figures,
and in particular a swarthy man is a leather apron leaning over a
brazier, from which came lurid flames. And I was bound. I experienced
that utter helplessness which is the last test of courage. The man
came forward, and then--then, thank God! the vision passed away.
An exclamation to which M. d'Agen gave vent, brought me back to the
present, and to the blessed knowledge that the fight was not yet over.

We were within a score of paces, I found, of the Castle gates; but so
were also a second party, who had just debouched from a side-street, and
now hurried on, pace for pace, with us, with the evident intention of
forestalling us, The race ended in both companies reaching the entrance
at the same time, with the consequence of some jostling taking place
amongst the servants. This must have led to blows but for the strenuous
commands which M. de Rambouillet had laid upon his followers. I found
myself in a moment confronted by a row of scowling faces, while a dozen
threatening hands were stretched out towards me, and as many voices,
among which I recognised Fresnoy's, cried out tumultuously, 'That is he!
That is the one!'

An elderly man in a quaint dress stepped forward, a paper in his hand,
and, backed as he was by half a dozen halberdiers, would in a moment
have laid hands on me if M. de Rambouillet had not intervened with a
negligent air of authority, which sat on him the more gracefully as he
held nothing but a riding-switch in his hands. 'Tut, tut! What is this?'
he said lightly. 'I am not wont to have my people interfered with, M.
Provost, without my leave. You know me, I suppose?'

'Perfectly, M. le Marquis,' the man answered with dogged respect; 'but
this is by the king's special command.'

'Very good,' my patron answered, quietly eyeing the faces behind the
Provost-Marshal, as if he were making a note of them; which caused some
of the gentlemen manifest uneasiness. 'That is soon seen, for we are
even now about to seek speech with his Majesty.'

'Not this gentleman,' the Provost-Marshal answered firmly, raising his
hand again. 'I cannot let him pass.'

'Yes, this gentleman too, by your leave,' the Marquis retorted, lightly
putting the hand aside with his cane.

'Sir,' said the other, retreating a step, and speaking with some heat,
'this is no jest with all respect. I hold the king's own order, and it
may not be resisted.'

The nobleman tapped his silver comfit-box and smiled. 'I shall be the
last to resist it--if you have it,' he said languidly.

'You may read it for yourself,' the Provost-Marshal answered, his
patience exhausted.

M. de Rambouillet took the parchment with the ends of his fingers,
glanced at it, and gave it back. 'As I thought,' he said, 'a manifest
forgery.'

'A forgery!' cried the other, crimson with indignation. 'And I had
it from the hands of the king's own secretary!' At this those behind
murmured, some 'shame,' and some one thing and some another--all with
an air so threatening that the Marquis's gentlemen closed up behind him,
and M. d'Agen laughed rudely.

But M. de Rambouillet remained unmoved. 'You may have had it from whom
you please, sir,' he said. 'It is a forgery, and I shall resist its
execution. If you choose to await me here, I will give you my word to
render this gentleman to you within an hour, should the order hold good.
If you will not wait, I shall command my servants to clear the way, and
if ill happen, then the responsibility will lie with you.'

He spoke in so resolute a manner it was not difficult to see that
something more was at stake than the arrest of a single man. This was
so; the real issue was whether the king, with whose instability it was
difficult to cope, should fall back into the hands of his old advisers
or not. My arrest was a move in the game intended as a counterblast to
the victory which M. de Rambouillet had gained when he persuaded the
king to move to Tours; a city in the neighbourhood of the Huguenots, and
a place of arms whence union with them would be easy.

The Provost-Marshal could, no doubt, make a shrewd guess at these
things. He knew that the order he had would be held valid or not
according as one party or the other gained the mastery; and, seeing M.
de Rambouillet's resolute demeanour, he gave way. Rudely interrupted
more than once by his attendants, among whom were some of Bruhl's men,
he muttered an ungracious assent to our proposal; on which, and without
a moment's delay, the Marquis took me by the arm and hurried me across
the courtyard.

And so far, well. My heart began to rise. But, for the Marquis, as we
mounted the staircase the anxiety he had dissembled while we faced the
Provost-Marshal, broke out in angry mutterings; from which I gathered
that the crisis was yet to come. I was not surprised, therefore, when an
usher rose on our appearance in the antechamber, and, quickly crossing
the floor, interposed between us and the door of the chamber, informing
the Marquis with a low obeisance that his Majesty was engaged.

'He will see me,' M. de Rambouillet cried, looking haughtily round on
the sneering pages and lounging courtiers, who grew civil under his eye.

'I have particular orders, sir, to admit so one,' the man answered.

'Tut, tut, they do not apply to me,' my companion retorted, nothing
daunted. 'I know the business on which the king is engaged, and I
am here to assist him.' And raising his hand he thrust the startled
official aside, and hardily pushed the doors of the chamber open.

The king, surrounded by half a dozen persons, was in the act of putting
on his riding-boots. On hearing us, he turned his head with a startled
air, and dropped in his confusion one of the ivory cylinders he was
using; while his aspect, and that of the persons who stood round him,
reminded me irresistibly of a party of schoolboys detected in a fault.

He recovered himself, it is true, almost immediately; and turning his
back to us? continued to talk to the persons round him on such trifling
subjects as commonly engaged him. He carried on this conversation in
a very free way, studiously ignoring our presence; but it was plain he
remained aware of it, and even that he was uneasy under the cold and
severe gaze which the Marquis, who seemed in nowise affrighted by his
reception, bent upon him.

I, for my part, had no longer any confidence. Nay, I came near to
regretting that I had persevered in an attempt so useless. The warrant
which awaited me at the gates seemed less formidable than his Majesty's
growing displeasure; which I saw I was incurring by remaining where
I was. It needed not the insolent glance of Marshal Retz, who lounged
smiling by the king's hand, or the laughter of a couple of pages who
stood at the head of the chamber, to deprive me of my last hope; while
some things which might have cheered me--the uneasiness of some
about the king, and the disquietude which underlay Marshal Retz's
manner--escaped my notice altogether.

What I did see clearly was that the king's embarrassment was fast
changing to anger. The paint which reddened his cheeks prevented tiny
alteration in his colour being visible, but his frown and the nervous
manner in which he kept taking off and putting on his jewelled cap
betrayed him. At length, signing to one of his companions to follow,
he moved a little aside to a window, whence, after a few moments, the
gentleman came to us.

'M. de Rambouillet,' he said, speaking coldly and formally, 'his Majesty
is displeased by this gentleman's presence, and requires him to withdraw
forthwith.'

'His Majesty's word is law,' my patron answered, bowing low, and
speaking in a clear voice audible throughout; the chamber, 'but the
matter which brings this gentleman here is of the utmost importance, and
touches his Majesty's person.'

M. de Retz laughed jeeringly. The other courtiers looked grave. The
king shrugged his shoulders with a peevish gesture, but after a moment's
hesitation, during which he looked first at Retz and then at M. de
Rambouillet, he signed to the Marquis to approach.

'Why have you brought him here?' he muttered sharply, looking askance at
me. 'He should have been bestowed according to my orders.'

'He has information for your Majesty's private ear,' Rambouillet
answered. And he looked so meaningly at the king that Henry, I think,
remembered on a sudden his compact with Rosny, and my part in it; for
he started with the air of a man suddenly awakened. 'To prevent that
information reaching you, sire,' my patron continued, 'his enemies have
practised on your Majesty's well-known sense of justice.'

'Oh, but stay, stay!' the king cried, hitching forward the scanty cloak
he wore, which barely came down to his waist. 'The man has killed a
priest! He has killed a priest, man!'

He repeated with confidence, as if he had now got hold of the right
argument.

That is not so, sire, craving your Majesty's pardon, M. de Rambouillet;
replied with the utmost coolness.

'Tut! Tut! The evidence is clear,' the king said peevishly.

'As to that, sire,' my companion rejoined, 'if it is of the murder of
Father Antoine he is accused, I say boldly that there is none.'

'Then there you are mistaken!' the king answered. 'I heard it with my
own ears this morning.'

'Will you deign, sire, to tell me its nature?' M. de Rambouillet
persisted.

But on that Marshal Retz thought it necessary to intervene. 'Need we
turn his Majesty's chamber into a court of justice?' he said smoothly.
Hitherto he had not spoken; trusting, perhaps, to the impression he had
already made upon the king.

M. de Rambouillet took no notice of him.

'But Bruhl,' said the king, 'you see, Bruhl says--'

'Bruhl!' my companion replied, with so much contempt that Henry started.
'Surely your Majesty has not taken his word against this gentleman, of
all people?'

Thus reminded, a second time, of the interests entrusted to me, and
of the advantage which Bruhl would gain by my disappearance, the king
looked first confused, and then angry. He vented his passion in one or
two profane oaths, with the childish addition that we were all a set of
traitors, and that he had no one whom he could trust. But my companion
had touched the right chord at last; for when the king grew more
composed, he waved aside Marshal Retz's protestations, and sullenly bade
Rambouillet say what he had to say.

'The monk was killed, sire, about sunset,' he answered. 'Now my nephew,
M. d'Agen, is without, and will tell your Majesty that he was with this
gentleman at his lodgings from about an hour before sunset last evening
until a full hour after. Consequently, M. de Marsac can hardly be the
assassin, and M. le Marechal must look elsewhere if he wants vengeance.'

'Justice, sir, not vengeance.' Marshal Retz said with a dark glance. His
keen Italian face hid his trouble well, but a little pulse of passion
beating in his olive cheek betrayed the secret to those who knew him.
He had a harder part to play than his opponent; for while Rambouillet's
hands were clean, Retz knew himself a traitor, and liable at any moment
to discovery and punishment.

'Let M. d'Agen be called,' Henry said curtly.

'And if your Majesty pleases,' Retz added, 'M. de Bruhl also, If you
really intend, sire, that is, to reopen a matter which I thought had
been settled.'

The king nodded obstinately, his face furrowed with ill-temper. He kept
his shifty eyes, which seldom met those of the person he addressed, on
the floor; and this accentuated the awkward stooping carriage which was
natural to him. There were seven or eight dogs of exceeding smallness in
the room, and while we waited for the persons who had been summoned, he
kicked, now one and now another of the baskets which held them, as if he
found in this some vent for his ill-humour.

The witnesses presently appeared, followed by several persons, among
whom were the Dukes of Nevers and Mercoeur, who came to ride out with
the king, and M. de Crillon; so that the chamber grew passably full.
The two dukes nodded formally to the Marquis, as they passed him, but
entered into a muttered conversation with Retz, who appeared to be
urging them to press his cause. They seemed to decline, however,
shrugging their short cloaks as if the matter were too insignificant.
Crillon on his part cried audibly, and with an oath, to know what the
matter was; and being informed, asked whether all this fuss was being
made about a damned shaveling monk.

Henry, whose tenderness for the cowl was well known, darted an angry
glance at him, but contented himself with saying sharply to M. d'Agen,
'Now, sir, what do you know about the matter?'

'One moment, sire,' M. Rambouillet cried, interposing before Francois
could answer. 'Craving your Majesty's pardon, you have heard M. de
Bruhl's account. May I, as a favour to myself, beg you, sire, to permit
us also to hear it?'

'What?' Marshal Retz exclaimed angrily, 'are we to be the judges, then,
or his Majesty? Arnidieu!' he continued hotly, 'what, in the fiend's
name, have we to do with it? I protest 'fore Heaven--'

'Ay, sir, and what do you protest?' my champion retorted, turning to him
with stern disdain.

'Silence!' cried the king who had listened almost bewildered. 'Silence!
By God, gentlemen,' he continued, his eye travelling round the circle
with a sparkle of royal anger in it not unworthy of his crown, 'you
forget yourselves. I will have none of this quarrelling in my presence
or out of it. I lost Quelus and Maugiron that way, and loss enough, and
I will have none of it, I say! M. de Bruhl,' he added, standing erect,
and looking for the moment, with all his paint and frippery, a king, 'M.
de Bruhl, repeat your story.'

The feelings with which I listened to this controversy may be imagined.
Devoured in turn by hope and fear as now one side and now the other
seemed likely to prevail, I confronted at one moment the gloom of the
dungeon, and at another tasted the air of freedom, which had never
seemed so sweet before. Strong as these feelings were, however, they
gave way to curiosity at this point; when I heard Bruhl called, and saw
him come forward at the king's command. Knowing this man to be himself
guilty, I marvelled with what face he would present himself before all
those eyes, and from what depths of impudence he could draw supplies in
such an emergency.

I need not have troubled myself, however, for he was fully equal to the
occasion. His high colour and piercing black eyes met the gaze of friend
and foe alike without flinching. Dressed well and elegantly, he wore
his raven hair curled in the mode, and looked alike gay, handsome, and
imperturbable. If there was a suspicion of coarseness about his bulkier
figure, as he stood beside M. d'Agen, who was the courtier perfect
and point devise, it went to the scale of sincerity, seeing that men
naturally associate truth with strength.

'I know no more than this, sire,' he said easily; 'that, happening to
cross the Parvis at the moment of the murder, I heard Father Antoine
scream. He uttered four words only, in the tone of a man in mortal
peril. They were'--and here the speaker looked for an instant at
me--'Ha! Marsac! A moi!'

'Indeed!' M. de Rambouillet said, after looking to the king for
permission. 'And that was all? You saw nothing?'

Bruhl shook his head. 'It was too dark,' he said.

'And heard no more?'

'No.'

'Do I understand, then,' the Marquis continued slowly, 'that M. de
Marsac is arrested because the priest--God rest his soul!--cried to him
for help?'

'For help?' M. de Retz exclaimed fiercely.

'For help?' said the king, surprised. And at that the most; ludicrous
change fell upon the faces of all. The king looked puzzled, the Duke
of Nevers smiled, the Duke of Mercoeur laughed aloud. Crillon cried
boisterously, 'Good hit!' and the majority, who wished no better than to
divine the winning party, grinned broadly, whether they would or no.

To Marshal Retz, however, and Bruhl, that which to everyone else seemed
an amusing retort had a totally different aspect; while the former
turned yellow with chagrin and came near to choking, the latter looked
as chapfallen and startled as if his guilt; had been that moment brought
home to him. Assured by the tone of the monk's voice--which must,
indeed, have thundered in his ears--that my name was uttered in
denunciation by one who thought me his assailant, he had chosen to tell
the truth without reflecting that words, so plain to him, might; bear a
different construction when repeated.

'Certainly the words seem ambiguous,' Henry muttered.

'But it was Marsac killed him,' Retz cried in a rage.

'It is for some evidence of that we are waiting,' my champion answered
suavely.

The Marshal looked helplessly at Nevers and Mercoeur, who commonly took
part with him; but apparently those noblemen had not been primed
for this occasion. They merely shook their heads and smiled. In the
momentary silence which followed, while all looked curiously at Bruhl,
who could not conceal his mortification, M. d'Agen stepped forward.

'If your Majesty will permit me,' he said, a malicious simper crossing
his handsome face--I had often remarked his extreme dislike for Bruhl
without understanding it--'I think I can furnish some evidence more
to the point than that; to which M. de Bruhl has with so much fairness
restricted himself.' He then went on to state that he had had the honour
of being in my company at the time of the murder; and he added, besides,
so many details as to exculpate me to the satisfaction of any candid
person.

The king nodded. 'That settles the matter,' he said, with a sigh of
relief. 'You think so, Mercoeur, do you not? Precisely. Villequier, see
that the order respecting M. de Marsac is cancelled.'

M. de Retz could not control his wrath on hearing this direction given.
'At this rate,' he cried recklessly, 'we shall have few priests left
here! We have got a bad name at Blois, as it is!'

For a moment all in the circle held their breath, while the king's eyes
flashed fire at this daring allusion to the murder of the Duke de Guise,
and his brother the Cardinal. But it was Henry's misfortune to be ever
indulgent in the wrong place, and severe when severity was either unjust
or impolitic. He recovered himself with an effort, and revenged himself
only by omitting to invite the Marshal, who was now trembling in his
shoes, to join his riding-party.

The circle broke up amid some excitement. I stood on one side with M.
d'Agen, while the king and his immediate following passed out, and,
greatly embarrassed as I was by the civil congratulating of many who
would have seen me hang with equal goodwill, I was sharp enough to see
that something was brewing between Bruhl and Marshal Retz, who stood
back conversing in low tones. I was not surprised, therefore, when
the former made his way towards me through the press which filled the
antechamber, and with a lowering brow requested a word with me.

'Certainly,' I said, watching him narrowly, for I knew him to be both
treacherous and a bully. 'Speak on, sir.'

'You have balked me once and again,' he rejoined, in a voice which shook
a little, as did the fingers with which he stroked his waxed moustache.
'There is no need of words between us. I, with one sword besides, will
to-morrow at noon keep the bridge at Chaverny, a league from here. It
is an open country. Possibly your pleasure may lead you to ride that way
with a friend?'

'You may depend upon me, sir,' I answered, bowing low, and feeling
thankful that the matter was at length to be brought to a fair and open
arbitration. 'I will be there--and in person. For my deputy last night,'
I added, searching his face with a steadfast eye, 'seems to have been
somewhat unlucky.'



CHAPTER XXI. TWO WOMEN.

Out of compliment, and to show my gratitude, I attended M. de
Rambouillet home to his lodging, and found him as much pleased with
himself, and consequently with me, as I was with him. For the time,
indeed, I came near to loving him; and, certainly, he was a man of high
and patriotic feeling, and of skill and conduct to match. But he lacked
that touch of nature and that power of sympathising with others which
gave to such men as M. de Rosny and the king, my master, their peculiar
charm; though after what I have related of him in the last chapter it
does not lie in my mouth to speak ill of him. And, indeed, he was a good
man.

When I at last reached my lodging, I found a surprise awaiting me in the
shape of a note which had just arrived no one knew how. If the manner
of its delivery was mysterious, however, its contents were brief and
sufficiently explicit; for it; ran thus: 'SIR, BY MEETING ME THREE HOURS
AFTER NOON IN THE SQUARE BEFORE THE HOUSE OF THE LITTLE SISTERS YOU
WILL DO A SERVICE AT ONCE TO YOURSELF AND TO THE UNDERSIGNED, MARIE DE
BRUHL.'

That was all, written in a feminine character, yet it was enough to
perplex me. Simon, who had manifested the liveliest joy at my escape,
would have had me treat it as I had treated the invitation to the Parvis
of the Cathedral; ignore it altogether I mean. But I was of a different
mind, and this for three reasons, among others: that the request was
straightforward, the time early, and the place sufficiently public to be
an unlikely theatre for violence, though well fitted for an interview
to which the world at large was not invited. Then, too, the square lay
little more than a bowshot from my lodging, though on the farther side
of the Rue St. Denys.

Besides, I could conceive many grounds which Madame de Bruhl might have
for seeing me; of which some touched me nearly. I disregarded Simon's
warnings, therefore, and repaired at the time appointed to the place--a
clean, paved square a little off the Rue St. Denys, and entered from
the latter by a narrow passage. It was a spot pleasantly convenient
for meditation, but overlooked on one side by the House of the Little
Sisters; in which, as I guessed afterwards, madame must have awaited me,
for the square when I entered it was empty, yet in a moment, though no
one came in from the street, she stood beside me. She wore a mask and
long cloak. The beautiful hair and perfect complexion, which had filled
me with so much admiration at our first meeting in her house, were
hidden, but I saw enough of her figure and carriage to be sure that it
was Madame de Bruhl and no other.

She began by addressing me in a tone of bitterness, for which I was not
altogether unprepared.

'Well, sir,' she exclaimed, her voice trembling with anger, 'you are
satisfied, I hope, with your work?'

I expected this and had my answer ready. 'I am not aware, Madame,' I
said, 'that I have cause to reproach myself. But, however that may be, I
trust you have summoned me for some better purpose than to chide me for
another's fault; though it was my voice which brought it to light.'

'Why did you shame me publicly?' she retorted, thrusting her
handkerchief to her lips and withdrawing it again with a passionate
gesture.

'Madame,' I answered patiently--I was full of pity for her, 'consider
for a moment the wrong your husband did me and how small and inadequate
was the thing I did to him in return.'

'To him!' she ejaculated so fiercely that I started. 'It was to me--to
me you did it! What had I done that you should expose me to the ridicule
of those who know no pity, and the anger of one as merciless? What had I
done, sir?'

I shook my head sorrowfully. 'So far, madame,' I answered, 'I allow I
owe you reparation, and I will make it should it ever be in my power.
Nay, I will say more,' I continued, for the tone in which she spoke had
wrung my heart. 'In one point I strained the case against your husband.
To the best of my belief he abducted the lady who was in my charge,
not for the love of her, but for political reasons, and as the agent of
another.'

She gasped. 'What?' she cried. 'Say that again!'

As I complied she tore off her mask and gazed into my face with
straining eyes and parted lips. I saw then how much she was changed,
even in these few days--how pale and worn were her cheeks, how dark
the circles round her eyes. 'Will you swear to it?' she said at last,
speaking with uncontrollable eagerness, while she laid a hand which
shook with excitement on my arm. Will you swear to it, sir?'

'It is true,' I answered steadfastly. I might have added that after the
event her husband had so treated mademoiselle as to lead her to fear the
worst. But I refrained, feeling that it was no part of my duty to come
between husband and wife.

She clasped her hands, and for a moment looked passionately upwards, as
though she were giving thanks to Heaven; while the flesh of health and
loveliness which I had so much admired returned, and illumined her
face in a wonderful manner. She seemed, in truth and for the moment,
transformed. Her blue eyes filled with tears, her lips moved; nor have
I ever seen anything bear so near a resemblance to those pictures of the
Virgin Mary which Romans worship as madame did then.

The change, however, was as evanescent as it was admirable. In an
instant she seemed to collapse. She struck her hands to her face and
moaned, and I saw tears, which she vainly strove to restrain, dropping
through her fingers. 'Too late!' she murmured, in a tone of anguish
which wrung my heart. 'Alas, you robbed me of one man, you give me back
another. I know him now for what he is. If he did not love her then, he
does now. It is too late!'

She seemed so much overcome that I assisted her to reach a bench which
stood against the wall a few paces away; nor, I confess, was it without
difficulty and much self-reproach that I limited myself to those prudent
offices only which her state and my duty required. To console her on the
subject of her husband was impossible; to ignore him, and so to console
her, a task which neither my discretion nor my sense of honour, though
sorely tried, permitted me to undertake.

She presently recovered and, putting on her mask again, said hurriedly
that she had still a word to say to me. 'You have treated me honestly,'
she continued, 'and, though I have no cause to do anything but hate you,
I say in return, look to yourself! You escaped last night--I know all,
for it was my velvet knot--which I had made thinking to send it to you
to procure this meeting--that he used as a lure. But he is not yet at
the end of his resources. Look to yourself, therefore.'

I thought of the appointment I had made with him for the morrow, but I
confined myself to thanking her, merely saying, as I bowed over the hand
she resigned to me in token of farewell, 'Madame, I am grateful. I am
obliged to you both for your warning and your forgiveness.'

'Bending her head coldly she drew away her hand. At that moment, as I
lifted my eyes, I saw something which for an instant rooted me to the
spot with astonishment. In the entrance of the passage which led to the
Rue St. Denys two people were standing, watching us. The one was Simon
Fleix, and the other, a masked woman, a trifle below the middle height,
and clad in a riding-coat, was Mademoiselle de la Vire!

I knew her in a moment. But the relief I experienced on seeing her safe
and in Blois was not unmixed with annoyance that Simon Fleix should have
been so imprudent as to parade her unnecessarily in the street. I felt
something of confusion also on my own account; for I could not tell how
long she and her escort had been watching me. And these two feelings
were augmented when, after turning to pay a final salute to Madame
de Bruhl, I looked again towards the passage and discovered that
mademoiselle and her squire were gone.

Impatient as I was, I would not seem to leave madame rudely or without
feeling, after the consideration she had shown me in her own sorrow; and
accordingly I waited uncovered until she disappeared within the 'Little
Sisters.' Then I started eagerly towards my lodging, thinking I might
yet overtake mademoiselle before she entered. I was destined to meet,
however, with another though very pertinent hindrance. As I passed from
the Rue St. Denys into the quiet of my street I heard a voice calling my
name, and, looking back, saw M. de Rambouillet's equerry, a man deep in
his confidence, running after me. He brought a message from his master,
which he begged me to consider of the first importance.

'The Marquis would not trust it to writing, sir,' he continued, drawing
me aside into a corner where we were conveniently retired, 'but he made
me learn it by heart. "Tell M. de Marsac," said he, "that that which he
was left in Blois to do must be done quickly, or not at all. There is
something afoot in the other camp, I am not sure what. But now is the
time to knock in the nail. I know his zeal, and I depend upon him."'

An hour before I should have listened to this message with serious
doubts and misgivings. Now, acquainted with mademoiselle's arrival, I
returned M. de Rambouillet an answer in the same strain, and parting
civilly from Bertram, who was a man I much esteemed, I hastened on to my
lodgings, exulting in the thought that the hour and the woman were come
at last, and that before the dawn of another day I might hope, all being
well, to accomplish with honour to myself and advantage to others the
commission which M. de Rosny had entrusted to me.

I must not deny that, mingled with this, was some excitement at the
prospect of seeing mademoiselle again. I strove to conjure up before me
as I mounted the stairs the exact expression of her face as I had last
seen it bending from the window at Rosny; to the end that I might have
some guide for my future conduct, and might be less likely to fall into
the snare of a young girl's coquetry. But I could come now, as then, to
no satisfactory or safe conclusion, and only felt anew the vexation I
had experienced on losing the velvet knot, which she had given me on
that occasion.

I knocked at the door of the rooms which I had reserved for her, and
which were on the floor below my own; but I got no answer. Supposing
that Simon had taken her upstairs, I mounted quickly, not doubting I
should find her there. Judge of my surprise and dismay when I found that
room also empty, save for the lackey whom M. de Rambouillet had lent me!

'Where are they?' I asked the man, speaking sharply, and standing with
my hand on the door.

'The lady and her woman, sir?' he answered, coming forward.

'Yes, yes!' I cried impatiently, a sudden fear at my heart.

She went out immediately after her arrival with Simon Fleix, sir, and
has not yet returned,' he answered.

The words were scarcely out of his mouth before I heard several persons
enter the passage below and begin to ascend the stairs. I did not;
doubt that mademoiselle and the lad had come home another way and, been
somehow detained; and I turned with a sigh of relief to receive them.
But when the persons whose steps I had heard appeared, they proved to be
only M. de Rosny's equerry, stout, burly, and bright-eyed as ever, and
two armed servants.



CHAPTER XXII. 'LA FEMME DISPOSE.'

The moment the equerry's foot touched the uppermost stair I advanced
upon him. 'Where is your mistress, man?' I said. 'Where is Mademoiselle
de la Vire? Be quick, tell me what you have done with her.'

His face fell amazingly. 'Where is she?' he answered, faltering between
surprise and alarm at my sudden onslaught. 'Here, she should be. I left
her here not an hour ago. Mon Dieu! Is she not here now?'

His alarm increased mine tenfold. 'No!' I retorted, 'she is not! She is
gone! And you--what business had you, in the fiend's name, to leave her
here, alone and unprotected? Tell me that!'

He leaned against the balustrade, making no attempt to defend himself,
and seemed, in his sudden terror, anything but the bold, alert fellow
who had ascended the stairs two minutes before. 'I was a fool,' he
groaned. 'I saw your man Simon here; and Fanchette, who is as good as a
man, was with her mistress. And I went to stable the horses. I thought
no evil. And now--My God!' he added, suddenly straightening himself,
while his face grew hard and grim, 'I am undone! My master will never
forgive me!'

'Did you come straight here?' I said, considering that, after all, he
was no more in fault than I had been on a former occasion.

'We went first to M. de Rosny's lodging,' he answered, 'where we found
your message telling us to come here. We came on without dismounting.'

'Mademoiselle may have gone back, and be there,' I said. 'It is
possible. Do you stay here and keep a good look-out, and I will go and
see. Let one of your men come with me.'

He uttered a brief assent; being a man as ready to take as to give
orders, and thankful now for any suggestion which held out a hope of
mademoiselle's safety. Followed by the servant he selected, I ran down
the stairs, and in a moment was hurrying along the Rue St. Denys. The
day was waning. The narrow streets and alleys were already dark, but the
air of excitement which I had noticed in the morning still marked the
townsfolk, of whom a great number were strolling abroad, or standing
in doorways talking to their gossips. Feverishly anxious as I was, I
remarked the gloom which dwelt on all faces; but as I set it down to
the king's approaching departure, and besides was intent on seeing that
those we sought did not by any chance pass us in the crowd, I thought
little of it. Five minutes' walking brought us to M. de Rosny's lodging.
There I knocked at the door; impatiently, I confess, and with little
hope of success. But, to my surprise, barely an instant elapsed before
the door opened, and I saw before me Simon Fleix!

Discovering who it was, he cowered back, with a terrified face, and
retreated to the wall with his arm raised.

'You scoundrel!' I exclaimed, restraining myself with difficulty. 'Tell
me this moment where Mademoiselle de la Vire is! Or, by Heaven, I shall
forget what my mother owed to you, and do you a mischief!'

For an instant he glared at me viciously, with all his teeth exposed, as
though he meant to refuse--and more. Then he thought better of it, and,
raising his hand, pointed sulkily upwards.

'Go before me and knock at the door,' I said, tapping the hilt of my
dagger with meaning.

Cowed by my manner, he obeyed, and led the way to the room in which M.
de Rambouillet had surprised us on a former occasion. Here he stopped
at the door and knocked gently; on which a sharp voice inside bade us
enter. I raised the latch and did so, closing the door behind me.

Mademoiselle, still wearing her riding-coat, sat in a chair before the
hearth, on which a newly kindled fire sputtered and smoked. She had her
back to me, and did not turn on my entrance, but continued to toy in
an absent manner with the strings of the mask which lay in her lap.
Fanchette stood bolt upright behind her, with her elbows squared and
her hands clasped; in such an attitude that I guessed the maid had
been expressing her strong dissatisfaction with this latest whim of her
mistress, and particularly with mademoiselle's imprudence in wantonly
exposing herself, with so inadequate a guard as Simon, in a place where
she had already suffered so much. I was confirmed in this notion on
seeing the woman's harsh countenance clear at sight of me; though the
churlish nod, which was all the greeting she bestowed on me, seemed to
betoken anything but favour or good-will. She touched her mistress on
the shoulder, however, and said, 'M. de Marsac is here.'

Mademoiselle turned her head and looked at me languidly, without
stirring in her chair or removing the foot she, was warming. 'Good
evening,' she said.

The greeting seemed so brief and so commonplace, ignoring, as it did,
both the pains and anxiety to which she had just put me and the great
purpose for which we were here--to say nothing of that ambiguous parting
which she must surely remember as well as I--that the words I had
prepared died on my lips, and I looked at her in honest confusion. All
her small face was pale except her lips. Her brow was dark, her eyes
were hard as well as weary. And not words only failed me as I looked at
her, but anger; having mounted the stairs hot foot to chide, I felt on a
sudden--despite my new cloak and scabbard, my appointment, and the same
I had made at Court--the same consciousness of age; and shabbiness and
poverty which had possessed me in her presence from the beginning. I
muttered, 'Good evening, mademoiselle,' and that was all I could say--I
who had frightened the burly Maignan a few minutes before!

Seeing, I have no doubt, the effect she produced on me, she maintained
for some time an embarrassing silence. At length she said, frigidly,
'Perhaps M. de Marsac will sit, Fanchette. Place a chair for him. I
am afraid, however, that after his successes at Court he may find our
reception somewhat cold. But we are only from the country,' she added,
looking at me askance, with a gleam of anger in her eyes.

I thanked her huskily, saying that I would not sit, as I could not stay.
'Simon Fleix,' I continued, finding my voice with difficulty, 'has, I am
afraid, caused you some trouble by bringing you to this house instead of
telling you that I had made preparation for you at my lodgings.'

'It was not Simon Fleix's fault,' she replied curtly. 'I prefer these
rooms. They are more convenient.'

'They are, perhaps, more convenient,' I rejoined humbly, 'But I have
to think of safety, mademoiselle, as you know. At my house I have a
competent guard, and can answer for your being unmolested.'

'You can send your guard here,' she said with a royal air.

'But, mademoiselle--'

'Is it not enough that I have said that I prefer these rooms?' she
replied sharply, dropping her mask on her lap and looking round at me in
undisguised displeasure. 'Are you deaf, sir? Let me tell you, I am in
no mood for argument. I am tired with riding. I prefer these rooms, and
that is enough!'

Nothing could exceed the determination with which she said these words,
unless it were the malicious pleasure in thwarting my wishes which made
itself seen through the veil of assumed indifference. I felt myself
brought up with a vengeance, and in a manner the most provoking that
could be conceived. But opposition so childish, so utterly wanton,
by exciting my indignation, had presently the effect of banishing the
peculiar bashfulness I felt in her presence, and recalling me to my
duty.

'Mademoiselle,' I said firmly, looking at her with a fixed countenance,
'pardon me if I speak plainly. This is no time for playing with straws.
The men from whom you escaped once are as determined and more desperate
now. By this time they probably know of your arrival. Do, then, as I
ask, I pray and beseech you. Or this time I may lack the power, though
never the will, to save you.'

Wholly ignoring my appeal, she looked into my face--for by this time I
had advanced to her side--with a whimsical smile. 'You are really much
improved in manner since I last saw you,' she said.

'Mademoiselle!' I replied, baffled and repelled. 'What do you mean?'

'What I say,' she answered, flippantly. 'But it was to be expected.'

'For shame!' I cried, provoked almost beyond bearing by her ill-timed
raillery, 'will you never be serious until you have ruined us and
yourself? I tell you this house is not safe for you! It is not safe for
me! I cannot bring my men to it, for there is not room for them. If you
have any spark of consideration, of gratitude, therefore--'

'Gratitude!' she exclaimed, swinging her mask slowly to and fro by a
ribbon, while she looked up at me as though my excitement amused her.
'Gratitude--'tis a very pretty phrase, and means much; but it is for
those who serve us faithfully, M. de Marsac, and not for others. You
receive so many favours, I am told, and are so successful at Court, that
I should not be justified in monopolising your services.'

'But, mademoiselle--' I said in a low tone. And there I stopped. I dared
not proceed.

'Well, sir,' she answered, looking up at she after a moment's silence,
and ceasing on a sudden to play with her toy, 'what is it?'

'You spoke of favours,' I continued, with an effort. 'I never received
but one from a lady. That was at Rosny, and from your hand.'

'From my hand?' she answered, with an air of cold surprise.

'It was so, mademoiselle.'

'You have fallen into some strange mistake, sir,' she replied, rousing
herself, and looking at me indifferently 'I never gave you a favour.'

I bowed low. 'If you say you did not, mademoiselle, that is enough,' I
answered.

'Nay, but do not let me do you an injustice, M. de Marsac,' she
rejoined, speaking more quickly and in an altered tone. 'If you can show
me the favour I gave you, I shall, of course, be convinced. Seeing
is believing, you know,' she added, with a light nervous laugh, and a
gesture of something like shyness.

If I had not sufficiently regretted my carelessness, and loss of the bow
at the time, I did so now. I looked at her in silence, and saw her face,
that had for a moment shown signs of feeling, almost of shame, grow
slowly hard again.

'Well, sir?' she said impatiently. 'The proof is easy.'

'It was taken from me; I believe, by M. de Rosny,' I answered lamely,
wondering what ill-luck had led her to put the question and press it to
this point.

'It was taken from you!' she exclaimed, rising and confronting me with
the utmost suddenness, while her eyes flashed, and her little hand
crumpled the mask beyond future usefulness. 'It was taken from you,
sir!' she repeated, her voice and her whole frame trembling with
anger and disdain. 'Then I thank you, I prefer my version. Yours is
impossible. For let me tell you, when Mademoiselle de la Vire does
confer a favour, it will be on a man with the power and the wit--and the
constancy, to keep it, even from M. de Rosny!'

Her scorn hurt, though it did not anger me. I felt it to be in a measure
deserved, and raged against myself rather than against her. But aware
through all of the supreme importance of placing her in safety, I
subjected my immediate feelings to the exigencies of the moment and
stooped to an argument which would, I thought, have weight though
private pleading failed.

'Putting myself aside, mademoiselle,' I said, with more formality than I
had yet used, 'there is one consideration which must weigh with you. The
king--'

'The king!' she cried, interrupting me violently, her face hot with
passion and her whole person instinct with stubborn self-will. 'I shall
not see the king!'

'You will not see the king?' I repeated in amazement.

'No, I will not!' she answered, in a whirl of anger, scorn, and
impetuosity. 'There! I will not! I have been made a toy and a tool long
enough, M. de Marsac,' she continued, 'and I will serve others' ends no
more. I have made up my mind. Do not talk to me; you will do no good,
sir. I would to Heaven,' she added bitterly, 'I had stayed at Chize and
never seen this place!'

'But, mademoiselle,' I said, 'you have not thought--'

'Thought!' she exclaimed, shutting her small white teeth so viciously
I all but recoiled. 'I have thought enough. I am sick of thought. I am
going to act now. I will be a puppet no longer. You may take me to the
castle by force if you will; but you cannot make me speak.'

I looked at her in the utmost dismay, and astonishment; being unable at
first to believe that a woman who had gone through so much, had run so
many risks, and ridden so many miles for a purpose, would, when all
was done and the hour come, decline to carry out her plan. I could
not believe it, I say, at first; and I tried arguments, and entreaties
without stint, thinking that she only asked to be entreated or coaxed.

But I found prayers and even threats breath wasted upon her; and beyond
these I would not go. I know I have been blamed by some and ridiculed by
others for not pushing the matter farther; but those who have stood face
to face with a woman of spirit--a woman whose very frailty and weakness
fought for her--will better understand the difficulties with which I had
to contend and the manner in which conviction was at last borne in on
my mind. I had never before confronted stubbornness of this kind. As
mademoiselle said again and again, I might force her to Court, but I
could not make her speak.

When I had tried every means of persuasion, and still found no way of
overcoming her resolution the while Fanchette looked on with a face of
wood, neither aiding me nor taking part against me--I lost, I confess,
in the chagrin of the moment that sense of duty which had hitherto
animated me; and though my relation to mademoiselle should have made me
as careful as ever of her safety, even in her own despite, I left her
at last in anger and went out without saying another word about removing
her--a thing which was still in my power. I believe a very brief
reflection would have recalled me to myself and my duty; but the
opportunity was not given me, for I had scarcely reached the head of the
stairs before Fanchette came after me, and called to me in a whisper to
stop.

She held a taper in her hand, and this she raised to my face, smiling at
the disorder which she doubtless read there. 'Do you say that this house
is not safe?' she asked abruptly, lowering the light as she spoke.

'You have tried a house in Blois before?' I replied with the same
bluntness. 'You should know as well as I, woman.'

'She must be taken from here, then,' she answered, nodding her head,
cunningly. 'I can persuade her. Do you send for your people, and be here
in half an hour. It may take me that time to wheedle her. But I shall do
it.'

'Then listen,' I said eagerly, seizing the opportunity and her sleeve
and drawing her farther from the door. 'If you can persuade her to that,
you can persuade to all I wish. Listen, my friend,' I continued, sinking
my voice still lower. 'If she will see the king for only ten minutes,
and tell him what she knows, I will give you--'

'What?' the woman asked suddenly and harshly, drawing at the same time
her sleeve from my hand.

'Fifty crowns,' I replied, naming in my desperation a sum which would
seem a fortune to a person in her position. 'Fifty crowns down, the
moment the interview is over.'

'And for that you would have me sell her!' the woman cried with a rude
intensity of passion which struck me like a blow. 'For shame! For
shame, man! You persuaded her to leave her home and her friends, and the
country where she was known; and now you would have me sell her! Shame
on you! Go!' she added scornfully. 'Go this instant and get your men.
The king, say you? The king! I tell you I would not have her finger ache
to save all your kings!'

She flounced away with that, and I retired crestfallen; wondering much
at the fidelity which Providence, doubtless for the well-being of the
gentle, possibly for the good of all, has implanted in the humble.
Finding Simon, to whom I had scarce patience to speak, waiting on the
stairs below, I despatched him to Maignan, to bid him come to me with
his men. Meanwhile I watched the house myself until their arrival,
and then, going up, found that Fanchette had been as good as her word.
Mademoiselle, with a sullen mien, and a red spot on either cheek,
consented to descend, and, preceded by a couple of links, which Maignan
had thoughtfully provided, was escorted safely to my lodgings; where I
bestowed her in the rooms below my own, which I had designed for her.

At the door she turned and bowed to me, her face on fire.

'So far, sir, you have got your way,' she said, breathing quickly. 'Do
not flatter yourself, however, that you will get it farther--even by
bribing my woman!'



CHAPTER XXIII. THE LAST VALOIS.

I stood for a few moments on the stairs, wondering what I should do in
an emergency to which the Marquis's message of the afternoon attached so
pressing a character. Had it not been for that I might have waited until
morning, and felt tolerably certain of finding mademoiselle in a more
reasonable mood then. But as it was I dared not wait. I dared not risk
the delay, and I came quickly to the conclusion that the only course
open to me was to go at once to M. de Rambouillet and tell him frankly
how the matter stood.

Maignan had posted one of his men at the open doorway leading into the
street, and fixed his own quarters on the landing at the top, whence he
could overlook an intruder without being seen himself. Satisfied with
the arrangement, I left Rambouillet's man to reinforce him, and took
with me Simon Fleix, of whose conduct in regard to mademoiselle I
entertained the gravest doubts.

The night, I found on reaching the street, was cold, the sky where it
was visible between the eaves being bright with stars. A sharp wind was
blowing, too, compelling us to wrap our cloaks round us and hurry on
at a pace which agreed well with the excitement of my thoughts. Assured
that had mademoiselle been complaisant I might have seen my mission
accomplished within the hour, it was impossible I should not feel
impatient with one who, to gratify a whim, played with the secrets of a
kingdom as if they were counters, and risked in passing ill-humour the
results of weeks of preparation. And I was impatient, and with her. But
my resentment fell so far short of the occasion that I wondered uneasily
at my own easiness, and felt more annoyed with myself for failing to be
properly annoyed with her, than inclined to lay the blame where it was
due. It was in vain I told myself contemptuously that she was a woman
and that women were not accountable. I felt that the real secret and
motive of my indulgence lay, not in this, but in the suspicion, which
her reference to the favour given me on my departure from Rosny had
converted almost into a certainty, that I was myself the cause of her
sudden ill-humour.

I might have followed this train of thought farther, and to very
pertinent conclusions. But on reaching M. de Rambouillet's lodging I
was diverted from it by the abnormally quiet aspect of the house, on the
steps of which half a dozen servants might commonly be seen lounging.
Now the doors were closed, no lights shone through the windows, and the
hall sounded empty and desolate when I knocked. Not a lackey hurried to
receive me even then; but the slipshod tread of the old porter, as he
came with a lantern to open, alone broke the silence. I waited eagerly
wondering what all this could mean; and when the man at last opened,
and, recognising my face, begged my pardon if he had kept me waiting I
asked him impatiently what was the matter.

'And where is the Marquis?' I added, stepping inside to be out of the
wind, and loosening my cloak.

'Have you not heard, sir?' the man asked, holding up his lantern to my
face. He was an old, wizened, lean fellow. 'It is a break-up, sir, I am
afraid, this time.'

'A break-up?' I rejoined, peevishly. 'Speak out, man! What is the
matter? I hate mysteries.'

You have not heard the news, sir? That the Duke of Mercoeur and Marshal
Retz, with all their people, left Blois this afternoon?'

'No?' I answered, somewhat startled. 'Whither are they gone?'

'To Paris, it is said, sir,--to join the League.'

'But do you mean that they have deserted the king?' I asked.

'For certain, sir!' he answered.

'Not the Duke of Mercoeur?' I exclaimed. 'Why, man, he is the king's
brother-in-law. He owes everything to him.'

'Well, he is gone, sir,' the old man answered positively. 'The news was
brought to M. le Marquis about four o'clock, or a little after. He got
his people together, and started after them to try and persuade them to
return. Or, so it is said.'

As quickly as I could, I reviewed the situation in my mind. If this
strange news were true, and men like Mercoeur, who had every reason to
stand by the king, as well as men like Retz, who had long been suspected
of disaffection, were abandoning the Court, the danger must be coming
close indeed. The king must feel his throne already tottering, and be
eager to grasp at any means of supporting it. Under such circumstances
it seemed to be my paramount duty to reach him; to gain his ear if
possible, and at all risks; that I and not Bruhl, Navarre not Turenne,
might profit by the first impulse of self-preservation.

Bidding the porter shut his door and keep close, I hurried to the
Castle, and was presently more than confirmed in my resolution. For
to my surprise I found the Court in much the same state as M. de
Rambouillet's house. There were double guards indeed at the gates, who
let me pass after scrutinising me narrowly; but the courtyard, which
should have been at this hour ablaze with torches and crowded with
lackeys and grooms, was a dark wilderness, in which half a dozen links
trembled mournfully. Passing through the doors I found things within in
the same state: the hall ill lit and desolate; the staircase manned
only by a few whispering groups, who scanned me as I passed; the
ante-chambers almost empty, or occupied by the grey uniforms of the
Switzer guards. Where I had looked, to see courtiers assembling to meet
their sovereign and assure him of their fidelity, I found only gloomy
faces, watchful eyes, and mouths ominously closed. An air of constraint
and foreboding rested on all. A single footstep sounded hollowly. The
long corridors, which had so lately rung with laughter and the rattle
of dice, seemed already devoted to the silence, and desolation which
awaited them when the Court should depart. Where any spoke I caught the
name of Guise; and I could have fancied that his mighty shadow lay upon
the place and cursed it.

Entering the chamber, I found matters little better there. His Majesty
was not present, nor were any of the Court ladies; but half a dozen
gentlemen, among whom I recognised Revol, one of the King's secretaries,
stood near the alcove. They looked up on my entrance, as though
expecting news, and then, seeing who it was, looked away again
impatiently. The Duke of Nevers was walking moodily to and fro before
one of the windows, his hands clasped behind his back: while Biron and
Crillon, reconciled by the common peril, talked loudly on the hearth. I
hesitated a moment, uncertain how to proceed, for I was not yet so old
at Court as to feel at home there. But, at last making up my mind, I
walked boldly up to Crillon and requested his good offices to procure me
an immediate audience of the king.

'An audience? Do you mean you want to see him alone?' he said, raising
his eyebrows and looking whimsically at Biron.

'That is my petition, M. de Crillon,' I answered firmly, though my heart
sank. 'I am here on M. de Rambouillet's business, and I need to see his
Majesty forthwith.'

'Well, that is straightforward,' he replied, clapping me on the
shoulder. 'And you shall see him. In coming to Crillon you have come
to the right man. Revol,' he continued, turning to the secretary, 'this
gentleman bears a message from M. de Rambouillet to the king. Take him
to the closet without delay, my friend, and announce him. I will be
answerable for him.'

But the secretary shrugged his shoulders up to his ears. 'It is quite
impossible, M. de Crillon,' he said gravely. 'Quite impossible at
present.'

'Impossible! Chut! I do not know the word,' Crillon retorted rudely.
'Come, take him at once, and blame me if ill comes of it. Do you hear?'

'But his Majesty--'

'Well?'

'Is at his devotions,' the secretary said stiffly.

'His Majesty's devotions be hanged!' Crillon rejoined--so loudly that
there was a general titter, and M. de Nevers laughed grimly. 'Do you
hear?' the Avennais continued, his face growing redder and his voice
higher, 'or must I pull your ears, my friend? Take this gentleman to the
closet, I say, and if his Majesty be angry, tell him it was by my order.
I tell you he comes from Rambouillet.'

I do not know whether it was the threat, or the mention of M. de
Rambouillet's name, which convinced the secretary. But at any rate,
after a moment's hesitation, he acquiesced.

He nodded sullenly to me to follow him, and led the way to a curtain
which masked the door of the closet. I followed him across the chamber,
after muttering a hasty word of acknowledgment to Crillon; and I had as
nearly as possible reached the door when the bustle of some one entering
the chamber caught my ear. I had just time to turn and see that this
was Bruhl, just time to intercept the dark look of chagrin and surprise
which he fixed on me, and then Revol, holding up the curtain, signed to
me to enter.

I expected to pass at once into the presence of the king, and had my
reverence ready. Instead, I found myself to my surprise in a small
chamber, or rather passage, curtained at both ends, and occupied by a
couple of guardsmen--members, doubtless, of the Band of the Forty-Five
who rose at my entrance and looked at me dubiously. Their guard-room,
dimly illumined by a lamp of red glass, seemed to me, in spite of its
curtains and velvet bench, and the thick tapestry which kept out every
breath of wholesome air, the most sombre I could imagine. And the most
ill-omened. But I had no time to make any long observation; for Revol,
passing me brusquely, raised the curtain at the other end, and, with his
finger on his lip, bade me by signs to enter.

I did so as silently, the heavy scent of perfumes striking me in the
face as I raised a second curtain, and stopped short a pace beyond
it; partly in reverence--because kings love their subjects best at a
distance--and partly in surprise. For the room, or rather that portion
of it in which I stood, was in darkness; only the farther end being
illumined by a cold pale flood of moonlight, which, passing through
a high, straight window, lay in a silvery sheet on the floor. For an
instant I thought I was alone; then I saw, resting against this window,
with a hand on either mullion, a tall figure, having something strange
about the head. This peculiarity presently resolved itself into the
turban in which I had once before seen his Majesty. The king--for he it
was--was talking to himself. He had not heard me enter, and having his
back to me remained unconscious of my presence.

I paused in doubt, afraid to advance, anxious to withdraw; yet uncertain
whether I could move again unheard. At this moment while I stood
hesitating, he raised his voice, and his words, reaching my ears,
riveted my attention, so strange and eerie were both they and his tone.
'They say there is ill-luck in thirteen,' he muttered. 'Thirteen
Valois and last!' He paused to laugh a wicked, mirthless laugh.
'Ay,--Thirteenth! And it is thirteen years since I entered Paris, a
crowned King! There were Quelus and Maugiron and St. Megrin and I--and
he, I remember. Ah, those days, those nights! I would sell my soul to
live them again; had I not sold it long ago in the living them once! We
were young then, and rich, and I was king; and Quelus was an Apollo! He
died calling on me to save him. And Maugiron died, blaspheming God and
the saints. And St. Megrin, he had thirty-four wounds. And he--he is
dead too, curse him! They are all dead, all dead, and it is all over! My
God! it is all over, it is all over, it is all over!'

He repeated the last four words more than a dozen times, rocking himself
to and fro by his hold on the mullions. I trembled as I listened, partly
through fear on my own account should I be discovered, and partly
by reason of the horror of despair and remorse--no, not remorse,
regret--which spoke in his monotonous voice. I guessed that some impulse
had led him to draw the curtain from the window and shade the lamp;
and that then, as he looked down on the moonlit country, the contrast
between it and the vicious, heated atmosphere, heavy with intrigue and
worse, in which he had spent his strength, had forced itself upon his
mind. For he presently went on.

'France! There it lies! And what will they do with it? Will they cut it
up into pieces, as it was before old Louis XI? Will Mercoeur--curse him!
be the most Christian Duke of Brittany? And Mayenne, by the grace of
God, Prince of Paris and the Upper Seine? Or will the little Prince of
Bearn beat them, and be Henry IV., King of France and Navarre, Protector
of the Churches? Curse him too! He is thirty-six. He is my age. But he
is young and strong, and has all before him. While I--I--oh, my God,
have mercy on me! Have mercy on me, O God in Heaven!'

With the last word he fell on his knees on the step before the window,
and burst into such an agony of unmanly tears and sobbings as I had
never dreamed of or imagined, and least of all in the King of France.
Hardly knowing whether to be more ashamed or terrified, I turned at all
risks, and stealthily lifting the curtain, crept out with infinite care;
and happily with so much good fortune as to escape detection. There was
space enough between the two curtains to admit my body and no more; and
here I stood a short while to collect my thoughts. Then, striking my
scabbard against the wall, as though by accident, and coughing loudly
at the same moment, I twitched the curtain aside with some violence and
re-entered, thinking that by these means I had given him warning enough.

But I had not reckoned on the darkness in which the room lay, or the
excitable state in which I had left him. He heard me, indeed, but being
able to see only a tall, indistinct figure approaching him, he took
fright, and falling back against the moonlit window, as though he saw
a ghost, thrust out his hand, gasping at the same time two words, which
sounded to me like 'Ha! Guise!'

The next instant, discerning that I fell on my knee where I stood,
and came no nearer, he recovered himself with an effort, which his
breathing made very apparent, he asked in an unsteady voice who it was.

'One of your Majesty's most faithful servants,' I answered, remaining on
my knee, and affecting to see nothing.

Keeping his face towards me, he sidled to the lamp and strove to
withdraw the shade. But his fingers trembled so violently that it was
some time before he succeeded, and set free the cheerful beams, which,
suddenly filling the room with radiance, disclosed to my wondering
eyes, instead of darkness and the cold gleam of the moon, a profusion
of riches, of red stuffs and gemmed trifles and gilded arms crowded
together in reckless disorder. A monkey chained in one corner began
to gibber and mow at me. A cloak of strange cut, stretched on a wooden
stand, deceived me for an instant into thinking that there was a third
person present; while the table, heaped with dolls and powder-puff's,
dog-collars and sweet-meats, a mask, a woman's slipper, a pair of
pistols, some potions, a scourge, and an immense quantity of like
litter, had as melancholy an appearance in my eyes as the king himself,
whose disorder the light disclosed without mercy. His turban was awry,
and betrayed the premature baldness of his scalp. The paint on his
cheeks was cracked and stained, and had soiled the gloves he wore. He
looked fifty years old; and in his excitement he had tugged his sword to
the front, whence it refused to be thrust back.

'Who sent you here?' he asked, when he had so far recovered his senses
as to recognise me, which he did with great surprise.

'I am here, sire,' I answered evasively, 'to place myself at your
Majesty's service.'

'Such loyalty is rare,' he answered, with a bitter sneer. 'But stand
up, sir. I suppose I must be thankful for small mercies, and, losing a
Mercoeur, be glad to receive a Marsac.'

'By your leave, sire,' I rejoined hardily, 'the exchange is not so
adverse. Your Majesty may make another duke when you will. But honest
men are not so easily come by.'

'So! so!' he answered, looking at me with a fierce light in his eyes.
'You remind me in season, I may still make and unmake! I am still King
of France? That is so sirrah, is it not?'

'God forbid that it should be otherwise!' I answered earnestly. 'It is
to lay before your Majesty certain means by which you may give fuller
effect to your wishes that I am here. The King of Navarre desires only,
sire--'

'Tut, tut!' he exclaimed impatiently, and with some displeasure, 'I know
his will better than you, man. But you see,' he continued cunningly,
forgetting my inferior position as quickly as he had remembered it,
'Turenne promises well, too. And Turenne--it is true he may play the
Lorrainer. But if I trust Henry of Navarre, and he prove false to me--'

He did not complete the sentence, but strode to and fro a time or two,
his mind, which had a natural inclination towards crooked courses, bent
on some scheme by which he might play off the one party against the
other. Apparently he was not very successful in finding one, however;
or else the ill-luck with which he had supported the League against the
Huguenots recurred to his mind. For he presently stopped, with a sigh,
and came back to the point.

'If I knew that Turenne were lying,' be muttered, 'then indeed--. But
Rosny promised evidence, and he has sent me none.'

'It is at hand, sire,' I answered, my heart beginning to beat, 'Your
Majesty will remember that M. de Rosny honoured me with the task of
introducing it to you.'

'To be sure,' he replied, awaking as from a dream, and looking and
speaking eagerly. Matters to-day have driven everything out of my head.
Where is your witness, man? Convince me, and we will act promptly. We
will give them Jarnac and Moncontour over again. Is he outside?'

'It is a woman, sire,' I made answer, dashed somewhat by his sudden and
feverish alacrity.

'A woman, eh? You have her here?'

'No, sire,' I replied, wondering what he would say to my next piece
of information. 'She is in Blois, she has arrived, but the truth is--I
humbly crave your Majesty's indulgence--she refuses to come or speak.
I cannot well bring her here by force, and I have sought you, sire, for
the purpose of taking your commands in the matter.'

He stared at me in the utmost astonishment.

'Is she young?' he asked after a long pause.

'Yes, sire,' I answered. 'She is maid of honour to the Princess of
Navarre, and a ward also of the Vicomte de Turenne.'

'Gad! then she is worth hearing, the little rebel!' he replied. 'A ward
Of Turenne's is she? Ho! ho! And now she will not speak? My cousin
of Navarre now would know how to bring her to her senses, but I have
eschewed these vanities. I might send and have her brought, it is true;
but a very little thing would cause a barricade to-night.'

'And besides, sire,' I ventured to add, 'she is known to Turenne's
people here, who have once stolen her away. Were she brought to your
Majesty with any degree of openness, they would learn it, and know that
the game was lost.'

'Which would not suit me,' he answered, nodding and looking at me
gloomily. 'They might anticipate our Jarnac; and until we have settled
matters with one or the other our person is not too secure. You must go
and fetch her. She is at your lodging. She must be brought, man.'

'I will do what you command, sire,' I answered. 'But I am greatly afraid
that she will not come.'

He lost his temper at that. 'Then why, in the devil's name, have
you troubled me with the matter?' he cried savagely. 'God knows--I
don't--why Rosny employed such a man and such a woman. He might have
seen from the cut of your cloak, sir, which is full six months behind
the fashion, that you could not manage a woman! Was ever such damnable
folly heard of in this world? But it is Navarre's loss, not mine. It is
his loss. And I hope to Heaven it may be yours too!' he added fiercely.

There was so much in what he said that I bent before the storm, and
accepted with humility blame which was as natural on his part as it was
undeserved on mine. Indeed I could not wonder at his Majesty's anger;
nor should I have wondered at it in a greater man. I knew that but for
reasons, on which I did not wish to dwell, I should have shared it to
the full, and spoken quite as strongly of the caprice which ruined hopes
and lives for a whim.

The king continued for some time to say to me all the hard things he
could think of. Wearied at last by my patience, he paused, and cried
angrily. 'Well, have you nothing; to say for yourself? Can you suggest
nothing?'

'I dare not mention to your Majesty,' I said humbly, 'what seems to me
to be the only alternative.'

'You mean that I should go to the wench!' he answered--for he did not
lack quickness. '"SE NON VA EL OTERO A MAHOMA, VAYA MAHOMA AL OTERO," as
Mendoza says. But the saucy quean, to force me to go to her! Did my wife
guess--but there, I will go. By God I will go!' he added abruptly and
fiercely. 'I will live to ruin Retz yet! Where is your lodging?'

I told him, wondering much at this flash of the old spirit, which twenty
years before had won him a reputation his later life did nothing to
sustain.

'Do you know,' he asked, speaking with sustained energy and clearness,
'the door by which M. de Rosny entered to talk with me? Can you find it
in the dark?'

'Yes, sire,' I answered, my heart beating high.

'Then be in waiting there two hours before midnight,' he replied. 'Be
well armed, but alone. I shall know how to make the girl speak. I can
trust you, I suppose?' he added suddenly, stepping nearer to me and
looking fixedly into my eyes.

'I will answer for your Majesty's life with my own,' I replied, sinking
on one knee.

'I believe you, sir,' he answered gravely, giving me his hand to kiss,
and then turning away. 'So be it. Now leave me. You have been here too
long already. Not a word to any one as you value your life.'

I made fitting answer and was leaving him; but when I had my head
already on the curtain, he called me back. 'In Heaven's name get a new
cloak!' he said peevishly, eyeing me all over with his face puckered up.
'Get a new cloak, man, the first thing in the morning. It is worse seen
from the side than the front. It would ruin the cleverest courtier of
them all!'



CHAPTER XXIV. A ROYAL PERIL.

The elation with which I had heard the king announce his resolution
quickly diminished on cooler reflection. It stood in particular at a
very low ebb as I waited, an hour later, at the little north postern of
the Castle, and, cowering within the shelter of the arch to escape the
wind, debated whether his Majesty's energy would sustain him to the
point of action, or whether he might not, in one of those fits of
treacherous vacillation which had again and again marred his plans, send
those to keep the appointment who would give a final account of me.
The longer I considered his character the more dubious I grew. The
loneliness of the situation, the darkness, the black front, unbroken by
any glimmer of light, which the Castle presented on this side, and the
unusual and gloomy stillness which lay upon the town, all contributed to
increase my uneasiness. It was with apprehension as well as relief that
I caught at last the sound of footsteps on the stone staircase, and,
standing a little to one side, saw a streak of light appear at the foot
of the door.

On the latter being partially opened a voice cried my name. I advanced
with caution and showed myself. A brief conversation ensued between
two or three persons who stood within; but in the end, a masked figure,
which I had no difficulty in identifying as the king, stepped briskly
out.

'You are armed?' he said, pausing a second opposite me.

I put back my cloak and showed him, by the light which streamed from the
doorway, that I carried pistols as well as a sword.

'Good!' he answered briefly; 'then let us go. Do you walk on my left
hand, my friend. It is a dark night, is it not?'

'Very dark, sire,' I said.

He made no answer to this, and we started, proceeding with caution until
we had crossed the narrow bridge, and then with greater freedom and at
a better pace. The slenderness of the attendance at Court that evening,
and the cold wind, which swept even the narrowest streets and drove
roisterers indoors, rendered it unlikely that we should be stopped or
molested by any except professed thieves; and for these I was prepared.
The king showed no inclination to talk; and keeping silence myself out
of respect, I had time to calculate the chances and to consider whether
his Majesty would succeed where I had failed.

This calculation, which was not inconsistent with the keenest
watchfulness on my part whenever we turned a corner or passed the mouth
of an alley, was brought to an end by our safe arrival at the house.
Briefly apologising to the king for the meanness and darkness of the
staircase, I begged leave to precede him, and rapidly mounted until I
met Maignan. Whispering to him that all was well, I did not wait to hear
his answer, but, bidding him be on the watch, I led the king on with
as much deference as was possible until we stood at the door of
mademoiselle's apartment, which I have elsewhere stated to consist of
an outer and inner room. The door was opened by Simon Fleix, and him
I promptly sent out. Then, standing aside and uncovering, I begged the
king to enter.

He did so, still wearing his hat and mask, and I followed and secured
the door. A lamp hanging from the ceiling diffused an imperfect light
through the room, which was smaller but more comfortable in appearance
than that which I rented overhead. I observed that Fanchette, whose
harsh countenance looked more forbidding than usual, occupied a stool
which she had set in a strange fashion against the Inner door; but I
thought no more of this at the moment, my attention passing quickly to
mademoiselle, who sat crouching before the fire, enveloped in a large
outdoor cloak, as if she felt the cold. Her back was towards us, and she
was, or pretended to be, still ignorant of our presence. With a muttered
word I pointed her out to the king, and went towards her with him.

'Mademoiselle, I said in a low voice, 'Mademoiselle de la Vire! I have
the honour--'

She would not turn, and I stopped. Clearly she heard, but she betrayed
that she did so only by drawing her cloak more closely round her. Primed
by my respect for the king, I touched her lightly on the shoulder.
'Mademoiselle!' I said impatiently, 'you are not aware of it, but--'

She shook herself free from my hand with so rude a gesture that I broke
off, and stood gazing foolishly at her. The king smiled, and nodding
to me to step back a pace, took the task on himself. 'Mademoiselle,' he
said with dignity, 'I am not accustomed--'

His voice had a magical effect. Before he could add another word she
sprang up as if she had been struck, and faced us, a cry of alarm on her
lips. Simultaneously we both cried out too, for it was not mademoiselle
at all. The woman who confronted us, her hand on her mask, her eyes
glittering through the slits, was of a taller and fuller figure. We
stared at her. Then a lock of bright golden hair which had escaped from
the hood of her cloak gave us the clue. 'Madame!' the king cried.

'Madame de Bruhl!' I echoed, my astonishment greater than his.

Seeing herself known, she began with trembling fingers to undo the
fastenings of her mask; but the king, who had hitherto displayed a
trustfulness I had not expected in him, had taken alarm at sight of her,
as at a thing unlooked for, and of which I had not warned him. 'How is
this?' he said harshly, drawing back a pace from her and regarding me
with anger and distrust. 'Is this some pretty arrangement of yours, sir?
Am I an intruder at an assignation, or is this a trap with M. de Bruhl
in the background? Answer, sirrah!' he continued, working himself
rapidly into a passion. 'Which am I to understand is the case?'

'Neither, sire,' I answered with as much dignity as I could assume,
utterly surprised and mystified as I was by Madame's presence. 'Your
Majesty wrongs Madame de Bruhl as much by the one suspicion as you
injure me by the other. I am equally in the dark with you, sire, and as
little expected to see madame here.'

'I came, sire,' she said proudly, addressing herself to the king, and
ignoring me, 'out of no love to M. de Marsac, but as any person bearing
a message to him might come. Nor can you, sire,' she added with spirit,
'feel half as much surprise at seeing me here, as I at seeing your
Majesty.'

'I can believe that,' the king answered drily. 'I would you had not seen
me.'

'The King of France is seen only when he chooses,' she replied,
curtseying to the ground.

'Good,' he answered. 'Let it be so, and you will oblige the King of
France, madame. But enough,' he continued, turning from her to me;
'since this is not the lady I came to see, M. de Marsac, where is she?'

'In the inner room, sire, I opine,' I said, advancing to Fanchette with
more misgiving at heart than my manner evinced. 'Your mistress is here,
is she not?' I continued, addressing the woman sharply.

'Ay, and will not come out,' she rejoined, sturdily keeping her place.

'Nonsense!' I said. 'Tell her--'

'You may tell her what you please,' she replied, refusing to budge an
inch. 'She can hear.'

'But, woman!' I cried impatiently, 'you do not understand. I MUST speak
with her. I must speak with her at once! On business of the highest
importance.'

'As you please,' she said rudely, still keeping her seat. 'I have told
you you can speak.'

Perhaps I felt as foolish on this occasion as ever in my life; and
surely never was man placed in a more ridiculous position. After
overcoming numberless obstacles, and escaping as many perils, I had
brought the king here, a feat beyond my highest hopes--only to be
baffled and defeated by a waiting-woman! I stood irresolute; witless and
confused; while the king waited half angry and half amused, and madame
kept her place by the entrance, to which she had retreated.

I was delivered from my dilemma by the curiosity which is,
providentially perhaps, a part of woman's character, and which led
mademoiselle to interfere herself. Keenly on the watch inside, she had
heard part of what passed between us, and been rendered inquisitive by
the sound of a strange man's voice, and by the deference which she
could discern I paid to the visitor. At this moment, she cried out,
accordingly, to know who was there; and Fanchette, seeming to take this
as a command, rose and dragged her stool aside, saying peevishly and
without any increase of respect, 'There, I told you she could hear.'

'Who is it?' mademoiselle asked again, in a raised voice.

I was about to answer when the king signed to me to stand back, and,
advancing himself, knocked gently on the door. 'Open, I pray you,
mademoiselle,' he said courteously.

'Who is there?' she cried again, her voice trembling.

'It is I, the king,' he answered softly; but in that tone of majesty
which belongs not to the man, but to the descendant, and seems to be the
outcome of centuries of command.

She uttered an exclamation and slowly, and with seeming reluctance,
turned the key in the lock. It grated, and the door opened. I caught a
glimpse for an instant of her pale face and bright eyes, and then his
Majesty, removing his hat, passed in and closed the door; and I withdrew
to the farther end of the room, where madame continued to stand by the
entrance.

I entertained a suspicion, I remember, and not unnaturally, that she
had come to my lodging as her husband's spy; but her first words when I
joined her dispelled this. 'Quick!' she said with an imperious gesture.
'Hear me and let me go! I have waited long enough for you, and suffered
enough through you. As for that, woman in there, she is mad, and her
servant too! Now, listen to me. You spoke to me honestly to-day, and
I have come to repay you. You have an appointment with my husband
to-morrow at Chaverny. Is it not so?' she added impatiently.

I replied that it was so.

'You are to go with one friend,' she went on, tearing the glove she
had taken off, to strips in her excitement, 'He is to meet you with one
also?'

'Yes,' I assented reluctantly, 'at the bridge, madame.'

'Then do not go,' she rejoined emphatically. 'Shame on me that I should
betray my husband; but it were worse to send an innocent man to his
death. He will meet you with one sword only, according to his challenge,
but there will be those under the bridge who will make certain work.
There, I have betrayed him now!' she continued bitterly. 'It is done.
Let me go!'

'Nay, but, madame,' I said, feeling more concerned for her, on whom from
the first moment of meeting her I had brought nothing but misfortune,
than surprised by this new treachery on his part, 'will you not run some
risk in returning to him? Is there nothing I can do for you--no step I
can take for your protection?'

'None!' she said repellently and almost rudely, 'except to speed my
going.'

'But you will not pass through the streets alone?'

She laughed so bitterly my heart ached for her. 'The unhappy are always
safe,' she said.

Remembering how short a time it was since I had surprised her in the
first happiness of wedded love, I felt for her all the pity it was
natural I should feel. But the responsibility under which his Majesty's
presence and the charge of mademoiselle laid me forbade me to indulge
in the luxury of evincing my gratitude. Gladly would I have escorted her
back to her home--even if I could not make that home again what it had
been, or restore her husband to the pinnacle from which I had dashed
him--but I dared not do this. I was forced to content myself with less,
and was about to offer to send one of my men with her, when a hurried
knocking at the outer door arrested the words on my lips.

Signing to her to stand still, I listened. The knocking was repeated,
and grew each moment more urgent. There was a little grille, strongly
wired, in the upper part of the door, and this I was about to open in
order to learn what was amiss, when Simon's voice reached me from the
farther side imploring me to open the door quickly. Doubting the lad's
prudence, yet afraid to refuse lest I should lose some warning he had to
give, I paused a second, and then undid the fastenings. The moment the
door gave way he fell in bodily, crying out to me to bar it behind him.
I caught a glimpse through the gap of a glare as of torches, and saw
by this light half a dozen flushed faces in the act of rising above the
edge of the landing. The men who owned them raised a shout of triumph at
sight of me, and, clearing the upper steps at a bound, made a rush for
the door. But in vain. We had just time to close it and drop the two
stout bars. In a moment, in a second, the fierce outcry fell to a dull
roar; and safe for the time, we had leisure to look in one another's
faces and learn the different aspects of alarm. Madame was white to the
lips, while Simon's eyes seemed starting from his head, and he shook in
every limb with terror.

At first, on my asking him what it meant, he could not speak. But that
would not do, and I was in the act of seizing him by the collar to force
an answer from him when the inner door opened, and the king came out,
his face wearing an air of so much cheerfulness as proved both his
satisfaction with mademoiselle's story and his ignorance of all we were
about. In a word he had not yet taken the least alarm; but seeing Simon
in my hands, and madame leaning against the wall by the door like one
deprived of life, he stood and cried out in surprise to know what it
was.

'I fear we are besieged, sire,' I answered desperately, feeling my
anxieties increased a hundredfold by his appearance--'but by whom I
cannot say. This lad knows, however,' I continued, giving Simon, a
vicious shake, 'and he shall speak. Now, trembler,' I said to him, 'tell
your tale?'

'The Provost-Marshal!' he stammered, terrified afresh by the king's
presence: for Henry had removed his mask. 'I was on guard below. I had
come up a few steps to be out of the cold, when I heard them enter.
There are a round score of them.'

I cried out a great oath, asking him why he had not gone up and warned
Maignan, who with his men was now cut off from us in the rooms above.
'You fool!' I continued, almost beside myself with rage, 'if you had not
come to this door they would have mounted to my rooms and beset them!
What is this folly about the Provost-Marshal?'

'He is there,' Simon answered, cowering away from me, his face working.

I thought he was lying, and had merely fancied this in his fright. But
the assailants at this moment began to hail blows on the door, calling
on us to open, and using such volleys of threats as penetrated even the
thickness of the oak; driving the blood from the women's cheeks, and
arresting the king's step in a manner which did not escape me. Among
their cries I could plainly distinguish the words, 'In the king's name!'
which bore out Simon's statement.

At the moment I drew comfort from this; for if we had merely to deal
with the law we had that on our side which was above it. And I speedily
made up my mind what to do. 'I think the lad speaks the truth, sire,' I
said coolly. 'This is only your Majesty's Provost-Marshal. The worst to
be feared, therefore, is that he may learn your presence here before
you would have it known. It should not be a matter of great difficulty,
however, to bind him to silence, and if you will please to mask, I will
open the grille and speak with him.'

The king, who had taken his stand in the middle of the room, and seemed
dazed and confused by the suddenness of the alarm and the uproar,
assented with a brief word. Accordingly I was preparing to open the
grille when Madame de Bruhl seized my arm, and forcibly pushed me back
from it.

'What would you do?' she cried, her face full of terror. 'Do you not
hear? He is there.'

'Who is there?' I said, startled more by her manner than her words.

'Who?' she answered; 'who should be there? My husband! I hear his voice,
I tell you! He has tracked me here! He has found me, and will kill me!'

'God forbid!' I said, doubting if she had really heard his voice. To
make sure, I asked Simon if he had seen him; and my heart sank when I
heard from him too that Bruhl was of the party. For the first time I
became fully sensible of the danger which threatened us. For the first
time, looking round the ill-lit room on the women's terrified faces,
and the king's masked figure instinct with ill-repressed nervousness, I
recognised how hopelessly we were enmeshed. Fortune had served Bruhl so
well that, whether he knew it or not, he had us all trapped--alike
the king whom he desired to compromise, and his wife whom he hated,
mademoiselle who had once escaped him, and me who had twice thwarted
him. It was little to be wondered at if my courage sank as I looked from
one to another, and listened to the ominous creaking of the door, as the
stout panels complained under the blows rained upon them. For my first
duty, and that which took the PAS of all others, was to the king--to
save him harmless. How, then, was I to be answerable for mademoiselle,
how protect Madame de Bruhl?--how, in a word, redeem all those pledges
in which my honour was concerned?

It was the thought of the Provost-Marshal which at this moment rallied
my failing spirits. I remembered that until the mystery of his presence
here in alliance with Bruhl was explained there was no need to despair;
and turning briskly to the king I begged him to favour me by standing
with the women in a corner which was not visible from the door. He
complied mechanically, and in a manner which I did not like; but lacking
time to weigh trifles, I turned to the grille and opened it without more
ado.

The appearance of my face at the trap was greeted with a savage cry of
recognition, which subsided as quickly into silence. It was followed
by a momentary pushing to and fro among the crowd outside, which in its
turn ended in the Provost-Marshal coming to the front. 'In the king's
name!' he said fussily.

'What is it?' I replied, eyeing rather the flushed, eager faces which
scowled over his shoulders than himself. The light of two links, borne
by some of the party, shone ruddily on the heads of the halberds, and,
flaring up from time to time, filled all the place with wavering, smoky
light. 'What do you want?' I continued, 'rousing my lodging at this time
of night?'

'I hold a warrant for your arrest,' he replied bluntly. 'Resistance will
be vain. If you do not surrender I shall send for a ram to break in the
door.'

'Where is your order?' I said sharply. 'The one you held this morning
was cancelled by the king himself.'

'Suspended only,' he answered. 'Suspended only. It was given out to me
again this evening for instant execution. And I am here in pursuance of
it, and call on you to surrender.'

'Who delivered it to you?' I retorted.

'M. de Villequier,' he answered readily. 'And here it is. Now, come,
sir,' he continued, 'you are only making matters worse. Open to us.'

'Before I do so,' I said drily, 'I should like to know what part in the
pageant my friend M. de Bruhl, whom I see on the stairs yonder, proposes
to play. And there is my old friend Fresnoy,' I added. 'And I see one or
two others whom I know, M. Provost. Before I surrender I must know among
other things what M. de Bruhl's business is here.'

'It is the business of every loyal man to execute the king's warrant,'
the Provost answered evasively. 'It is yours to surrender, and mine to
lodge you in the Castle. 'But I am loth to have a disturbance. I will
give you until that torch goes out, if you like, to make up your mind.
At the end of that time, if you do not surrender, I shall batter down
the door.'

'You will give the torch fair play?' I said, noting its condition.

He assented; and thanking him sternly for this indulgence, I closed the
grille.



CHAPTER XXV. TERMS OF SURRENDER.

I still had my hand on the trap when a touch on the shoulder caused me
to turn, and in a moment apprised me of the imminence of a new peril; a
peril of such a kind that, summoning all my resolution, I could scarcely
hope to cope with it. Henry was at my elbow. He had taken of his mask,
and a single glance at his countenance warned me that that had happened
of which I had already felt some fear. The glitter of intense excitement
shone in his eyes. His face, darkly-flushed and wet with sweat, betrayed
overmastering emotion, while his teeth, tight clenched in the effort to
restrain the fit of trembling which possessed him, showed between his
lips like those of a corpse. The novelty of the danger which menaced
him, the absence of his gentlemen, and of all the familiar faces and
surroundings without which he never moved, the hour, the mean house,
and his isolation among strangers, had proved too much for nerves long
weakened by his course of living, and for a courage, proved indeed in
the field, but unequal to a sudden stress. Though he still strove to
preserve his dignity, it was alarmingly plain to my eyes that he was on
the point of losing, if he had not already lost, all self-command.

'Open!' he muttered between his teeth, pointing impatiently to the trap
with the hand with which he had already touched me. 'Open, I say, sir!'

I stared at him, startled and confounded. 'But your Majesty,' I ventured
to stammer, 'forgets that I have not yet--'

'Open, I say!' he repeated passionately. 'Do you hear me, sir? I desire
that this door be opened.' His lean hand shook as with the palsy, so
that the gems on it twinkled in the light and rattled as he spoke.

I looked helplessly from him to the women and back again, seeing in
a flash all the dangers which might follow from the discovery of his
presence there--dangers which I had not before formulated to myself, but
which seemed in a moment to range themselves with the utmost clearness
before my eyes. At the same time I saw what seemed to me to be a way of
escape; and emboldened by the one and the other, I kept my hand on the
trap and strove to parley with him.

'Nay, but, sire,' I said hurriedly, yet still with as much deference
as I could command, 'I beg you to permit me first to repeat what I have
seen. M. de Bruhl is without, and I counted six men whom I believe to be
his following. They are ruffians ripe for any crime; and I implore your
Majesty rather to submit to a short imprisonment--'

I paused struck dumb on that word, confounded by the passion which
lightened in the king's face. My ill-chosen expression had indeed
applied the spark to his wrath. Predisposed to suspicion by a hundred
treacheries, he forgot the perils outside in the one idea which on the
instant possessed his mind; that I would confine his person, and had
brought him hither for no other purpose. He glared round him with eyes
full of rage and fear, and his trembling lips breathed rather than spoke
the word 'Imprison?'

Unluckily, a trifling occurrence added at this moment to his disorder,
and converted it into frenzy. Someone outside fell heavily against the
door; this, causing madame to utter a low shriek, seemed to shatter the
last remnant of the king's self-control. Stamping his foot on the floor,
he cried to me with the utmost wildness to open the door--by which I had
hitherto kept my place.

But, wrongly or rightly, I was still determined to put off opening it;
and I raised my hands with the intention of making a last appeal to
him. He misread the gesture, and retreating a step, with the greatest
suddenness whipped out his sword, and in a moment had the point at my
breast, and his wrist drawn back to thrust.

It has always been my belief that he would not have dealt the blow,
but that the mere touch of the hilt, awaking the courage which he
undoubtedly possessed, and which did not desert him in his last moments,
would have recalled him to himself. But the opportunity was not
given him, for while the blade yet quivered, and I stood motionless,
controlling myself by an effort, my knee half bent and my eyes on his,
Mademoiselle de la Vire sprang forward at his back, and with a loud
scream clutched his elbow. The king, surprised, and ignorant who held
him, flung up his point wildly, and striking the lamp above his head
with his blade, shattered it in an instant, bringing down the pottery
with a crash and reducing the room to darkness; while the screams of
the women, and the knowledge that we had a madman among us, peopled, the
blackness with a hundred horrors.

Fearing above all for mademoiselle, I made my way as soon as I could
recover my wits to the embers of the fire, and regardless of the king's
sword, which I had a vague idea was darting about in the darkness, I
searched for and found a half-burnt stick, which I blew into a blaze.
With this, still keeping my back to the room, I contrived to light a
taper that I had noticed standing by the hearth; and then, and then
only, I turned to see what I had to confront.

Mademoiselle de la Vire stood in a corner, half-fierce, half-terrified,
and wholly flushed. She had her hand wrapped up in a 'kerchief already
stained with blood; and from this I gathered that the king in his frenzy
had wounded her slightly. Standing before her mistress, with her hair
bristling, like a wild-cat's fur, and her arms akimbo, was Fanchette,
her harsh face and square form instinct with fury and defiance. Madame
de Bruhl and Simon cowered against the wall not far from them; and in a
chair, into which he had apparently just thrown himself, sat the king,
huddled up and collapsed, the point of his sword trailing on the ground
beside him, and his nerveless hand scarce retaining force to grip the
pommel.

In a moment I made up my mind what to do, and going to him in silence, I
laid my pistols, sword, and dagger on a stool by his side. Then I knelt.

'The door, sire,' I said, 'is there. It is for your Majesty to open it
when you please. Here, too, sire, are my weapons. I am your prisoner,
the Provost-Marshal is outside, and you can at a word deliver me to him.
Only one thing I beg, sire,' I continued earnestly, 'that your Majesty
will treat as a delusion the idea that I meditated for a moment
disrespect or violence to your person.'

He looked at me dully, his face pale, his eyes fish-like. 'Sanctus,
man!' he muttered, 'why did you raise your hand?'

'Only to implore your Majesty to pause a moment,' I answered, watching
the intelligence return slowly to his face. 'If you will deign to listen
I can explain in half a dozen words, sire. M. de Bruhl's men are six
or seven, the Provost has eight or nine; but the former are the wilder
blades, and if M. de Bruhl find your Majesty in my lodging, and infer
his own defeat, he will be capable of any desperate stroke. Your person
would hardly be safe in his company through the streets. And there is
another consideration,' I went on, observing with joy that the king
listened, and was gradually regaining his composure. 'That is, the
secrecy you desired to preserve, sire, until this matter should be
well advanced. M. de Rosny laid the strictest injunctions on me in that
respect, fearing an EMEUTE in Blois should your Majesty's plans become
known.'

'You speak fairly,' the king answered with returning energy, though he
avoided looking at the women. 'Bruhl is likely enough to raise one. But
how am I to get out, sir?' he continued, querulously. 'I cannot remain
here. I shall be missed, man! I am not a hedge-captain, neither sought
nor wanted!'

'If your Majesty would trust me?' I said slowly and with hesitation.

'Trust you!' he retorted peevishly, holding up his hands and gazing
intently at his nails, of the shape and whiteness of which he was
prouder than any woman. 'Have I not trusted you? If I had not trusted
you, should I have been here? But that you were a Huguenot--God forgive
me for saying it!--I would have seen you in hell before I would have
come here with you!'

I confess to having heard this testimony to the Religion with a pride
which made me forget for a moment the immediate circumstances--the peril
in which we stood, the gloomy room darkly lighted by a single candle,
the scared faces in the background, even the king's huddled figure, in
which dejection and pride struggled for expression. For a moment only;
then I hastened to reply, saying that I doubted not I could still
extricate his Majesty without discovery.

'In Heaven's name do it, then!' he answered sharply. 'Do what you like,
man! Only get me back into the castle, and it shall not be a Huguenot
will entice me out again. I am over old for these adventures!'

A fresh attack on the door taking place as he said this induced me to
lose no time in explaining my plan, which he was good enough to approve,
after again upbraiding me for bringing him into such a dilemma. Fearing
lest the door should give way prematurely, notwithstanding the bars
I had provided for it, and goaded on by Madame de Bruhl's face, which
evinced the utmost terror, I took the candle and attended his Majesty
into the inner room; where I placed my pistols beside him, but silently
resumed my sword and dagger. I then returned for the women, and
indicating by signs that they were to enter, held the door open for
them.

Mademoiselle, whose bandaged hand I could not regard without emotion,
though the king's presence and the respect I owed him forbade me to
utter so much as a word, advanced readily until she reached the doorway
abreast of me. There, however, looking back, and seeing Madame de Bruhl
following her, she stopped short, and darting a haughty glance at me,
muttered, 'And--that lady? Are we to be shut up together, sir?'

'Mademoiselle,' I answered quickly in the low tone she had used herself,
'have I ever asked anything dishonourable of you?'

She seemed by a slight movement of the head to answer in the negative.

'Nor do I now,' I replied with earnestness. 'I entrust to your care a
lady who has risked great peril for US; and the rest I leave to you.'

She looked me very keenly in the face for a second, and then, without
answering, she passed on, Madame and Fanchette following her in that
order. I closed the door and turned to Simon; who by my direction had
blown the embers of the fire into a blaze so as to partially illumine
the room, in which only he and I now remained. The lad seemed afraid to
meet my eye, and owing to the scene at which he had just assisted, or to
the onslaught on the door, which grew each moment more furious, betrayed
greater restlessness than I had lately observed in him. I did not doubt
his fidelity, however, or his devotion to mademoiselle; and the orders I
had to give him were simple enough.

'This is what you have got to do,' I said, my hand already on the bars.
'The moment I am outside secure this door. After that, open to no one
except Maignan. When he applies, let him in with caution, and bid him,
as he loves M. de Rosny, take his men as soon as the coast is clear, and
guard the King of France to the castle. Charge him to be brave and wary,
for his life will answer for the king's.'

Twice I repeated this; then fearing lest the Provost-Marshal should make
good his word and apply a ram to the door, I opened the trap. A dozen
angry voices hailed my appearance, and this with so much violence and
impatience that it was some time before I could get a hearing; the
knaves threatening me if I would not instantly open, and persisting that
I should do so without more words. Their leader at length quieted them,
but it was plain that his patience too was worn out. 'Do you surrender
or do you not?' he said. 'I am not going to stay out of my bed all night
for you!'

'I warn you,' I answered, 'that the order you have there has been
cancelled by the king!'

'That is not my business,' he rejoined hardily.

'No, but it will be when the king sends for you to-morrow morning,' I
retorted; at which he looked somewhat moved. 'However, I will surrender
to you on two conditions,' I continued, keenly observing the coarse
faces of his following. 'First, that you let me keep my arms until we
reach the gate-house, I giving you my parole to come with you quietly.
That is number one.'

'Well,' the Provost-Marshal said more civilly, 'I have no objection to
that.'

'Secondly, that you do not allow your men to break into my lodgings. I
will come out quietly, and so an end. Your order does not direct you to
sack my goods.'

'Tut, tut!' he replied; 'I want, you to come out. I do not want to go
in.'

'Then draw your men back to the stairs,' I said. 'And if you keep terms
with me, I will uphold you to-morrow, For your orders will certainly
bring you into trouble. M. de Retz, who procured it this morning, is
away, you know. M. de Villequier may be gone to-morrow. But depend upon
it, M. de Rambouillet will be here!'

The remark was well timed and to the point. It startled the man as much
as I had hoped it would. Without raising any objection he ordered his
men to fall back and guard the stairs; and I on my side began to undo
the fastenings of the door.

The matter was not to be so easily concluded, however; for Bruhl's
rascals, in obedience, no doubt, to a sign given by their leader, who
stood with Fresnoy on the upper flight of stairs, refused to withdraw;
and even hustled the Provost-Marshal's men when the latter would have
obeyed the order. The officer, already heated by delay, replied by
laying about him with his staff, and in a twinkling there seemed to
be every prospect of a very pretty MELEE, the end of which it was
impossible to foresee.

Reflecting, however, that if Bruhl's men routed their opponents our
position might be made worse rather than better, I did not act on my
first impulse, which was to see the matter out where I was. Instead, I
seized the opportunity to let myself out, while Simon fastened the door
behind me. The Provost-Marshal was engaged at the moment in a wordy
dispute with Fresnoy; whose villainous countenance, scarred by the wound
which I had given him at Chize, and flushed with passion, looked its
worst by the light of the single torch which remained. In one respect
the villain had profited by his present patronage, for he was decked out
in a style of tawdry magnificence. But I have always remarked this
about dress, that while a shabby exterior does not entirely obscure a
gentleman, the extreme of fashion is powerless to gild a knave.

Seeing me on a sudden at the Provost's elbow, he recoiled with a change
of countenance so ludicrous that that officer was himself startled, and
only held his ground on my saluting him civilly and declaring myself
his prisoner I added a warning that he should look to the torch which
remained; seeing that if it failed we were both like to have our throats
cut in the confusion.

He took the hint promptly, and calling the link-man to his side prepared
to descend, bidding Fresnoy and his men, who remained clumped at the
head of the stairs, make way for us without ado. They seemed much
inclined, however, to dispute our passage, and replying to his
invectives with rough taunts, displayed so hostile a demeanour that the
Provost, between regard for his own importance and respect for Bruhl,
appeared for a moment at a loss what to do; and seemed rather relieved
than annoyed when I begged leave to say a word to M. de Bruhl.

'If you can bring his men to reason,' he replied testily, 'speak your
fill to him!'

Stepping to the foot of the upper flight, on which Bruhl retained his
position, I saluted him formally. He returned my greeting with a
surly, watchful look only, and drawing his cloak more tightly round him
affected to gaze down at me with disdain; which ill concealed, however,
both the triumph he felt and the hopes of vengeance he entertained. I
was especially anxious to learn whether he had tracked his wife hither,
or was merely here in pursuance of his general schemes against me, and
to this end. I asked him with as much irony as I could compass to what
I was to attribute his presence. 'I am afraid I cannot stay to offer you
hospitality,' I continued; 'but for that you have only your friend M.
Villequier to thank!'

'I am greatly obliged to you,' he answered with a devilish smile, 'but
do not let that affect you. When you are gone I propose to help myself,
my friend, to whatever takes my taste.'

'Do you?' I retorted coolly--not that I was unaffected by the threat and
the villainous hint which underlay the words, but that, fully expecting
them, I was ready with my answer. 'We will see about that.' And
therewith I raised my fingers to my lips, and, whistling shrilly, cried
'Maignan! Maignan!' in a clear voice.

I had no need to cry the name a third time, for before the
Provost-Marshal could do more than start at this unexpected action,
the landing above us rang under a heavy tread, and the man I called,
descending the stairs swiftly, appeared on a sudden within arm's length
of M. de Bruhl; who, turning with an oath, saw him, and involuntarily
recoiled. At all times Maignan's hardy and confident bearing was of a
kind to impress the strong; but on this occasion there was an added dash
of recklessness in his manner which was not without its effect on the
spectators. As he stood there smiling darkly over Bruhl's head, while
his hand toyed carelessly with his dagger, and the torch shone ruddily
on his burly figure, he was so clearly an antagonist in a thousand
that, had I sought through Blois, I might not have found his fellow
for strength and SANG-FROID. He let his black eyes rove from one to the
other, but took heed of me only, saluting me with effusion and a touch
of the Gascon which was in place here, if ever.

I knew how M. de Rosny dealt with him, and followed the pattern as
far as I could. 'Maignan!' I said curtly, 'I have taken a lodging for
to-night elsewhere. Then I am gone you will call out your men and watch
this door. If anyone tries to force an entrance you will do your duty.'

'You may consider it done,' he replied.

'Even if the person be M. de Bruhl here,' I continued.

'Precisely.'

'You will remain on guard,' I went on, 'until to-morrow morning if M.
de Bruhl remains here; but whenever he leaves you will take your orders
from the persons inside, and follow them implicitly.'

'Your Excellency's mind may be easy,' he answered, handling his dagger.

Dismissing him with a nod, I turned with a smile to M. de Bruhl, and saw
that between rage at this unexpected check and chagrin at the insult
put upon him, his discomfiture was as complete as I could wish. As for
Fresnoy, if he had seriously intended to dispute our passage, he was
no longer in the mood for the attempt. Yet I did not let his master
off without one more prick. 'That being settled, M. de Bruhl,' I said
pleasantly, 'I may bid you good evening. You will doubtless honour me at
Chaverny tomorrow. But we will first let Maignan look under the bridge!'



CHAPTER XXVI. MEDITATIONS.

Either the small respect I had paid M. de Bruhl, or the words I had let
fall respecting the possible disappearance of M. Villequier, had had so
admirable an effect on the Provost-Marshal's mind that from the
moment of leaving my lodgings he treated me with the utmost civility;
permitting me even to retain my sword, and assigning me a sleeping-place
for the night in his own apartments at the gate-house.

Late as it was, I could not allow so much politeness to pass
unacknowledged. I begged leave, therefore, to distribute a small
gratuity among his attendants, and requested him to do me the honour of
drinking a bottle of wine with me. This being speedily procured, at such
an expense as is usual in these places, where prisoners pay, according
as they are rich or poor, in purse or person, kept us sitting for an
hour, and finally sent us to our pallets perfectly satisfied with one
another.

The events of the day, however, and particularly one matter, on which I
have not dwelt at length, proved as effectual to prevent my sleeping as
if I had been placed in the dampest cell below the castle. So much had
been crowded into a time so short that it seemed as if I had had until
now no opportunity of considering whither I was being hurried, or what
fortune awaited me at the end of this turmoil. From the first
appearance of M. d'Agen in the morning, with the startling news that the
Provost-Marshal was seeking me, to my final surrender and encounter with
Bruhl on the stairs, the chain of events had run out so swiftly that I
had scarcely had time at any particular period to consider how I stood,
or the full import of the latest check or victory. Now that I had
leisure I lived the day over again, and, recalling its dangers and
disappointments, felt thankful that all had ended so fairly.

I had the most perfect confidence in Maignan, and did not doubt that
Bruhl would soon weary, if he had not already wearied, of a profitless
siege. In an hour at most--and it was not yet midnight--the king would
be free to go home; and with that would end, as far as he was concerned,
the mission with which M. de Rosny had honoured me. The task of
communicating his Majesty's decision to the King of Navarre would
doubtless be entrusted to M. de Rambouillet, or some person of similar
position and influence; and in the same hands would rest the honour and
responsibility of the treaty which, as we all know now, gave after a
brief interval and some bloodshed, and one great providence, a lasting
peace to France. But it must ever be--and I recognised this that
night with a bounding heart, which told of some store of youth yet
unexhausted--a matter of lasting pride to me that I, whose career but
now seemed closed in failure, had proved the means of conferring so
especial a benefit on my country and religion.

Remembering, however, the King of Navarre's warning that I must not look
to him for reward, I felt greatly doubtful in what direction the scene
would next open to me; my main dependence being upon M. de Rosny's
promise that he would make my fortune his own care. Tired of the Court
at Blois, and the atmosphere of intrigue and treachery which pervaded
it, and with which I hoped I had now done, I was still at a loss to
see how I could recross the Loire in face of the Vicomte de Turenne's
enmity. I might have troubled myself much more with speculating upon
this point had I not found--in close connection with it--other and more
engrossing food for thought in the capricious behaviour of Mademoiselle
de la Vire.

To that behaviour it seemed to me that I now held the clue. I suspected
with as much surprise as pleasure that only one construction could be
placed upon it--a construction which had strongly occurred to me on
catching sight of her face when she intervened between me and the king.

Tracing the matter back to the moment of our meeting in the antechamber
at St. Jean d'Angely, I remembered the jest which Mathurine had uttered
at our joint expense. Doubtless it had dwelt in mademoiselle's mind,
and exciting her animosity against me had prepared her to treat me with
contumely when, contrary to all probability, we met again, and she found
herself placed in a manner in my hands. It had inspired her harsh words
and harsher looks on our journey northwards, and contributed with her
native pride to the low opinion I had formed of her when I contrasted
her with my honoured mother.

But I began to think it possible that the jest had worked in another
way as well, by keeping me before her mind and impressing upon her the
idea--after my re-appearance at Chize more particularly--that our fates
were in some way linked. Assuming this, it was not hard to understand
her manner at Rosny when, apprised that I was no impostor, and
regretting her former treatment of me, she still recoiled from the
feelings which she began to recognise in her own breast. From that time,
and with this clue, I had no difficulty in tracing her motives, always
supposing that this suspicion, upon which I dwelt with feelings of
wonder and delight, were well founded.

Middle-aged and grizzled, with the best of my life behind me I had
never dared to think of her in this way before. Poor and comparatively
obscure, I had never raised my eyes to the wide possessions said to be
hers. Even now I felt myself dazzled and bewildered by the prospect so
suddenly unveiled. I could scarcely, without vertigo, recall her as I
had last seen her, with her hand wounded in my defence; nor, without
emotions painful in their intensity, fancy myself restored to the youth
of which I had taken leave, and to the rosy hopes and plannings which
visit most men once only, and then in early years. Hitherto I had deemed
such things the lot of others.

Daylight found me--and no wonder--still diverting myself with these
charming speculations; which had for me, be it remembered, all the force
of novelty. The sun chanced to rise that morning in a clear sky, and
brilliantly for the time of year; and words fail me when I look
back, and try to describe how delicately this single fact enhanced
my pleasure! I sunned myself in the beams, which penetrated my barred
window; and tasting the early freshness with a keen and insatiable
appetite, I experienced to the full that peculiar aspiration after
goodness which Providence allows such moments to awaken in us in youth;
but rarely when time and the camp have blunted the sensibilities.

I had not yet arrived at the stage at which difficulties have to be
reckoned up, and the chief drawback to the tumult of joy I felt took
the shape of regret that my mother no longer lived to feel the emotions
proper to the time, and to share in the prosperity which she had so
often and so fondly imagined. Nevertheless, I felt myself drawn closer
to her. I recalled with the most tender feelings, and at greater leisure
than had before been the case, her last days and words, and particularly
the appeal she had uttered on mademoiselle's behalf. And I vowed, if
it were possible, to pay a visit to her grave before leaving the
neighbourhood, that I might there devote a few moments to the thought of
the affection which had consecrated all women in my eyes.

I was presently interrupted in these reflections by a circumstance which
proved in the end diverting enough, though far from reassuring at the
first blush. It began in a dismal rattling of chains in the passage
below and on the stairs outside my room; which were paved, like the
rest of the building, with stone. I waited with impatience and some
uneasiness to see what would come of this; and my surprise may be
imagined when, the door being unlocked, gave entrance to a man in whom I
recognised on the instant deaf Mathew--the villain whom I had last seen
with Fresnoy in the house in the Rue Valois. Amazed at seeing him
here, I sprang to my feet in fear of some treachery, and for a moment
apprehended that the Provost-Marshal had basely given me over to
Bruhl's custody. But a second glance informing me that the man was in
irons--hence the noise I had heard--I sat down again to see what would
happen.

It then appeared, that he merely brought me my breakfast, and was
a prisoner in less fortunate circumstances than myself; but as he
pretended not to recognise me, and placed the things before me in
obdurate silence, and I had no power to make him hear, I failed to
learn how he came to be in durance. The Provost-Marshal, however, came
presently to visit me, and brought me in token that the good-fellowship
of the evening still existed a pouch of the Queen's herb; which I
accepted for politeness' sake rather than from any virtue I found in it.
And from him I learned how the rascal came to be in his charge.

It appeared that Fresnoy, having no mind to be hampered with a wounded
man, had deposited him on the night of our MELEE at the door of a
hospital attached to a religious house in that part of the town. The
fathers had opened to him, but before taking him in put, according to
their custom, certain questions. Matthew had been primed with the right
answers to these questions, which were commonly a form; but, unhappily
for him, the Superior by chance or mistake began with the wrong one.

'You are not a Huguenot, my son?' he said.

'In God's name, I am!' Matthew replied with simplicity, believing he was
asked if he was a Catholic.

'What?' the scandalised Prior ejaculated, crossing himself in doubt,
'are you not a true son of the Church?'

'Never!' quoth our deaf friend--thinking all went well.

'A heretic!' cried the monk.

'Amen to that!' replied Matthew innocently; never doubting but that he
was asked the third question, which was, commonly, whether he needed
aid.

Naturally after this there was a very pretty commotion, and
Matthew, vainly protesting that he was deaf, was hurried off to the
Provost-Marshal's custody. Asked how he communicated with him, the
Provost answered that he could not, but that his little godchild, a girl
only eight years old, had taken a strange fancy to the rogue, and was
never so happy as when talking to him by means of signs, of which she
had invented a great number. I thought this strange at the time, but I
had proof before the morning was out that it was true enough, and
that the two were seldom apart, the little child governing this grim
cut-throat with unquestioned authority.

After the Provost was gone I heard the man's fetters clanking again.
This time he entered to remove my cup and plate, and surprised me by
speaking to me. Maintaining his former sullenness, and scarcely looking
at me, he said abruptly: 'You are going out again?'

I nodded assent.

'Do you remember a bald-faced bay horse that fell with you?' he
muttered, keeping his dogged glance on the floor.

I nodded again.

'I want to sell the horse,' he said. 'There is not such another in
Blois, no, nor in Paris! Touch it on the near hip with the whip and it
will go down as if shot. At other times a child might ride it. It is
in a stable, the third from the Three Pigeons, in the Ruelle Amancy.
Fresnoy does not know where it is. He sent to ask yesterday, but I would
not tell him.'

Some spark of human feeling which appeared in his lowering, brutal
visage as he spoke of the horse led me to desire further information.
Fortunately the little girl appeared at that moment at the door in
search of her play-fellow; and through her I learned that the man's
motive for seeking to sell the horse was fear lest the dealer in whose
charge it stood should dispose of it to repay himself for its keep, and
he, Matthew, lose it without return.

Still I did not understand why he applied to me, but I was well pleased
when I learned the truth. Base as the knave was, he had an affection for
the bay, which had been his only property for six years. Having this
in his mind, he had conceived the idea that I should treat it well, and
should not, because he was in prison and powerless, cheat him of the
price.

In the end I agreed to buy the horse for ten crowns, paying as well what
was due at the stable. I had it in my head to do something also for the
man, being moved to this partly by an idea that there was good in him,
and partly by the confidence he had seen fit to place in me, which
seemed to deserve some return. But a noise below stairs diverted my
attention. I heard myself named, and for the moment forgot the matter.



CHAPTER XXVII. TO ME, MY FRIENDS!

I was impatient to learn who had come, and what was their errand with
me; and being still in that state of exaltation in which we seem to hear
and see more than at other times, I remarked a peculiar lagging in
the ascending footsteps, and a lack of buoyancy, which was quick to
communicate itself to my mind. A vague dread fell upon me as I stood
listening. Before the door opened I had already conceived a score of
disasters. I wondered that I had not inquired earlier concerning the
king's safety, and en fin I experienced in a moment that complete
reaction of the spirits which is too frequently consequent upon an
excessive flow of gaiety.

I was prepared, therefore, for heavy looks, but not for the persons who
wore them nor the strange bearing the latter displayed on entering. My
visitors proved to be M. d'Agen and Simon Fleix. And so far well. But
the former, instead of coming forward to greet me with the punctilious
politeness which always characterised him, and which I had thought to
be proof against every kind of surprise and peril, met me with downcast
eyes and a countenance so gloomy as to augment my fears a hundredfold;
since it suggested all those vague and formidable pains which M. de
Rambouillet had hinted might await me in a prison. I thought nothing
more probable than the entrance after them of a gaoler laden with gyves
and handcuffs; and saluting M. Francois with a face which, do what I
would, fashioned itself upon his, I had scarce composure sufficient to
place the poor accommodation of my room at his disposal.

He thanked me; but he did it with so much gloom and so little
naturalness that I grew more impatient with each laboured syllable.
Simon Fleix had slunk to the window and turned his back on us. Neither
seemed to have anything to say. But a state of suspense was one which I
could least endure to suffer; and impatient of the constraint which
my friend's manner was fast imparting to mine, I asked him at once and
abruptly if his uncle had returned.

'He rode in about midnight,' he answered, tracing a pattern on the floor
with the point of his riding-switch.

I felt some surprise on hearing this, since d'Agen was still dressed
and armed for the road, and was without all those prettinesses
which commonly marked his attire. But as he volunteered no further
information, and did not even refer to the place in which he found me,
or question me as to the adventures which had lodged me there, I let it
pass, and asked him if his party had overtaken the deserters.

'Yes,' he answered, 'with no result.'

'And the king?'

'M. de Rambouillet is with him now,' he rejoined, still bending over his
tracing.

This answer relieved the worst of my anxieties, but the manner of
the speaker was so distrait and so much at variance with the studied
INSOUCIANCE which he usually, affected, that I only grew more alarmed. I
glanced at Simon Fleix, but he kept his face averted, and I could gather
nothing from it; though I observed that he, too, was dressed for the
road, and wore his arms. I listened, but I could hear no sounds which
indicated that the Provost-Marshal was approaching. Then on a sudden I
thought of Mademoiselle de la Vire. Could it be that Maignan had proved
unequal to his task?

I started impetuously from my stool under the influence of the emotion
which this thought naturally aroused, and seized M. d'Agen by the arm.
'What has happened?' I exclaimed. 'Is it Bruhl? Did he break into my
lodgings last night? What!' I continued, staggering back as I read the
confirmation of my fears in his face. 'He did?'

M. d'Agen, who had risen also, pressed my hand with convulsive energy.
Gazing into my face, he held me a moment thus embraced, His manner a
strange mixture of fierceness and emotion. 'Alas, yes,' he answered, 'he
did, and took away those whom he found there! Those whom he found there,
you understand! But M. de Rambouillet is on his way here, and in a
few minutes you will be free. We will follow together. If we overtake
them--well. If not, it will be time to talk.'

He broke off, and I stood looking at him, stunned by the blow, yet in
the midst of my own horror and surprise retaining sense enough to wonder
at the gloom on his brow and the passion which trembled in his words.
What had this to do with him? 'But Bruhl?' I said at last, recovering
myself with an effort--'how did he gain access to the room? I left it
guarded.'

'By a ruse, while Maignan and his men were away,' was the answer. 'Only
this lad of yours was there. Bruhl's men overpowered him.'

'Which way has Bruhl gone?' I muttered, my throat dry, my heart beating
wildly.

He shook his head. 'All we know is that he passed through the south gate
with eleven horsemen, two women, and six led horses, at daybreak this
morning,' he answered. 'Maignan came to my uncle with the news, and M.
de Rambouillet went at once, early as it was, to the king to procure
your release. He should be here now.'

I looked at the barred window, the most horrible fears at my heart;
from it to Simon Fleix, who stood beside it, his attitude expressing
the utmost dejection. I went towards him. 'You hound!' I said in a low
voice, 'how did it happen?'

To my surprise he fell in a moment on his knees, and raised his arm as
though to ward off a blow. 'They imitated Maignan's voice,' he muttered
hoarsely. 'We opened.'

'And you dare to come here and tell me!' I cried, scarcely restraining
my passion. 'You, to whom I entrusted her. You, whom I thought devoted
to her. You have destroyed her, man!'

He rose as suddenly as he had cowered down. His thin, nervous face
underwent a startling change; growing on a sudden hard and rigid, while
his eyes began to glitter with excitement. 'I--I have destroyed her?
Ay, mon dieu! I HAVE,' he cried, speaking to my face, and no longer
flinching or avoiding my eye. 'You may kill me, if you like. You do not
know all. It was I who stole the favour she gave you from your doublet,
and then said M. de Rosny had taken it! It was I who told her you had
given it away! It was I who brought her to the Little Sisters', that she
might see you with Madame de Bruhl! It was I who did all, and destroyed
her! Now you know! Do with me what you like!'

He opened his arms as though to receive a blow, while I stood before
him astounded beyond measure by a disclosure so unexpected; full of
righteous wrath and indignation, and yet uncertain what I ought to do.
'Did you also let Bruhl into the room on purpose?' I cried at last.

'I?' he exclaimed, with a sudden flash of rage in his eyes. 'I would
have died first!'

I do not know how I might have taken this confession; but at the moment
there was a trampling of horses outside, and before I could answer him
I heard M. de Rambouillet speaking in haughty tones, at the door below.
The Provost-Marshal was with him, but his lower notes were lost in the
ring of bridles and the stamping of impatient hoofs. I looked towards
the door of my room, which stood ajar, and presently the two entered,
the Marquis listening with an air of contemptuous indifference to the
apologies which the other, who attended at his elbow, was pouring forth.
M. de Rambouillet's face reflected none of the gloom and despondency
which M. d'Agen's exhibited in so marked a degree. He seemed, on the
contrary, full of gaiety and good-humour, and, coming forward and seeing
me, embraced me with the utmost kindness and condescension.

'Ha! my friend,' he said cheerfully, 'so I find you here after all!
But never fear. I am this moment from the king with an order for your
release. His Majesty has told me all, making me thereby your lasting
friend and debtor. As for this gentleman,' he continued, turning with
a cold smile to the Provost-Marshal, who seemed to be trembling in his
boots, 'he may expect an immediate order also. M. de Villequier has
wisely gone a-hunting, and will not be back for a day or two.'

Racked as I was by suspense and anxiety, I could not assail him with
immediate petitions. It behoved me first to thank him for his prompt
intervention, and this in terms as warm as I could invent. Nor could
I in justice fail to commend the Provost; to him, representing the
officer's conduct to me, and lauding his ability. All this, though
my heart was sick with thought and fear and disappointment, and every
minute seemed an age.

'Well, well,' the Marquis said with stately good-nature, 'We will lay
the blame on Villequier then. He is an old fox, however, and ten to one
he will go scot-free. It is not the first time he has played this trick.
But I have not yet come to the end of my commission,' he continued
pleasantly. 'His Majesty sends you this, M. de Marsac, and bade me say
that he had loaded it for you.'

He drew from under his cloak as he spoke the pistol which I had left
with the king, and which happened to be the same M. de Rosny had given
me. I took it, marvelling impatiently at the careful manner in which he
handled it; but in a moment I understood for I found it loaded to the
muzzle with gold-pieces, of which two or three fell and rolled upon the
floor. Much moved by this substantial mark of the king's gratitude,
I was nevertheless for pocketing them in haste; but the Marquis, to
satisfy a little curiosity on his part, would have me count them, and
brought the tale to a little over two thousand livres, without counting
a ring set with precious stones which I found among them. This handsome
present diverted my thoughts from Simon Fleix, but could not relieve the
anxiety I felt on mademoiselle's account. The thought of her position so
tortured me that M. de Rambouillet began to perceive my state of mind,
and hastened to assure me that before going to the Court he had already
issued orders calculated to assist me.

'You desire to follow this lady, I understand?' he said. 'What with the
king who is enraged beyond the ordinary by this outrage, and Francois
there, who seemed beside himself when he heard the news, I have not got
any very clear idea of the position.'

'She was entrusted to me by--by one, sir, well known to you,' I answered
hoarsely. 'My honour is engaged to him and to her. If I follow on my
feet and alone, I must follow. If I cannot save her, I can at least
punish the villains who have wronged her.'

'But the man's wife is with them,' he said in some wonder.

'That goes for nothing,' I answered.

He saw the strong emotion under which I laboured, and which scarcely
suffered me to answer him with patience; and he looked at me curiously,
but not unkindly. 'The sooner you are off, the better then,' he said,
nodding. 'I gathered as much. The man Maignan will have his fellows
at the south gate an hour before noon, I understand. Francois has two
lackeys, and he is wild to go. With yourself and the lad there you will
muster nine swords. I will lend you two. I can spare no more, for we may
have an EMEUTE at any moment. You will take the road, therefore, eleven
in all, and should overtake them some time to-night if your horses are
in condition.'

I thanked him warmly, without regarding his kindly statement that my
conduct on the previous day had laid him under lasting obligations to
me. We went down together, and he transferred two of his fellows to me
there and then, bidding them change their horses for fresh ones and
meet me at the south gate. He sent also a man to my stable--Simon Fleix
having disappeared in the confusion--for the Cid, and was in the act of
inquiring whether I needed anything else, when a woman slipped through
the knot of horsemen who surrounded us as we stood in the doorway of
the house, and, throwing herself upon me, grasped me by the arm. It was
Fanchette. Her harsh features were distorted with grief, her cheeks
were mottled with the violent weeping in which such persons vent their
sorrow. Her hair hung in long wisps on her neck. Her dress was torn and
draggled, and there was a great bruise over her eye. She had the air of
one frantic with despair and misery.

She caught me by the cloak, and shook me so that I staggered. 'I have
found you at last!' she cried joyfully. 'You will take me with you! You
will take me to her!'

Though her words tried my composure, and my heart went out to her,
I strove to answer her according to the sense of the matter. 'It is
impossible, I said sternly. 'This is a man's errand. We shall have to
ride day and night, my good woman.'

'But I will ride day and night too!' she replied passionately, flinging
the hair from her eyes, and looking wildly from me to M. Rambouillet.
'What would I not do for her? I am as strong as a man, and stronger.
Take me, take me, I say, and when I meet that villain I will tear him
limb for limb!'

I shuddered, listening to her; but remembering that, being country
bred, she was really as strong as she said, and that likely enough some
advantage might accrue to us from her perfect fidelity and devotion
to her mistress, I gave a reluctant consent. I sent one of M. de
Rambouillet's men to the stable where the deaf man's bay was standing,
bidding him pay whatever was due to the dealer, and bring the horse to
the south gate; my intention being to mount one of my men on it, and
furnish the woman with a less tricky steed.

The briskness of these and the like preparations, which even for one
of my age and in my state of anxiety were not devoid, of pleasure,
prevented my thoughts dwelling on the future. Content to have M.
Francois' assistance without following up too keenly the train of ideas
which his readiness suggested, I was satisfied also to make use of Simon
without calling him to instant account for his treachery. The bustle of
the streets, which the confirmation of the king's speedy departure had
filled with surly, murmuring crowds, tended still further to keep my
fears at bay; while the contrast between my present circumstances, as I
rode through them well-appointed and well-attended, with the Marquis by
my side, and the poor appearance I had exhibited on my first arrival in
Blois, could not fail to inspire me with hope that I might surmount this
danger, also, and in the event find Mademoiselle safe and uninjured. I
took leave of M. de Rambouillet with many expressions of esteem on both
sides, and a few minutes before eleven reached the rendezvous outside
the south gate.

M. d'Agen and Maignan advanced to meet me, the former still presenting
an exterior so stern and grave that I wondered to see him, and could
scarcely believe he was the same gay spark whose elegant affectations
had more than once caused me to smile. He saluted me in silence; Maignan
with a sheepish air, which ill-concealed the savage temper defeat had
roused in him. Counting my men, I found we mustered ten only, but the
equerry explained that he had despatched a rider ahead to make inquiries
and leave word for us at convenient points; to the end that we might
follow the trail with as few delays as possible. Highly commending
Maignan for his forethought in this, I gave the word to start, and
crossing the river by the St. Gervais Bridge, we took the road for
Selles at a smart trot.

The weather had changed much in the last twenty-four hours. The sun
shone brightly, with a warm west wind, and the country already showed
signs of the early spring which marked that year. If, the first hurry of
departure over, I had now leisure to feel the gnawing of anxiety and the
tortures inflicted by an imagination which, far outstripping us, rode
with those whom we pursued and shared their perils, I found two sources
of comfort still open to me. No man who has seen service can look on a
little band of well-appointed horsemen without pleasure. I reviewed the
stalwart forms and stern faces which moved beside me and comparing their
decent order and sound equipments with the scurvy foulness of the men
who had ridden north with me, thanked God, and, ceased to wonder at the
indignation which Matthew and his fellows had aroused in mademoiselle's
mind. My other source of satisfaction, the regular beat of hoofs and
ring of bridles continually augmented. Every step took us farther from
Blois--farther from the close town and reeking streets and the Court;
which, if it no longer seemed to me a shambles, befouled by one great
deed of blood--experience had removed that impression--retained an
appearance infinitely mean and miserable in my eyes. I hated and loathed
its intrigues and its jealousies, the folly which trifled in a closet
while rebellion mastered France, and the pettiness which recognised no
wisdom save that of balancing party and party. I thanked God that my
work there was done, and could have welcomed any other occasion that
forced me to turn my back on it, and sent me at large over the pure
heaths, through the woods, and under the wide heaven, speckled with
moving clouds.

But such springs of comfort soon ran dry. M. d'Agen's gloomy rage and
the fiery gleam in Maignan's eye would have reminded me, had I been
in any danger of forgetting the errand on which we were bound, and the
need, exceeding all other needs, which compelled us to lose no moment
that might be used. Those whom we followed had five hours' start. The
thought of what might; happen in those five hours to the two helpless
women whom I had sworn to protect burned itself into my mind; so that
to refrain from putting spurs to my horse and riding recklessly forward
taxed at times all my self-control. The horses seemed to crawl. The men
rising and falling listlessly in their saddles maddened me. Though I
could not hope to come upon any trace of our quarry for many hours,
perhaps for days, I scanned the long, flat heaths unceasingly, searched
every marshy bottom before we descended into it, and panted for the
moment when the next low ridge should expose to our view a fresh track
of wood and waste. The rosy visions of the past night, and those fancies
in particular which had made the dawn memorable, recurred to me, as his
deeds in the body (so men say) to a hopeless drowning wretch. I grew to
think of nothing but Bruhl and revenge. Even the absurd care with which
Simon avoided the neighbourhood of Fanchette, riding anywhere so long
as he might ride at a distance from the angry woman's tongue and
hand--which provoked many a laugh from the men, and came to be the joke
of the company--failed to draw a smile from me.

We passed through Contres, four leagues from Blois, an hour after noon,
and three hours later crossed the Cher at Selles, where we stayed
awhile to bait our horses. Here we had news of the party before us, and
henceforth had little doubt that Bruhl was making for the Limousin; a
district in which he might rest secure under the protection of Turenne,
and safely defy alike the King of France and the King of Navarre. The
greater the necessity, it was plain, for speed; but the roads in
that neighbourhood, and forward as far as Valancy, proved heavy and,
foundrous, and it was all we could do to reach Levroux with jaded
horses three hours after sunset. The probability that Bruhl would lie
at Chateauroux, five leagues farther on--for I could not conceive that
under the circumstances he would spare the women--would have led me to
push forward had it been possible; but the darkness and the difficulty
of finding a guide who would venture deterred me from the hopeless
attempt, and we stayed the night where we were.

Here we first heard of the plague; which was said to be ravaging
Chateauroux and all the country farther south. The landlord of the inn
would have regaled us with many stories of it, and particularly of the
swiftness with which men and even cattle succumbed to its attacks. But
we had other things to think of, and between anxiety and weariness had
clean forgotten the matter when we rose next morning.

We started shortly after daybreak, and for three leagues pressed on at
tolerable speed. Then, for no reason stated, our guide gave us the slip
as we passed through a wood, and was seen no more. We lost the road,
and had to retrace our steps. We strayed into a slough, and extracted
ourselves with difficulty. The man who was riding the bay I had
purchased forgot the secret which I had imparted to him, and got an ugly
fall. En fin, after all these mishaps it wanted little of noon,
and less to exhaust our patience, when at length we came in sight of
Chateauroux.

Before entering the town we had still an adventure; for we came at
a turn in the road on a scene as surprising as it was at first
inexplicable. A little north of the town, in a coppice of box facing the
south and west, we happed suddenly on a rude encampment, consisting of
a dozen huts and booths, set back from the road and formed, some of
branches of evergreen trees laid clumsily together, and some of sacking
stretched over poles. A number of men and women of decent appearance lay
on the short grass before the booths, idly sunning themselves; or moved
about, cooking and tending fires, while a score of children raced to and
fro with noisy shouts and laughter. The appearance of our party on the
scene caused an instant panic. The women and children fled screaming
into the wood, spreading the sound of breaking branches farther and
farther as they retreated; while the men, a miserable pale-faced set,
drew together, and seeming half-inclined to fly also, regarded us with
glances of fear and suspicion.

Remarking that their appearance and dress were not those of vagrants,
while the booths seemed to indicate little skill or experience in the
builders, I bade my companions halt, and advanced alone.

'What is the meaning of this, my men?' I said, addressing the first
group I reached. 'You seem to have come a-Maying before the time. Whence
are you?'

'From Chateauroux,' the foremost answered sullenly. His dress, now I saw
him nearer, seemed to be that of a respectable townsman.

'Why?' I replied. 'Have you no homes?'

'Ay, we have homes,' he answered with the same brevity.

'Then why, in God's name, are you here?' I retorted, marking the gloomy
air and downcast faces of the group. 'Have you been harried?'

'Ay, harried by the Plague!' he answered bitterly. 'Do you mean to say
you have not heard? In Chateauroux there is one man dead in three. Take
my advice, sir--you are a brave company--turn, and go home again.'

'Is it as bad as that?' I exclaimed. I had forgotten the landlord's
gossip, and the explanation struck me with the force of surprise.

'Ay, is it! Do you see the blue haze?' he continued, pointing with a
sudden gesture to the lower ground before us, over which a light pall
of summery vapour hung still and motionless. 'Do you see it? Well, under
that there is death! You may find food in Chateauroux, and stalls for
your horses, and a man to take money; for there are still men there.
But cross the Indre, and you will see sights worse than a battle-field a
week old! You will find no living soul in house or stable or church, but
corpses plenty. The land is cursed! cursed for heresy, some say! Half
are dead, and half are fled to the woods! And if you do not die of the
plague, you will starve.'

'God forbid!' I muttered, thinking with a shudder of those before
us. This led me to ask him if a party resembling ours in number, and
including two women, had passed that way. He answered, Yes, after sunset
the evening before; that their horses were stumbling with fatigue
and the men swearing in pure weariness. He believed that they had not
entered the town, but had made a rude encampment half a mile beyond it;
and had again broken this up, and ridden southwards two or three hours
before our arrival.

'Then we may overtake them to-day?' I said.

'By your leave, sir,' he answered, with grave meaning. 'I think you are
more likely to meet them.'

Shrugging my shoulders, I thanked him shortly and left him; the full
importance of preventing my men hearing what I had heard--lest the
panic which possessed these townspeople should seize on them also--being
already in my mind. Nevertheless the thought came too late, for on
turning my horse I found one of the foremost, a long, solemn-faced man,
had already found his way to Maignan's stirrup; where he was dilating
so eloquently upon the enemy which awaited us southwards that the
countenances of half the troopers were as long as his own, and I saw
nothing for it but to interrupt his oration by a smart application of my
switch to his shoulders. Having thus stopped him, and rated him back to
his fellows, I gave the word to march. The men obeyed mechanically, we
swung into a canter, and for a moment the danger was over.

But I knew that it would recur again and again. Stealthily marking the
faces round me, and listening to the whispered talk which went on, I saw
the terror spread from one to another. Voices which earlier in the day
had been raised in song and jest grew silent. Great reckless fellows of
Maignan's following, who had an oath and a blow for all comers, and
to whom the deepest ford seemed to be child's play, rode with drooping
heads and knitted brows; or scanned with ill-concealed anxiety the
strange haze before us, through which the roofs of the town, and here
and there a low hill or line of poplars, rose to plainer view. Maignan
himself, the stoutest of the stout, looked grave, and had lost his
swaggering air. Only three persons preserved their SANG-FROID entire. Of
these, M. d'Agen rode as if he had heard nothing, and Simon Fleix as if
he feared nothing; while Fanchette, gazing eagerly forward, saw, it was
plain, only one object in the mist, and that was her Mistress's face.

'We found the gates of the town open, and this, which proved to be the
herald of stranger sights, daunted the hearts of my men more than the
most hostile reception. As we entered, our horses' hoofs, clattering
loudly on the pavement, awoke a hundred echoes in the empty houses to
right and left. The main street, flooded with sunshine, which made its
desolation seem a hundred times more formidable, stretched away before
us, bare and empty; or haunted only by a few slinking dogs, and prowling
wretches, who fled, affrighted at the unaccustomed sounds, or stood and
eyed us listlessly as me passed. A bell tolled; in the distance we heard
the wailing of women. The silent ways, the black cross which marked
every second door, the frightful faces which once or twice looked out
from upper windows and blasted our sight, infected my men with terror so
profound and so ungovernable that at last discipline was forgotten;
and one shoving his horse before another in narrow places, there was
a scuffle to be first. One, and then a second, began to trot. The trot
grew into a shuffling canter. The gates of the inn lay open, nay seemed
to invite us to enter; but no one turned or halted. Moved by a single
impulse we pushed breathlessly on and on, until the open country was
reached, and we who had entered the streets in silent awe, swept out and
over the bridge as if the fiend were at our heels.

That I shared in this flight causes me no shame even now, for my men
were at the time ungovernable, as the best-trained troops are when
seized by such panics; and, moreover, I could have done no good by
remaining in the town, where the strength of the contagion was probably
greater and the inn larder like to be as bare, as the hillside. Few
towns are without a hostelry outside the gates for the convenience of
knights of the road or those who would avoid the dues, and Chateauroux
proved no exception to this rule. A short half-mile from the walls we
drew rein before a second encampment raised about a wayside house.
It scarcely needed the sound of music mingled with brawling voices to
inform us that the wilder spirits of the town had taken refuge here, and
were seeking to drown in riot and debauchery, as I have seen happen in a
besieged place, the remembrance of the enemy which stalked abroad in the
sunshine. Our sudden appearance, while it put a stop to the mimicry
of mirth, brought out a score of men and women in every stage of
drunkenness and dishevelment, of whom some, with hiccoughs and loose
gestures, cried to us to join them, while others swore horridly at being
recalled to the present, which, with the future, they were endeavouring
to forget.

I cursed them in return for a pack of craven wretches, and threatening
to ride down those who obstructed us, ordered my men forward; halting
eventually a quarter of a mile farther on, where a wood of groundling
oaks which still wore last year's leaves afforded fair shelter. Afraid
to leave my men myself, lest some should stray to the inn and others
desert altogether, I requested M. d'Agen to return thither with Maignan
and Simon, and bring us what forage and food we required. This he did
with perfect success, though not until after a scuffle, in which
Maignan showed himself a match for a hundred. We watered the horses at
a neighbouring brook, and assigning two hours to rest and refreshment--a
great part of which M. d'Agen and I spent walking up and down in moody
silence, each immersed in his own thoughts--we presently took the road
again with renewed spirits.

But a panic is not easily shaken off, nor is any fear so difficult to
combat and defeat as the fear of the invisible. The terrors which food
and drink had for a time thrust out presently returned with sevenfold
force. Men looked uneasily in one another's faces, and from them to the
haze which veiled all distant objects. They muttered of the heat,
which was sudden, strange, and abnormal at that time of the year. And
by-and-by they had other things to speak of. We met a man, who ran
beside us and begged of us, crying out in a dreadful voice that his wife
and four children lay unburied in the house. A little farther on, beside
a well, the corpse of a woman with a child at her breast lay poisoning
the water; she had crawled to it to appease her thirst, and died of the
draught. Last of all, in, a beech-wood near Lotier we came upon a lady
living in her coach, with one or two panic-stricken women for her only
attendants. Her husband was in Paris, she told me; half her servants
were dead, the rest had fled. Still she retained in a remarkable degree
both courage and courtesy, and accepting with fortitude my reasons
and excuses for perforce leaving her in such a plight, gave me a clear
account of Bruhl and his party, who had passed her some, hours before.
The picture of this lady gazing after us with perfect good-breeding,
as we rode away at speed, followed by the lamentations of her women,
remains with me to this day; filling my mind at once with admiration and
melancholy. For, as I learned later, she fell ill of the plague where we
left her in the beech-wood, and died in a night with both her servants.

The intelligence we had from her inspired us to push forward, sparing
neither spur nor horseflesh, in the hope that we might overtake Bruhl
before night should expose his captives to fresh hardships and dangers.
But the pitch to which the dismal sights and sounds I have mentioned,
and a hundred like them, had raised the fears of my following did much
to balk my endeavours. For a while, indeed, under the influence of
momentary excitement, they spurred their horses to the gallop, as if
their minds were made up to face the worst; but presently they checked
them despite all my efforts, and, lagging slowly and more slowly, seemed
to lose all spirit and energy. The desolation which met our eyes on
every side, no less than the death-like stillness which prevailed, even
the birds, as it seemed to us, being silent, chilled the most reckless
to the heart. Maignan's face lost its colour, his voice its ring. As for
the rest, starting at a sound and wincing if a leather galled them,
they glanced backwards twice for once they looked forwards, and held
themselves ready to take to their heels and be gone at the least alarm.

Noting these signs, and doubting if I could trust even Maignan, I
thought it prudent to change my place, and falling to the rear, rode
there with a grim face and a pistol ready to my hand. It was not the
least of my annoyances that M. d'Agen appeared to be ignorant of any
cause for apprehension save such as lay before us, and riding on in the
same gloomy fit which had possessed him from the moment of starting,
neither sought my opinion nor gave his own, but seemed to have undergone
so complete and mysterious a change that I could think of one thing only
that could have power to effect so marvellous a transformation. I felt
his presence a trial rather than a help, and reviewing the course of our
short friendship, which a day or two before had been so great a delight
to me--as the friendship of a young man commonly is to one growing
old--I puzzled myself with much wondering whether there could be rivalry
between us.

Sunset, which was welcome to my company, since it removed the haze,
which they regarded with superstitious dread, found us still plodding
through a country of low ridges and shallow valleys, both clothed in
oak-woods. Its short brightness died away, and with it my last hope of
surprising Bruhl before I slept. Darkness fell upon us as we wended
our way slowly down a steep hillside where the path was so narrow and
difficult as to permit only one to descend at a time. A stream of some
size, if we might judge from the noise it made, poured through the
ravine below us, and presently, at the point where we believed the
crossing to be, we espied a solitary light shining in the blackness.
To proceed farther was impossible, for the ground grew more and more
precipitous; and, seeing this, I bade Maignan dismount, and leaving us
where we were, go for a guide to the house from which the light issued.

He obeyed, and plunging into the night, which in that pit; between the
hills was of an inky darkness, presently returned with a peasant and a
lanthorn. I was about to bid the man guide us to the ford, or to some
level ground where we could picket the horses, when Maignan gleefully
cried out that he had news. I asked what news.

'Speak up, MANANT!' he said, holding up his lanthorn so that the light
fell on the man's haggard face and unkempt hair. 'Tell his Excellency
what you have told me, or I will skin you alive, little man!'

'Your other party came to the ford an hour before sunset,' the peasant
answered, staring dully at us. 'I saw them coming, and hid myself. They
quarrelled by the ford. Some were for crossing, and some not.'

'They had ladies with them?' M. d'Agen said suddenly.

'Ay, two, your Excellency,' the clown answered, 'riding like men. In the
end they did not cross for fear of the plague, but turned up the river,
and rode westwards towards St. Gaultier.'

'St. Gaultier!' I said, 'Where is that? Where does the road to it go to
besides?'

But the peasant's knowledge was confined to his own neighbourhood. He
knew no world beyond St. Gaultier, and could not answer my question. I
was about to bid him show us the way down, when Maignan cried out that
he knew more.

'What?' I asked.

'Arnidieu! he heard them say where they were going to spend the night!'

'Ha!' I cried. 'Where?'

'In an old ruined castle two leagues from this, and between here and St.
Gaultier,' the equerry answered, forgetting in his triumph both plague
and panic. 'What do you say to that, your Excellency? It is so, sirrah,
is it not?' he continued, turning to the peasant. 'Speak, Master
Jacques, or I will roast you before a slow fire!'

But I did not wait to hear the answer. Leaping to the ground, I took the
Cid's rein on my arm, and cried impatiently to the man to lead us down.



CHAPTER XXVIII. THE CASTLE ON THE HILL.

The certainty that Bruhl and his captives were not far off, and the
likelihood that we might be engaged within the hour, expelled from the
minds of even the most timorous among us the vapourish fears which had
before haunted them. In the hurried scramble which presently landed us
on the bank of the stream, men who had ridden for hours in sulky
silence found their voices, and from cursing their horses' blunders soon
advanced to swearing and singing after the fashion of their kind. This
change, by relieving me of a great fear, left me at leisure to consider
our position, and estimate more clearly than I might have done the
advantages of hastening, or postponing, an attack. We numbered eleven;
the enemy, to the best of my belief, twelve. Of this slight superiority
I should have reeked little in the daytime; nor, perhaps, counting
Maignan as two, have allowed that it existed. But the result of a
night attack is more difficult to forecast; and I had also to take into
account the perils to which the two ladies would be exposed, between the
darkness and tumult, in the event of the issue remaining for a time in
doubt.

These considerations, and particularly the last, weighed so powerfully
with me, that before I reached the bottom of the gorge I had decided to
postpone the attack until morning. The answers to some questions which
I put to the inhabitant of the house by the ford as soon as I reached
level ground only confirmed me in this resolution. The road Bruhl had
taken ran for a distance by the riverside, and along the bottom of
the gorge; and, difficult by day, was reported to be impracticable for
horses by night. The castle he had mentioned lay full two leagues away,
and on the farther edge of a tract of rough woodland. Finally, I doubted
whether, in the absence of any other reason for delay, I could have
marched my men, weary as they were, to the place before daybreak.

When I came to announce this decision, however, and to inquire what
accommodation the peasant could afford us, I found myself in trouble.
Fanchette, mademoiselle's woman, suddenly confronted me, her face
scarlet with rage. Thrusting herself forward into the circle of light
cast by the lanthorn, she assailed me with a virulence and fierceness
which said more for her devotion to her mistress than her respect for
me. Her wild gesticulations, her threats, and the appeals which she
made now to me, and now to the men who stood in a circle round us, their
faces in shadow, discomfited as much as they surprised me.

'What!' she cried violently, 'you call yourself a gentleman, and lie
here and let my mistress be murdered, or worse, within a league of you!
Two leagues? A groat for your two leagues! I would walk them barefoot,
if that would shame you. And you, you call yourselves men, and suffer
it! It is God's truth you are a set of cravens and sluggards. Give me as
many women, and I would--'

'Peace, woman!' Maignan said in his deep voice. 'You had your way and
came with us, and you will obey orders as well as another! Be off, and
see to the victuals before worse happen to you!'

'Ay, see to the victuals!' she retorted. 'See to the victuals, forsooth!
That is all you think of--to lie warm and eat your fill! A set of
dastardly, drinking, droning guzzlers you are! You are!' she retorted,
her voice rising to a shriek. 'May the plague take you!'

'Silence!' Maignan growled fiercely, 'or have a care to yourself! For a
copper-piece I would send you to cool your heels in the water below--for
that last word! Begone, do you hear,' he continued, seizing her by the
shoulder and thrusting her towards the house, 'or worse may happen to
you. We are rough customers, as you will find if you do not lock up your
tongue!'

I heard her go wailing into the darkness; and Heaven knows it was not
without compunction I forced myself to remain inactive in the face of a
devotion which seemed so much greater than mine. The men fell away one
by one to look to their horses and choose sleeping-quarters for the
night; and presently M. d'Agen and I were left alone standing beside the
lanthorn, which the man had hung on a bush before his door. The brawling
of the water as it poured between the banks, a score of paces from us,
and the black darkness which hid everything beyond the little ring
of light in which we stood--so that for all we could see we were in a
pit--had the air of isolating us from all the world.

I looked at the young man, who had not once lisped that day; and I
plainly read in his attitude his disapproval of my caution. Though he
declined to meet my eye, he stood with his arms folded and his head
thrown back, making no attempt to disguise the scorn and ill-temper
which his face expressed. Hurt by the woman's taunts, and possibly
shaken in my opinion, I grew restive under his silence, and unwisely
gave way to my feelings.

'You do not appear to approve of my decision, M. d'Agen?' I said.

'It is yours to command, sir,' he answered proudly.

There are truisms which have more power to annoy than the veriest
reproaches. I should have borne in mind the suspense and anxiety he was
suffering, and which had so changed him that I scarcely knew him for
the gay young spark on whose toe I had trodden. I should have remembered
that he was young and I old, and that it behoved me to be patient. But
on my side also there was anxiety, and responsibility as well; and,
above all, a rankling soreness, to which I refrain from giving the name
of jealousy, though it came as near to that feeling as the difference
in our ages and personal advantages (whereof the balance was all on his
side) would permit. This, no doubt, it was which impelled me to continue
the argument.

'You would go on?' I said persistently.

'It is idle to say what I would do,' he answered with a flash of anger.

'I asked for your opinion, sir,' I rejoined stiffly.

'To what purpose?' he retorted, stroking his small moustache haughtily,
'We look at the thing from opposite points. You, are going about your
business, which appears to be the rescuing of ladies who are--may I
venture to say it? so unfortunate as to entrust themselves to your
charge. I, M. de Marsac, am more deeply interested. More deeply
interested,' he repeated lamely. 'I--in a word, I am prepared, sir, to
do what others only talk of--and if I cannot follow otherwise, would
follow on my feet!'

'Whom?' I asked curtly, stung by this repetition of my own words.

He laughed harshly and bitterly. 'Why explain? or why quarrel?'
he replied cynically. 'God knows, if I could afford to quarrel with
you, I should have done so fifty hours ago. But I need your help; and,
needing it, I am prepared to do that which must seem to a person of your
calm passions and perfect judgment alike futile and incredible--pay the
full price for it.'

'The full price for it!' I muttered, understanding nothing, except that
I did not understand.

'Ay, the full price for it!' he repeated. And as he spoke he looked at
me with an expression of rage so fierce that I recoiled a step. That
seemed to restore him in some degree to himself, for without giving me
an opportunity of answering he turned hastily from me, and, striding
away, was in a moment lost in the darkness.

He left me amazed beyond measure. I stood repeating his phrase about
'the full price' a hundred times over, but still found it and his
passion inexplicable. To cut the matter short, I could come to no other
conclusion than that he desired to insult me, and aware of my poverty
and the equivocal position in which I stood towards mademoiselle, chose
his words accordingly. This seemed a thing unworthy of one of whom I
had before thought highly; but calmer reflection enabling me to see
something of youthful bombast in the tirade he had delivered, I smiled
a little sadly, and determined to think no more of the matter for the
present, but to persist firmly in that which seemed to me to be the
right course.

Having settled this, I was about to enter the house, when Maignan
stopped me, telling me that the plague had killed five people in it,
letting only the man we had seen; who had, indeed, been seized, but
recovered. This ghastly news had scared my company to such a degree that
they had gone as far from the house as the level ground permitted, and
there lighted a fire, round which they were going to pass the night.
Fanchette had taken up her quarters in the stable, and the equerry
announced that he had kept a shed full of sweet hay for M. d'Agen and
myself. I assented to this arrangement, and after supping off soup and
black bread, which was all we could procure, bade the peasant rouse us
two hours before sunrise; and so, being too weary and old in service to
remain awake thinking, I fell asleep, and slept; soundly till a little
after four.

My first business on rising was to see that the men before mounting made
a meal, for it is ill work fighting empty. I went round also and saw
that all had their arms, and that such as carried pistols had them
loaded and primed. Francois did not put in an appearance until this work
was done, and then showed a very pale and gloomy countenance. I took no
heed of him, however, and with the first streak of daylight we started
in single file and at a snail's pace up the valley, the peasant, whom I
placed in Maignan's charge, going before to guide us, and M. d'Agen and
I riding in the rear. By the time the sun rose and warmed our chilled
and shivering frames we were over the worst of the ground, and were able
to advance at some speed along a track cut through a dense forest of
oak-trees.

Though we had now risen out of the valley, the close-set trunks and the
undergrowth round them prevented our seeing in any direction. For a mile
or more we rode on blindly, and presently started on finding ourselves
on the brow of a hill, looking down into a valley, the nearer end of
which was clothed in woods, while the farther widened into green sloping
pastures. From the midst of these a hill or mount rose sharply up,
until it ended in walls of grey stone scarce to be distinguished at that
distance from the native rock on which they stood.

'See!' cried our guide. 'There is the castle!'

Bidding the men dismount in haste, that the chance of our being seen by
the enemy--which was not great--might be farther lessened, I began to
inspect the position at leisure; my first feeling while doing so being
one of thankfulness that I had not attempted a night attack, which
must inevitably have miscarried, possibly with loss to ourselves, and
certainly with the result of informing the enemy of our presence. The
castle, of which we had a tolerable view, was long and narrow in shape,
consisting of two towers connected by walls, The nearer tower, through
which lay the entrance, was roofless, and in every way seemed to be more
ruinous than the inner one, which appeared to be perfect in both its
stories. This defect notwithstanding, the place was so strong that my
heart sank lower the longer I looked; and a glance at Maignan's face
assured me that his experience was also at fault. For M. d'Agen, I
clearly saw, when I turned to him, that he had never until this moment
realised what we had to expect, but, regarding our pursuit in the light
of a hunting-party, had looked to see it end in like easy fashion. His
blank, surprised face, as he stood eyeing the stout grey walls, said as
much as this.

'Arnidieu!' Maignan muttered, 'give me ten men, and I would hold it
against a hundred!'

'Tut, man, There is more than one way to Rome!' I answered oracularly,
though I was far from feeling as confident as I seemed. 'Come, let us
descend and view this nut a little nearer.'

We began to trail downwards in silence, and as the path let us for a
while, out of sight of the castle, we were able to proceed with less
caution. We had nearly reached without adventure the father skirts of
the wood, between which and the ruin lay an interval of open ground,
when we came suddenly, at the edge of a little clearing, on an old hag;
who was so intent; upon tying up faggots that she did not see us until
Maignan's hand was on her shoulder. When she did, she screamed out, and
escaping from him with an activity wonderful in a woman of her age, ran
with great swiftness to the side of an old man who lay at the foot of a
tree half a bowshot off; and whom we had not before seen. Snatching up
an axe, she put herself in a posture of defence before him with gestures
and in a manner as touching in the eyes of some among us as they were
ludicrous in those of others; who cried to Maignan that he had met his
match at last, with other gibes of the kind that pass current in camps.

I called to him to let her be, and went forward myself to the old man,
who lay on a rude bed of leaves, and seemed unable to rise. Appealing
to me with a face of agony not to hurt his wife, he bade her again and
again lay down her axe; but she would not do this until I had assured
her that we meant him no harm, and that my men should molest neither the
one nor the other.

'We only want to know this,' I said, speaking slowly, in fear lest my
language should be little more intelligible to them than their PATOIS to
me. 'There are a dozen horsemen in the old castle there, are there not?'

The man stilled his wife, who continued to chatter and mow at us, and
answered eagerly that there were; adding, with a trembling oath, that
the robbers had beaten him, robbed him of his small store of meal, and
when he would have protested, thrown him out, breaking his leg.

'Then how came you here?' I said.

'She brought me on her back,' he answered feebly.

Doubtless there were men in my train who would have done all that these
others had done; but hearing the simple story told, they stamped and
swore great oaths of indignation; and one, the roughest of the party,
took out some black bread and gave it to the woman, whom under other
circumstances he would not have hesitated to rob. Maignan, who knew
all arts appertaining to war, examined the man's leg and made a kind of
cradle for it, while I questioned the woman.

'They are there still?' I said. 'I saw their horses tethered under the
walls.'

'Yes, God requite them!' she answered, trembling violently.

'Tell me about the castle, my good woman,' I said. 'How many roads into
it are there?'

'Only one.'

'Through the nearer tower?'

She said yes, and finding that she understood me, and was less dull of
intellect than her wretched appearance led me to expect, I put a series
of questions to her which it would be tedious to detail. Suffice it
that I learned that it was impossible to enter or leave the ruin except
through the nearer tower; that a rickety temporary gate barred the
entrance, and that from this tower, which was a mere shell of four
walls, a narrow square-headed doorway without a door led into the court,
beyond which rose the habitable tower of two stories.

'Do you know if they intend to stay there?' I asked

'Oh, ay, they bade me bring them faggots for their fire this morning,
and I should have a handful of my own meal back,' she answered bitterly;
and fell thereon into a passion of impotent rage, shaking both her
clenched hands in the direction of the castle, and screaming frenzied
maledictions in her cracked and quavering voice.

I pondered awhile over what she had said; liking very little the thought
of that narrow square-headed doorway through which we must pass before
we could effect anything. And the gate, too, troubled me. It might not
be a strong one, but we had neither powder, nor guns, nor any siege
implements, and could not pull down stone walls with our naked hands. By
seizing the horses we could indeed cut off Bruhl's retreat; but he might
still escape in the night; and in any case our pains would only increase
the women's hardships while adding fuel to his rage. We must have some
other plan.

The sun was high by this time; the edge of the wood scarcely a hundred
paces from us. By advancing a few yards through the trees I could see
the horses feeding peacefully at the foot of the sunny slope, and even
follow with my eyes the faint track which zigzagged up the hill to
the closed gate. No one appeared--doubtless they were sleeping off
the fatigue of the journey--and I drew no inspiration thence; but as
I turned to consult Maignan my eye lit on the faggots, and I saw in a
flash that here was a chance of putting into practice a stratagem as old
as the hills, yet ever fresh, and not seldom successful.

It was no time for over-refinement. My knaves were beginning to stray
forward out of curiosity, and at any moment one of our horses, scenting
those of the enemy, might neigh and give the alarm. Hastily calling
M. d'Agen and Maignan to me, I laid my plan before them, and satisfied
myself that it had their approval; the fact that I had reserved a
special part for the former serving to thaw the reserve which had
succeeded to his outbreak of the night before. After some debate Maignan
persuaded me that the old woman had not sufficient nerve to play the
part I proposed for her, and named Fanchette; who being called into
council, did not belie the opinion we had formed of her courage. In
a few moments our preparations were complete: I had donned the old
charcoal-burner's outer rags, Fanchette had assumed those of the woman,
while M. d'Agen, who was for a time at a loss, and betrayed less taste
for this part of the plan than for any other, ended by putting on the
jerkin and hose of the man who had served us as guide.

When all was ready I commended the troop to Maignan's discretion,
charging him in the event of anything happening to us to continue the
most persistent efforts for mademoiselle's release, and on no account
to abandon her. Having received his promise to this effect, and being
satisfied that he would keep it, we took up each of us a great faggot,
which being borne on the head and shoulders served to hide the features
very effectually; and thus disguised we boldly left the shelter of the
trees. Fanchette and I went first, tottering in a most natural fashion
under the weight of our burdens, while M. d'Agen followed a hundred
yards behind. I had given Maignan orders to make a dash for the gate the
moment he saw the last named start to run.

The perfect stillness of the valley, the clearness of the air, and the
absence of any sign of life in the castle before us--which might have
been that of the Sleeping Princess, so fairy-like it looked against the
sky--with the suspense and excitement in our own breasts, which these
peculiarities seemed to increase a hundred-fold, made the time that
followed one of the strangest in my experience. It was nearly ten
o'clock, and the warm sunshine flooding everything about us rendered
the ascent, laden as we were, laborious in the extreme. The crisp,
short turf, which had scarcely got its spring growth, was slippery and
treacherous. We dared not hasten, for we knew not what eyes were upon
us, and we dared as little after we had gone half-way--lay our faggots
down, lest the action should disclose too much of our features.

When we had reached a point within a hundred paces of the gate, which
still remained obstinately closed, we stood to breathe ourselves, and
balancing my bundle on my head, I turned to make sure that all was right
behind us. I found that M. d'Agen, intent on keeping his distance,
had chosen the same moment for rest, and was sitting in a very natural
manner on his faggot, mopping his face with the sleeve of his jerkin.
I scanned the brown leafless wood, in which we had left Maignan and our
men; but I could detect no glitter among the trees nor any appearance
likely to betray us. Satisfied on these points, I muttered a few
words of encouragement to Fanchette, whose face was streaming with
perspiration; and together we turned and addressed ourselves to our
task, fatigue--for we had had no practice in carrying burdens on the
head--enabling us to counterfeit the decrepitude of age almost to the
life.

The same silence prevailing as we drew nearer inspired me with not a few
doubts and misgivings. Even the bleat of a sheep would have been welcome
in the midst of a stillness which seemed ominous. But no sheep bleated,
no voice hailed us. The gate, ill-hung and full of fissures, remained
closed. Step by step we staggered up to it, and at length reached it.
Afraid to speak lest my accent should betray me, I struck the forepart
of my faggot against it and waited: doubting whether our whole stratagem
had not been perceived from the beginning, and a pistol-shot might not
be the retort.

Nothing of the kind happened, however. The sound of the blow, which
echoed dully through the building, died away, and the old silence
resumed its sway. We knocked again, but fully two minutes elapsed before
a grumbling voice, as of a man aroused from sleep, was heard drawing
near, and footsteps came slowly and heavily to the gate. Probably the
fellow inspected us through a loophole, for he paused a moment, and my
heart sank; but the next, seeing nothing suspicious, he unbarred the
gate with a querulous oath, and, pushing it open, bade us enter and be
quick about it.

I stumbled forward into the cool, dark shadow, and the woman followed
me, while the man, stepping out with a yawn, stood in the entrance,
stretching himself in the sunshine. The roofless tower, which smelled
dank and unwholesome, was empty, or cumbered only with rubbish and heaps
of stones; but looking through the inner door I saw in the courtyard a
smouldering fire and half a dozen men in the act of rousing themselves
from sleep. I stood a second balancing my faggot, as if in doubt where
to lay it down; and then assuring myself by a swift glance that the man
who had let us in still had his back towards us, I dropped it across the
inner doorway, Fanchette, as she had been instructed, plumped hers upon
it, and at the same moment I sprang to the door, and taking the man
there by surprise, dealt him a violent blow between the shoulders, which
sent him headlong down the slope.

A cry behind me, followed by an oath of alarm, told me that the action
was observed and that now was the pinch. In a second I was back at the
faggots, and drawing a pistol from under my blouse was in time to meet
the rush of the nearest man, who, comprehending all, sprang up, and made
for me, with his sheathed sword. I shot him in the chest as he cleared
the faggots--which, standing nearly as high as a man's waist, formed a
tolerable obstacle--and he pitched forward at my feet.

This balked his companions, who drew back; but unfortunately it was
necessary for me to stoop to get my sword, which was hidden in the
faggot I had carried. The foremost of the rascals took advantage of
this. Rushing at me with a long knife, he failed to stab me--for I
caught his wrist--but he succeeded in bringing me to the ground. I
thought I was undone. I looked to have the others swarm over upon us;
and so it would doubtless have happened had not Fanchette, with rare
courage, dealt the first who followed a lusty blow on the body with a
great stick she snatched up. The man collapsed on the faggots, and this
hampered the rest. The check was enough. It enabled M. d'Agen to come
up, who, dashing in through the gate, shot down the first he saw before
him, and running at the doorway with his sword with incredible fury and
the courage which I had always known him to possess, cleared it in a
twinkling. The man with whom I was engaged on the ground, seeing what
had happened, wrested himself free with the strength of despair, and
dashing through the outer door, narrowly escaped being ridden down by my
followers as they swept up to the gate at a gallop, and dismounted amid
a whirlwind of cries.

In a moment they thronged in on us pell-mell, and as soon as I could lay
my hand on my sword I led them through the doorway with a cheer, hoping
to be able to enter the farther tower with the enemy. But the latter had
taken the alarm too early and too thoroughly. The court was empty. We
were barely in time to see the last man dart up a flight of outside
stairs, which led to the first story, and disappear, closing a heavy
door behind him. I rushed to the foot of the steps and would have
ascended also, hoping against hope to find the door unsecured; but a
shot which was fired through a loop hole and narrowly missed my head,
and another which brought down one of my men, made me pause. Discerning
all the advantage to be on Bruhl's side, since he could shoot us down
from his cover, I cried a retreat; the issue of the matter leaving
us masters of the entrance-tower, while they retained the inner and
stronger tower, the narrow court between the two being neutral ground
unsafe for either party.

Two of their men had fled outwards and were gone, and two lay dead;
while the loss on our side was confined to the man who was shot, and
Fanchette, who had received a blow on the head in the MELEE, and was
found, when we retreated, lying sick and dazed against the wall.

It surprised me much, when I came to think upon it, that I had seen
nothing of Bruhl, though the skirmish had lasted two or three minutes
from the first outcry, and been attended by an abundance of noise. Of
Fresnoy, too, I now remembered that I had caught a glimpse only. These
two facts seemed so strange that I was beginning to augur the worst,
though I scarcely know why, when my spirits were marvellously raised and
my fears relieved by a thing which Maignan, who was the first to notice
it, pointed out to me. This was the appearance at an upper window of a
white 'kerchief, which was waved several times towards us. The window
was little more than an arrow-slit, and so narrow and high besides
that it was impossible to see who gave the signal; but my experience of
mademoiselle's coolness and resource left me in no doubt on the point.
With high hopes and a lighter heart than I had worn for some time I
bestirred myself to take every precaution, and began by bidding Maignan
select two men and ride round the hill, to make sure that the enemy had
no way of retreat open to him.



CHAPTER XXIX. PESTILENCE AND FAMINE.

While Maignan was away about this business I despatched two men to catch
our horses, which were running loose in the valley, and to remove those
of Bruhl's party to a safe distance from the castle. I also blocked up
the lower part of the door leading into the courtyard, and named four
men to remain under arms beside it, that we might not be taken by
surprise; an event of which I had the less fear, however, since the
enemy were now reduced to eight swords, and could only escape, as we
could only enter, through this doorway. I was still busied with these
arrangements when M. d'Agen joined me, and I broke off to compliment him
on his courage, acknowledging in particular the service he had done me
personally. The heat of the conflict had melted the young man's reserve,
and flushed his face with pride; but as he listened to me he gradually
froze again, and when I ended he regarded me with the same cold
hostility.

'I am obliged to you,' he said, bowing. 'But may I ask what next, M. de
Marsac?'

'We have no choice,' I answered. 'We can only starve them out.'

'But the ladies?' he said, starting slightly. 'What of them?'

'They will suffer less than the men,' I replied. 'Trust me, the latter
will not bear starving long.'

He seemed surprised, but I explained that with our small numbers we
could not hope to storm the tower, and might think ourselves fortunate
that we now had the enemy cooped up where he could not escape, and must
eventually surrender.

'Ay, but in the meantime how will you ensure the women against
violence?' he asked, with an air which showed he was far from satisfied.

'I will see to that when Maignan comes back,' I answered pretty
confidently.

The equerry appeared in a moment with the assurance that egress from the
farther side of the tower was impossible. I bade him nevertheless keep
a horseman moving round the hill, that we might have intelligence of
any attempt. The order was scarcely given when a man--one of those I had
left on guard at the door of the courtyard--came to tell me that Fresnoy
desired to speak with me on behalf of M. de Bruhl.

'Where is he?' I asked.

'At the inner door with a flag of truce,' was the answer.

'Tell him, then,' I said, without offering to move, 'that I will
communicate with no one except his leader, M. de Bruhl. And add this,
my friend,' I continued. 'Say it aloud that if the ladies whom he has
in charge are injured by so much as a hair, I will hang every man within
these walls, from M. de Bruhl to the youngest lackey.' And I added a
solemn oath to that effect.

The man nodded, and went on his errand, while I and M. d'Agen, with
Maignan, remained standing outside the gate, looking idly over the
valley and the brown woods through which we had ridden in the early
morning. My eyes rested chiefly on the latter, Maignan's as it proved on
the former. Doubtless we all had our own thoughts. Certainly I had,
and for a while, in my satisfaction at the result of the attack and
the manner in which we had Bruhl confined, I did not remark the gravity
which was gradually overspreading the equerry's countenance. When I did
I took the alarm, and asked him sharply what was the matter. 'I don't
like that, your Excellency,' he answered, pointing into the valley.

I looked anxiously, and looked, and saw nothing.

'What?' I said in astonishment.

'The blue mist,' he muttered, with a shiver. 'I have been watching it
this half-hour, your Excellency. It is rising fast.'

I cried out on him for a maudlin fool, and M. d'Agen swore impatiently;
but for all that, and despite the contempt I strove to exhibit, I felt
a sudden chill at my heart as I recognised in the valley below the same
blue haze which had attended us through yesterday's ride, and left us
only at nightfall. Involuntarily we both fell to watching it as it
rose slowly and more slowly, first enveloping the lower woods, and then
spreading itself abroad in the sunshine. It is hard to witness a bold
man's terror and remain unaffected by it; and I confess I trembled.
Here, in the moment of our seeming success, was something which I had
not taken into account, something against which I could not guard either
myself or others!

'See!' Maignan whispered hoarsely, pointing again with his linger. 'It
is the Angel of Death, your Excellency! Where he kills by ones and twos,
he is invisible. But when he slays by hundreds and by thousands, men see
the shadow of his wings!'

'Chut, fool!' I retorted with, anger, which was secretly proportioned to
the impression his weird saying made on me. 'You have been in battles!
Did you ever see him there? or at a sack? A truce to this folly,' I
continued. 'And do you go and inquire what food we have with us. It may
be necessary to send for some.'

I watched him go doggedly off, and knowing the stout nature of the man
and his devotion to his master, I had no fear that he would fail us; but
there were others, almost as necessary to us, in whom I could not place
the same confidence. And these had also taken the alarm. When I turned I
found groups of pale-faced men, standing by twos and threes at my back;
who, pointing and muttering and telling one another what Maignan had
told us, looked where we had looked. As one spoke and another listened,
I saw the old panic revive in their eyes. Men who an hour or two before
had crossed the court under fire with the utmost resolution, and dared
instant death without a thought, grew pale, and looking from this side
of the valley to that; with faltering eyes, seemed to be seeking, like
hunted animals, a place of refuge. Fear, once aroused, hung in the
air. Men talked in whispers of the abnormal heat, and, gazing at the
cloudless sky, fled from the sunshine to the shadow; or, looking over
the expanse of woods, longed to be under cover and away from this lofty
eyrie, which to their morbid eyes seemed a target for all the shafts of
death.

'I was not slow to perceive the peril with which these fears and
apprehensions, which rapidly became general, threatened my plans. I
strove to keep the men employed, and to occupy their thoughts as far as
possible with the enemy and his proceedings; but I soon found that even
here a danger lurked; for Maignan, coming to me by-and-by with a
grave face, told me that one of Bruhl's men had ventured out, and was
parleying with the guard on our side of the court. I went at once and
broke the matter off, threatening to shoot the fellow if he was not
under cover before I counted ten. But the scared, sultry faces he left
behind him told me that the mischief was done, and I could think of no
better remedy for it than to give M. d'Agen a hint, and station him at
the outer gate with his pistols ready.

The question of provisions, too, threatened to become a serious one; I
dared not leave to procure them myself, nor could I trust any of my
men with the mission. In fact the besiegers were rapidly becoming the
besieged. Intent on the rising haze and their own terrors, they forgot
all else. Vigilance and caution were thrown to the winds. The stillness
of the valley, its isolation, the distant woods that encircled us and
hung quivering in the heated air, all added to the panic. Despite all
my efforts and threats, the men gradually left their posts, and getting
together in little parties at the gate, worked themselves up to such a
pitch of dread that by two hours after noon they were fit for any folly;
and at the mere cry of 'plague!' would have rushed to their horses and
ridden in every direction.

It was plain that I could depend for useful service on myself and three
others only--of whom, to his credit be it said, Simon Fleix was one.
Seeing this, I was immensely relieved when I presently heard that
Fresnoy was again seeking to speak with me. I was no longer, it will be
believed, for standing on formalities; but glad to waive in silence the
punctilio on which I had before insisted, and anxious to afford him no
opportunity of marking the slackness which prevailed among my men, I
hastened to meet him at the door of the courtyard where Maignan had
detained him.

I might have spared my pains, however. I had no more than saluted him
and exchanged the merest preliminaries before I saw that he was in a
state of panic far exceeding that of my following. His coarse face,
which had never been prepossessing, was mottled and bedabbled with
sweat; his bloodshot eyes, when they met mine, wore the fierce yet
terrified expression of an animal caught in a trap. Though his first
word was an oath, sworn for the purpose of raising his courage, the
bully's bluster was gone. He spoke in a low voice, and his hands shook;
and for a penny-piece I saw he would have bolted past me and taken his
chance in open flight.

I judged from his first words, uttered, as I have said, with an oath,
that he was aware of his state. 'M. de Marsac,' he said, whining like a
cur, 'you know me, to be a man of courage.'

I needed nothing after this to assure me that he meditated something of
the basest; and I took care how I answered him. 'I have known you stiff
enough upon occasions,' I replied drily. 'And then, again, I have known
you not so stiff, M. Fresnoy.'

'Only when you were in question,' he muttered with another oath. 'But
flesh and blood cannot stand this. You could not yourself. Between
him and them I am fairly worn out. Give me good terms--good terms, you
understand, M. de Marsac?' he whispered eagerly, sinking his voice still
lower, 'and you shall have all you want.'

'Your lives, and liberty to go where you please,' I answered coldly.
'The two ladies to be first given up to me uninjured. Those are the
terms.'

'But for me?' he said anxiously.

'For you? The same as the others,' I retorted. 'Or I will make a
distinction for old acquaintance sake, M. Fresnoy; and if the ladies
have aught to complain of, I will hang you first.'

He tried to bluster and hold out for a sum of money, or at least for
his horse to be given up to him. But I had made up my mind to reward my
followers with a present of a horse apiece; and I was besides well aware
that this was only an afterthought on his part, and that he had fully
decided to yield. I stood fast, therefore. The result justified my
firmness, for he presently agreed to surrender on those terms.

'Ay, but M. de Bruhl?' I said, desiring to learn clearly whether he had
authority to treat for all. 'What of him?'

He looked at me impatiently. 'Come and see!' he said, with an ugly
sneer.

'No, no, my friend,' I answered, shaking my head warily. 'That is not
according to rule. You are the surrendering party, and it is for you to
trust us. Bring out the ladies, that I may have speech with them, and
then I will draw off my men.'

'Nom de Dieu!' he cried hoarsely, with so much fear and rage in his face
that I recoiled from him. 'That is just what I cannot do.'

'You cannot?' I rejoined with a sudden thrill of horror. 'Why not? why
not, man?' And in the excitement of the moment, conceiving the idea that
the worst had happened to the women, I pushed him back with so much fury
that he laid his hand on his sword.

'Confound you!' he stuttered, 'stand back! It is not that, I tell you!
Mademoiselle is safe and sound, and madame, if she had her senses, would
be sound too. It is not our fault if she is not. But I have not got the
key of the rooms. It is in Bruhl's pocket, I tell you!'

'Oh!' I made answer drily. 'And Bruhl?'

'Hush, man,' Fresnoy replied, wiping the perspiration from his brow, and
bringing his pallid, ugly face, near to mine, 'he has got the plague!'

I stared at him for a moment in silence; which he was the first to
break. 'Hush!' he muttered again, laying a trembling hand on my arm,
'if the men knew it--and not seeing him they are beginning to suspect
it--they would rise on us. The devil himself could not keep them here.
Between him and them I am on a razor's edge. Madame is with him, and
the door is locked. Mademoiselle is in a room upstairs, and the door
is locked. And he has the keys. What can I do? What can I do, man?' he
cried, his voice hoarse with terror and dismay.

'Get the keys,' I said instinctively.

'What?' From him?' he muttered, with an irrepressible shudder, which
shook his bloated cheeks. 'God forbid I should see him! It takes
stout men infallibly. I should be dead by night! By God, I should!' he
continued, whining. 'Now you are not stout, M. de Marsac. If you will
come with me I will draw off the men from that part; and you may go in
and get the key from him.'

His terror, which surpassed all feeling, and satisfied me without doubt
that he was in earnest, was so intense that it could not fail to infect
me. I felt my face, as I looked into his, grow to the same hue. I
trembled as he did and grew sick. For if there is a word which blanches
the soldier's cheek and tries his heart more than another, it is the
name of the disease which travels in the hot noonday, and, tainting the
strongest as he rides in his pride, leaves him in a few hours a poor
mass of corruption. The stoutest and the most reckless fear it; nor
could I, more than another, boast myself indifferent to it, or think of
its presence without shrinking. But the respect in which a man of birth
holds himself saves him from the unreasoning fear which masters the
vulgar; and in a moment I recovered myself, and made up my mind what it
behoved me to do.

'Wait awhile,' I said sternly, 'and I will come with you.'

He waited accordingly, though with manifest impatience, while I sent
for M. d'Agen, and communicated to him what I was about to do. I did not
think it necessary to enter into details, or to mention Bruhl's state,
for some of the men were well in hearing. I observed that the young
gentleman received my directions with a gloomy and dissatisfied air. But
I had become by this time so used to his moods, and found myself so
much mistaken in his character, that I scarcely gave the matter a second
thought. I crossed the court with Fresnoy, and in a moment had mounted
the outside staircase and passed through the heavy doorway.

The moment I entered, I was forced to do Fresnoy the justice of
admitting that he had not come to me before he was obliged. The three
men who were on guard inside tossed down their weapons at sight of me,
while a fourth, who was posted at a neighbouring window, hailed me with
a cry of relief. From the moment I crossed the threshold the defence was
practically at an end. I might, had I chosen or found it consistent with
honour, have called in my following and secured the entrance. Without
pausing, however, I passed on to the foot of a gloomy stone staircase
winding up between walls of rough masonry; and here Fresnoy stood on one
side and stopped. He pointed upwards with a pale face and muttered,'The
door on the left.'

Leaving him there watching me as I went upwards, I mounted slowly to the
landing, and by the light of an arrow-slit which dimly lit the ruinous
place found the door he had described, and tried it with my hand. It
was locked, but I heard someone moan in the room, and a step crossed
the floor, as if he or another came to the door and listened. I knocked,
hearing my heart beat in the silence. At last a voice quite strange to
me cried, 'Who is it?'

'A friend,' I muttered, striving to dull my voice that they might not
hear me below.

'A friend!' the bitter answer came. 'Go! You have made a mistake! We
have no friends.'

'It is I, M. de Marsac,' I rejoined, knocking more imperatively. 'I
would see M. de Bruhl. I must see him.'

The person inside, at whose identity I could now make a guess, uttered
a low exclamation, and still seemed to hesitate. But on my repeating my
demand I heard a rusty bolt withdrawn, and Madame de Bruhl, opening the
door a few inches, showed her face in the gap. 'What do you want?' she
murmured jealously.

Prepared as I was to see her, I was shocked by the change in her
appearance, a change which even that imperfect light failed to hide. Her
blue eyes had grown larger and harder, and there were dark marks under
them. Her face, once so brilliant, was grey and pinched; her hair had
lost its golden lustre. 'What do you want?' she repeated, eyeing me
fiercely.

'To see him,' I answered.

'You know?' she muttered. 'You know that he--'

I nodded.

And you still want to come in? My God! Swear you will not hurt him?'

'Heaven forbid!' I said; and on that she held the door open that I might
enter. But I was not half-way across the room before she had passed me,
and was again between me and the wretched makeshift pallet. Nay, when
I stood and looked down at him, as he moaned and rolled in senseless
agony, with livid face and distorted features (which the cold grey light
of that miserable room rendered doubly appalling), she hung over him and
fenced him from me: so that looking on him and her, and remembering how
he had treated her, and why he came to be in this place, I felt unmanly
tears rise to my eyes. The room was still a prison, a prison with broken
mortar covering the floor and loopholes for windows; but the captive was
held by other chains than those of force. When she might have gone free,
her woman's love surviving all that he had done to kill it, chained
her to his side with fetters which old wrongs and present danger were
powerless to break.

It was impossible that I could view a scene so strange without feelings
of admiration as well as pity; or without forgetting for a while, in
my respect for Madame de Bruhl's devotion, the risk which had seemed so
great to me on the stairs. I had come simply for a purpose of my own,
and with no thought of aiding him who lay here. But so great, as I
have noticed on other occasions, is the power of a noble example, that,
before I knew it, I found myself wondering what I could do to help this
man, and how I could relieve madame, in the discharge of offices which
her husband had as little right to expect at her hands as at mine. At
the mere sound of the word Plague I knew she would be deserted in this
wilderness by all, or nearly all; a reflection which suggested to me
that I should first remove mademoiselle to a distance, and then consider
what help I could afford here.

I was about to tell her the purpose with which I had come when a
paroxysm more than ordinarily violent, and induced perhaps by the
excitement of my presence--though he seemed beside himself--seized him,
and threatened to tax her powers to the utmost. I could not look on and
see her spend herself in vain; and almost before I knew what I was doing
I had laid my hands on him and after a brief struggle thrust him back
exhausted on the couch.

She looked at me so strangely after that that in the half-light which
the loopholes afforded I tried in vain to read her meaning. 'Why did you
come?' she cried at length, breathing quickly. 'You, of all men? Why did
you come? He was no friend of yours, Heaven knows!'

'No, madame, nor I of his,' I answered bitterly, with a sudden revulsion
of feeling.

'Then why are you here?' she retorted.

'I could not send one of my men,' I answered. 'And I want the key of the
room above.'

At the mention of that the room above--she flinched as if I had struck
her, and looked as strangely at Bruhl as she had before looked at me. No
doubt the reference to Mademoiselle de la Vire recalled to her mind
her husband's wild passion for the girl, which for the moment she had
forgotten. Nevertheless she did not speak, though her face turned very
pale. She stooped over the couch, such as it was, and searching his
clothes, presently stood up, and held out the key to me. 'Take it, and
let her out,' she said with a forced smile. 'Take it up yourself, and do
it. You have done so much for her it is right that you should do this.'

I took the key, thanking her with more haste than thought, and turned
towards the door, intending to go straight up to the floor above and
release mademoiselle. My hand was already on the door, which madame, I
found, had left ajar in the excitement of my entrance, when I heard her
step behind me. The next instant she touched me on the shoulder. 'You
fool!' she exclaimed, her eyes flashing, 'would you kill her?' Would you
go from him to her, and take the plague to her? God forgive me, it was
in my mind to send you. And men are such puppets you would have gone!'

I trembled with horror, as much at my stupidity as at her craft. For she
was right: in another moment I should have gone, and comprehension and
remorse would have come too late. As it was, in my longing at once
to reproach her for her wickedness and to thank her for her timely
repentance, I found no words; but I turned away in silence and went out
with a full heart.



CHAPTER XXX. STRICKEN.

Outside the door, standing in the dimness of the landing, I found M.
d'Agen. At any other time I should have been the first to ask him why he
had left the post which I had assigned to him. But at the moment I was
off my balance, and his presence suggested nothing more than that here
was the very person who could best execute my wishes. I held out the key
to him at arms length, and bade him release Mademoiselle de la Vire, who
was in the room above, and escort her out of the castle. 'Do not let
her linger here,' I continued urgently. 'Take her to the place where we
found the wood-cutters. You need fear no resistance.'

'But Bruhl?' he said, as he took the key mechanically from me.

'He is out of the question,' I answered in a low voice. 'We have done
with him. He has the plague.'

He uttered a sharp exclamation. 'What of madame, then?' he muttered.

'She is with him,' I said.

He cried out suddenly at that, sucking in his breath, as I have known
men do in pain. And but that I drew back he would have laid his hand on
my sleeve. 'With him?' he stammered. 'How is that?'

'Why, man, where else should she be?' I answered, forgetting that the
sight of those two together had at first surprised me also, as well as
moved me. 'Or who else should be with him? He is her husband.'

He stared at me for a moment at that, and then he turned slowly away
and began to go up; while I looked after him, gradually thinking out the
clue to his conduct. Could it be that it was not mademoiselle attracted
him, but Madame de Bruhl?

And with that hint I understood it all. I saw in a moment; the
conclusion to which he had come on hearing of the presence of madame
in my room. In my room at night! The change had dated from that time;
instead of a careless, light-spirited youth he had become in a moment
a morose and restive churl, as difficult to manage as an unbroken colt.
Quite clearly I saw now the meaning of the change; why he had shrunk
from me, and why all intercourse between us had been so difficult; and
so constrained.

I laughed to think how he had deceived himself, and how nearly I had
come to deceiving myself also. And what more I might have thought I
do not know, for my meditations were cut short at this point by a loud
outcry below, which, beginning in one or two sharp cries of alarm and
warning, culminated quickly in a roar of anger and dismay.

Fancying I recognised Maignan's voice, I ran down the stairs, seeking
a loophole whence I could command the scene; but finding none, and
becoming more and more alarmed, I descended to the court, which I
found, to my great surprise, as empty and silent as an old battle-field.
Neither on the enemy's side nor on ours was a single man to be seen.
With growing dismay I sprang across the court and darted through the
outer tower, only to find that and the gateway equally unguarded. Nor
was it until I had passed through the latter, and stood on the brow of
the slope, which we had had to clamber with so much toil, that I learned
what was amiss.

Far below me a string of men, bounding and running at speed, streamed
down the hill towards the horses. Some were shouting, some running
silently, with their elbows at their sides and their scabbards leaping
against their calves. The horses stood tethered in a ring near the edge
of the wood, and by some oversight had been left unguarded. The foremost
runner I made out to be Fresnoy; but a number of his men were close
upon him, and then after an interval came Maignan, waving his blade and
emitting frantic threats with every stride. Comprehending at once
that Fresnoy and his following, rendered desperate by panic and the
prospective loss of their horses, had taken advantage of my absence and
given Maignan the slip, I saw I could do nothing save watch the result
of the struggle.

This was not long delayed. Maignan's threats, which seemed to me mere
waste of breath, were not without effect on those he followed. There
is nothing which demoralises men like flight. Troopers who have stood
charge after charge while victory was possible will fly like sheep, and
like sheep allow themselves to be butchered, when they have once turned
the back. So it was here. Many of Fresnoy's men were stout fellows,
but having started to run they had no stomach for fighting. Their fears
caused Maignan to appear near, while the horses seemed distant; and one
after another they turned aside and made like rabbits for the wood.
Only Fresnoy, who had taken care to have the start of all, kept on,
and, reaching the horses, cut the rope which tethered the nearest, and
vaulted nimbly on its back. Safely seated there, he tried to frighten
the others into breaking loose; but not succeeding at the first attempt,
and seeing Maignan, breathing vengeance, coming up with him, he started
his horse, a bright bay, and rode off laughing along the edge of the
wood.

Fully content with the result--for our carelessness might have cost
us very dearly--I was about to turn away when I saw that Maignan had
mounted and was preparing to follow. I stayed accordingly to see the
end, and from my elevated position enjoyed a first-rate view of the race
which ensued. Both were heavy weights, and at first Maignan gained no
ground. But when a couple of hundred yards had been covered Fresnoy had
the ill-luck to blunder into some heavy ground, and this enabling his
pursuer, who had time to avoid it, to get within two-score paces of him,
the race became as exciting as I could wish. Slowly and surely Maignan,
who had chosen the Cid, reduced the distance between them to a score of
paces--to fifteen--to ten. Then Fresnoy, becoming alarmed, began to look
over his shoulder and ride in earnest. He had no whip, and I saw him
raise his sheathed sword, and strike his beast on the flank. It sprang
forward, and appeared for a few strides to be holding its own. Again he
repeated the blow but this time with a different result. While his hand
was still in the air, his horse stumbled, as it seemed to me, made a
desperate effort to recover itself, fell headlong and rolled over and
over.

Something in the fashion of the fall, which reminded me of the mishap I
had suffered on the way to Chize led me to look more particularly at the
horse as it rose trembling to its feet, and stood with drooping head.
Sure enough, a careful glance enabled me, even at that distance, to
identify it as Matthew's bay--the trick-horse. Shading my eyes, and
gazing on the scene with increased interest, I saw Maignan, who had
dismounted, stoop over something on the ground, and again after an
interval stand upright.

But Fresnoy did not rise. Nor was it without awe that, guessing what had
happened to him, I remembered how he had used this very horse to befool
me; how heartlessly he had abandoned Matthew, its owner; and by what
marvellous haps--which men call chances--Providence had brought it to
this place, and put it in his heart to choose it out of a score which
stood ready to his hand!

I was right. The man's neck was broken. He was quite dead. Maignan
passed the word to one, and he to another, and so it reached me on the
hill. It did not fail to awaken memories both grave and wholesome.
I thought of St. Jean d'Angely, of Chize, of the house in the Ruelle
d'Arcy; then in the midst of these reflections I heard voices, and
turned to find mademoiselle, with M. d'Agen behind me.

Her hand was still bandaged, and her dress, which she had not changed
since leaving Blois, was torn and stained with mud. Her hair was in
disorder; she walked with a limp. Fatigue and apprehension had stolen
the colour from her cheeks, and in a word she looked, when I turned, so
wan and miserable that for a moment I feared the plague had seized her.

The instant, however, that she caught sight of me a wave of colour
invaded, not her cheeks only, but her brow and neck. From her hair
to the collar of her gown she was all crimson. For a second she stood
gazing at me, and then, as I saluted her, she sprang forward. Had I not
stepped back she would have taken my hands.

My heart so overflowed with joy at this sight, that in the certainty her
blush gave me I was fain to toy with my happiness. All jealousy of M.
d'Agen was forgotten; only I thought it well not to alarm her by telling
her what I knew of the Bruhls. 'Mademoiselle,' I said earnestly, bowing,
but retreating from her, 'I thank God for your escape. One of your
enemies lies helpless here, and another is dead yonder.'

'It is not of my enemies I am thinking,' she answered quickly, 'but of
God, of whom you rightly remind me; and then of my friends.'

'Nevertheless,' I answered as quickly, 'I beg you will not stay to thank
them now, but go down to the wood with M. d'Agen, who will do all that
may be possible to make you comfortable.'

'And you, sir?' she said, with a charming air of confusion.

'I must stay here,' I answered, 'for a while.'

'Why?' she asked with a slight frown.

I did not know how to tell her, and I began lamely. 'Someone must stop
with madame,' I said without thought.

'Madame?' she exclaimed. 'Does she require assistance? I will stop.'

'God forbid!' I cried.

I do not know how she understood the words, but her face, which had been
full of softness, grew hard. She moved quickly towards me; but, mindful
of the danger I carried about me, I drew farther back. 'No nearer,
mademoiselle,' I murmured, 'if you please.'

She looked puzzled, and finally angry, turning away with a sarcastic
bow. 'So be it, then, sir,' she said proudly, 'if you desire it. M.
d'Agen, if you are not afraid of me, will you lead me down?'

I stood and watched them go down the hill, comforting myself with the
reflection that to-morrow, or the next day, or within a few days at
most, all would be well. Scanning her figure as she moved, I fancied
that she went with less spirit as the space increased between us. And I
pleased myself with the notion. A few days, a few hours, I thought, and
all would be well. The sunset which blazed in the west was no more than
a faint reflection of the glow which for a few minutes pervaded my mind,
long accustomed to cold prospects and the chill of neglect.

A term was put to these pleasant imaginings by the arrival of Maignan;
who, panting from the ascent of the hill, informed me with a shamefaced
air that the tale of horses was complete, but that four of our men were
missing, and had doubtless gone off with the fugitives. These proved
to be M. d'Agen's two lackeys and the two varlets M. de Rambouillet had
lent us. There remained besides Simon Fleix only Maignan's three men
from Rosny; but the state in which our affairs now stood enabled us to
make light of this. I informed the equerry--who visibly paled at the
news--that M. de Bruhl lay ill of the plague, and like to die; and I
bade him form a camp in the wood below, and, sending for food to
the house where we had slept the night before, make mademoiselle as
comfortable as circumstances permitted.

He listened with surprise, and when I had done asked with concern what I
intended to do myself.

'Someone must remain with Madam de Bruhl,' I answered. 'I have already
been to the bedside to procure the key of mademoiselle's room, and I run
no farther risk. All I ask is that you will remain in the neighbourhood,
and furnish us with supplies should it be necessary.'

He looked at me with emotion, which, strongly in conflict with his fears
as it was, touched me not a little. 'But morbleu! M. de Marsac,' he
said, 'you will take the plague and die.'

'If God wills,' I answered, very lugubriously I confess, for pale looks
in one commonly so fearless could not but depress me. 'But if not, I
shall escape. Any way, my friend,' I continued, 'I owe you a quittance.
Simon Fleix has an inkhorn and paper. Bid him bring them to this stone
and leave them, and I will write that Maignan, the equerry of the Baron
de Rosny, served me to the end as a brave soldier and an honest friend.
'What, MON AMI?' I continued, for I saw that he was overcome by this,
which was, indeed, a happy thought of mine. 'Why not? It is true, and
will acquit you with the Baron. Do it, and go. Advise M. d'Agen, and be
to him what you have been to me.'

He swore two or three great oaths, such as men of his kind use to hide
an excess of feeling, and after some further remonstrance went away to
carry out my orders; leaving me to stand on the brow in a strange kind
of solitude, and watch horses and men withdraw to the wood, until the
whole valley seemed left to me and stillness and the grey evening. For
a time I stood in thought. Then reminding myself, for a fillip to my
spirits, that I had been far more alone when I walked the streets of St.
Jean friendless and threadbare (than I was now), I turned, and swinging
my scabbard against my boots for company, stumbled through the dark,
silent courtyard, and mounted as cheerfully as I could to madame's room.

To detail all that passed during the next five days would be tedious
and in indifferent taste, seeing that I am writing this memoir for the
perusal of men of honour; for though I consider the offices which the
whole can perform for the sick to be worthy of the attention of every
man, however well born, who proposes to see service, they seem to be
more honourable in the doing than the telling. One episode, however,
which marked those days filled me then, as it does now, with the most
lively pleasure; and that was the unexpected devotion displayed by Simon
Fleix, who, coming to me, refused to leave, and showed himself at this
pinch to be possessed of such sterling qualities that I freely forgave
him the deceit he had formerly practised on me. The fits of moody
silence into which he still fell at times and an occasional irascibility
seemed to show that he had not altogether conquered his insane fancy;
but the mere fact that; he had come to me in a situation of hazard, and
voluntarily removed himself from mademoiselle's neighbourhood, gave me
good hope for the future.

M. de Bruhl died early on the morning of the second day, and Simon and
I buried him at noon. He was a man of courage and address, lacking only
principles. In spite of madame's grief and prostration, which were as
great as though she had lost the best husband in the world, we removed
before night to a separate camp in the woods; and left with the utmost
relief the grey ruin on the hill, in which, it seemed to me, we had
lived an age. In our new bivouac, where, game being abundant, and the
weather warm, we lacked no comfort, except the society of our friends,
we remained four days longer. On the fifth morning we met the others of
our company by appointment on the north road, and commenced the return
journey.

Thankful that we had escaped contagion, we nevertheless still proposed
to observe for a time such precautions in regard to the others as seemed
necessary; riding in the rear and having no communication with them,
though they showed by signs the pleasure they felt at seeing us. From
the frequency with which mademoiselle turned and looked behind her,
I judged she had overcome her pique at my strange conduct; which the
others should by this time have explained to her. Content, therefore,
with the present, and full of confidence in the future, I rode along in
a rare state of satisfaction; at one moment planning what I would do,
and at another reviewing what I had done.

The brightness and softness of the day, and the beauty of the woods,
which in some places, I remember, were bursting into leaf, contributed
much to establish me in this frame of mind. The hateful mist, which
had so greatly depressed us, had disappeared; leaving the face of the
country visible in all the brilliance of early spring. The men who rode
before us, cheered by the happy omen, laughed and talked as they rode,
or tried the paces of their horses, where the trees grew sparsely; and
their jests and laughter coming pleasantly to our ears as we followed,
warmed even madame's sad face to a semblance of happiness.

I was riding along in this state of contentment when a feeling of
fatigue, which the distance we had come did not seem to justify, led me
to spur the Cid into a brisker pace. The sensation of lassitude still
continued, however, and indeed grew worse; so that I wondered idly
whether I had over-eaten myself at my last meal. Then the thing passed
for awhile from my mind, which the descent of a steep hill sufficiently
occupied.

But a few minutes later, happening to turn in the saddle, I experienced
a strange and sudden dizziness; so excessive as to force me to grasp the
cantle, and cling to it, while trees and hills appeared to dance round
me. A quick, hot pain in the side followed, almost before I recovered
the power of thought; and this increased so rapidly, and was from the
first so definite, that, with a dreadful apprehension already formed
in my mind, I thrust my hand inside my clothes, and found that swelling
which is the most sure and deadly symptom of the plague.

The horror of that moment--in which I saw all those things on the
possession of which I had just been congratulating myself, pass
hopelessly from me, leaving me in dreadful gloom--I will not attempt to
describe in this place. Let it suffice that the world lost in a moment
its joyousness, the sunshine its warmth. The greenness and beauty round
me, which an instant before had filled me with pleasure, seemed on a
sudden no more than a grim and cruel jest at my expense, and I an atom
perishing unmarked and unnoticed. Yes, an atom, a mote; the bitterness
of that feeling I well remember. Then, in no long time--being a
soldier--I recovered my coolness, and, retaining the power to think,
decided what it behoved me to do.



CHAPTER XXXI. UNDER THE GREENWOOD.

To escape from my companions on some pretext, which should enable me to
ensure their safety without arousing their fears, was the one thought
which possessed me on the subsidence of my first alarm. Probably it
answered to that instinct in animals which bids them get away alone when
wounded or attacked by disease; and with me it had the fuller play as
the pain prevailed rather by paroxysms, than in permanence, and, coming
and going, allowed intervals of ease, in which I was able to think
clearly and consecutively, and even to sit firmly in the saddle.

The moment one of these intervals enabled me to control myself, I used
it to think where I might go without danger to others; and at once and
naturally my thoughts turned to the last place we had passed; which
happened to be the house in the gorge where we had received news of
Bruhl's divergence from the road. The man who lived there alone had had
the plague; therefore he did not fear it. The place itself was solitary,
and I could reach it, riding slowly, in half an hour. On the instant
and without more delay I determined on this course. I would return,
and, committing myself to the fellow's good offices, bid him deny me to
others, and especially to my friends--should they seek me.

Aware that I bad no time to lose if I would put this plan into execution
before the pains returned to sap my courage, I drew bridle at once,
and muttered some excuse to madame; if I remember rightly, that I had
dropped my gauntlet. Whatever the pretext--and my dread was great lest
she should observe any strangeness in my manner--it passed with her; by
reason, chiefly, I think, of the grief which monopolised her. She let me
go, and before anyone else could mark or miss me I was a hundred yards
away on the back-track, and already sheltered from observation by a turn
in the road.

The excitement of my evasion supported me for a while after leaving her;
and then for another while, a paroxysm of pain deprived me of the power
of thought. But when this last was over, leaving me weak and shaken, yet
clear in my mind, the most miserable sadness and depression that can be
conceived came upon me; and, accompanying me through the wood, filled
its avenues (which doubtless were fair enough to others' eyes) with the
blackness of despair. I saw but the charnel-house, and that everywhere.
It was not only that the horrors of the first discovery returned upon me
and almost unmanned me; nor only that regrets and memories, pictures of
the past and plans for the future, crowded thick upon my mind, so that
I could have wept at the thought of all ending here. But in my weakness
mademoiselle's face shone where the wood was darkest, and, tempting and
provoking me to return--were it only to tell her that, grim and dull as
I seemed, I loved her--tried me with a subtle temptation almost beyond
my strength to resist. All that was mean in me rose in arms, all that
was selfish clamoured to know why I must die in the ditch while others
rode in the sunshine; why I must go to the pit, while others loved and
lived!

And so hard was I pressed that I think I should have given way had the
ride been longer or my horse less smooth and nimble. But in the midst of
my misery, which bodily pain was beginning to augment to such a degree
that I could scarcely see, and had to ride gripping the saddle with both
hands, I reached the mill. My horse stopped of its own accord. The man
we had seen before came out. I had I just strength left to tell him what
was the matter, and what I wanted and then a fresh attack came on, with
sickness, and overcome by vertigo I fell to the ground.

I have but an indistinct idea what happened after that; until I found
myself inside the house, clinging to the man's arm. He pointed to a
box-bed in one corner of the room (which was, or seemed to my sick eyes,
gloomy and darksome in the extreme), and would have had me lie down in
it. But something inside me revolted against the bed, and despite the
force he used, I broke away, and threw myself on a heap of straw which I
saw in another corner.

'Is not the bed good enough for you?' he grumbled.

I strove to tell him it was not that.

'It should be good enough to die on,' he continued brutally. 'There's
five have died on that bed, I'd have you know! My wife one, and my son
another, and my daughter another; and then my son again, and a daughter
again. Five! Ay, five in that bed!'

Brooding in the gloom of the chimney-corner, where he was busied about a
black pot, he continued to mutter and glance at me askance; but after a
while I swooned away with pain.

When I opened my eyes again the room was darker. The man still sat where
I had last seen him, but a noise, the same, perhaps, which had roused
me, drew him as I looked to the unglazed window. A voice outside, the
tones of which I seemed to know, inquired if he had seen me; and so
carried away was I by the excitement of the moment that I rose on my
elbow to hear the answer. But the man was staunch. I heard him deny all
knowledge of me, and presently the sound of retreating hoofs and the
echo of voices dying in the distance assured me I was left.

Then, at that instant, a doubt of the man on whose compassion I had
thrown myself entered my mind. Plague-stricken, hopeless as I was, it
chilled me to the very heart; staying in a moment the feeble tears I was
about to shed, and curing even the vertigo, which forced me to clutch at
the straw on which I lay. Whether the thought arose from a sickly sense
of my own impotence, or was based on the fellow's morose air and the
stealthy glances he continued to cast at me, I am as unable to say as I
am to decide whether it was well-founded, or the fruit of my own fancy.
Possibly the gloom of the room and the man's surly words inclined me
to suspicion; possibly his secret thoughts portrayed themselves in his
hang-dog visage. Afterwards it appeared that he had stripped me, while
I lay, of everything of value; but he may have done this in the belief
that I should die.

All I know is that I knew nothing certain, because the fear died almost
as soon as it was born. The man had scarcely seated himself again, or I
conceived the thought, when a second alarm outside caused him to spring
to his feet. Scowling and muttering as he went, he hurried to the
window. But before he reached it the door was dashed violently open, and
Simon Fleix stood in the entrance.

There came in with him so blessed a rush of light and life as in a
moment dispelled the horror of the room, and stripped me at one and the
same time of fear and manhood. For whether I would or no, at sight of
the familiar face, which I had fled so lately, I burst into tears; and,
stretching out my hands to him, as a frightened child might have done,
called on him by name. I suppose the plague was by this time so plainly
written on my face that all who looked might read; for he stood at gaze,
staring at me, and was still so standing when a hand put him aside and
a slighter, smaller figure, pale-faced and hooded, stood for a moment
between me and the sunshine. It was mademoiselle!

That, I thank God, restored me to myself, or I had been for ever shamed.
I cried to them with all the voice I had left to take her away; and
calling out frantically again and again that I had the plague and she
would die, I bade the man close the door. Nay, regaining something of
strength in my fear for her, I rose up, half-dressed as I was, and would
have fled into some corner to avoid her, still calling out to them to
take her away, to take her away--if a fresh paroxysm had not seized me,
so that I fell blind and helpless where I was.

For a time after that I knew nothing; until someone held water to my
lips, and I drank greedily, and presently awoke to the fact that the
entrance was dark with faces and figures all gazing at me as I lay. But
I could not see her; and I had sense enough to know and be thankful that
she was no longer among them. I would fain have bidden Maignan to begone
too, for I read the consternation in his face. But I could not muster
strength or voice for the purpose, and when I turned my head to see
who held me--ah me! it comes back to me still in dreams--it was
mademoiselle's hair that swept my forehead and her hand that ministered
to me; while tears she did not try to hide or wipe away fell on my hot
cheek. I could have pushed her away even then, for she was slight and
small; but the pains came upon me, and with a sob choking my voice I
lost all knowledge.

I am told that I lay for more than a month between life and death,
now burning with fever and now in the cold fit; and that but for the
tendance which never failed nor faltered, nor could have been outdone
had my malady been the least infectious in the world. I must have died
a hundred times, as hundreds round me did die week by week in that year.
From the first they took me out of the house (where I think I should
have perished quickly, so impregnated was it with the plague poison) and
laid me under a screen of boughs in the forest, with a vast quantity of
cloaks and horse-cloths cunningly disposed to windward. Here I ran some
risk from cold and exposure and the fall of heavy dews; but, on the
other hand, had all the airs of heaven to clear away the humours and
expel the fever from my brain.

Hence it was that when the first feeble beginnings of consciousness
awoke in me again, they and the light stole in on me through green
leaves, and overhanging boughs, and the freshness and verdure of the
spring woods. The sunshine which reached my watery eyes was softened by
its passage through great trees, which grew and expanded as I gazed
up into them, until each became a verdant world, with all a world's
diversity of life. Grown tired of this, I had still long avenues
of shade, carpeted with flowers, to peer into; or a little wooded
bottom--where the ground fell away on one side--that blazed and burned
with redthorn. Ay, and hence it was that the first sounds I heard, when
the fever left me at last, and I knew morning from evening, and man from
woman, were the songs of birds calling to their mates.

Mademoiselle and Madame de Bruhl, with Fanchette and Simon Fleix, lay
all this time in such shelter as could be raised for them where I lay;
M. Francois and three stout fellows, whom Maignan left to guard us
living in a hut within hail. Maignan himself, after seeing out a week of
my illness, had perforce returned to his master, and no news had since
been received from him. Thanks to the timely move into the woods, no
other of the party fell ill, and by the time I was able to stand and
speak the ravages of the disease had so greatly decreased that fear was
at an end.

I should waste words were I to try to describe how the peace and
quietude of the life we led in the forest during the time of my recovery
sank into my heart; which had known, save by my mother's bedside, little
of such joys. To awake in the morning to sweet sounds and scents, to eat
with reviving appetite and feel the slow growth of strength, to lie all
day in shade or sunshine as it pleased me, and hear women's voices and
tinkling laughter, to have no thought of the world and no knowledge
of it, so that we might have been, for anything we saw, in another
sphere--these things might have sufficed for happiness without that
which added to each and every one of them a sweeter and deeper and more
lasting joy. Of which next.

I had not begun to take notice long before I saw that M. Francois and
madame had come to an understanding; such an one, at least, as permitted
him to do all for her comfort and entertainment without committing
her to more than was becoming at such a season. Naturally this left
mademoiselle much in my company; a circumstance which would have
ripened into passion the affection I before entertained for her, had
not gratitude and a nearer observance of her merits already elevated my
regard into the most ardent worship that even the youngest lover ever
felt for his mistress.

In proportion, however, as I and my love grew stronger, and
mademoiselle's presence grew more necessary to my happiness--so that
were she away but an hour I fell a-moping--she began to draw off from
me, and absenting herself more and more on long walks in the woods,
by-and-by reduced me to such a pitch, of misery as bid fair to complete
what the fever had left undone.

If this had happened in the world I think it likely that I should have
suffered in silence. But here, under the greenwood, in common enjoyment
of God's air and earth, we seemed more nearly equal. She was scarce
better dressed, than a sutler's wife; while recollections of her wealth
and station, though they assailed me nightly, lost much of their point
in presence of her youth and of that fair and patient gentleness which
forest life and the duties of a nurse had fostered.

So it happened that one day, when she had been absent longer than usual,
I took my courage in my hand and went to meet her as far as the stream
which ran through the bottom by the redthorn. Here, at a place where
there were three stepping-stones, I waited for her; first taking away
the stepping-stones, that she might have to pause, and, being at a loss,
might be glad to see me.

She came presently, tripping through an alley in the low wood, with her
eyes on the ground, and her whole carriage full of a sweet pensiveness
which it did me good to see. I turned my back on the stream before she
saw me, and made a pretence of being taken up with something in another
direction. Doubtless she espied me soon, and before she came very
near; but she made no sign until she reached the brink, and found the
stepping-stones were gone.

Then, whether she suspected me or not, she called out to me, not once,
but several times. For, partly to tantalise her, as lovers will, and
partly because it charmed me to hear her use my name, I would not turn
at once.

When I did, and discovered her standing with one small foot dallying
with the water, I cried out with well-affected concern; and in a great
hurry ran towards her, paying no attention to her chiding or the pettish
haughtiness with which she spoke to me.

'The stepping-stones are all on your side,' she said imperiously.

'Who has moved them?'

I looked about without answering, and at last pretended to find them;
while she stood watching me, tapping the ground with one foot the while.
Despite her impatience, the stone which was nearest to her I took care
to bring last--that she might not cross without my assistance. But after
all she stepped over so lightly and quickly that the hand she placed
in mine seemed scarcely to rest there a second. Yet when she was over
I managed to retain it; nor did she resist, though her cheek, which had
been red before, turned crimson and her eyes fell, and bound to me by
the link of her little hand, she stood beside me with her whole figure
drooping.

'Mademoiselle,' I said gravely, summoning all my resolution to my aid,
'do you know of what that stream with its stepping-stones reminds me?'

She shook her head but did not answer.

'Of the stream which has flowed between us from the day when I first saw
you at St. Jean,' said in a low voice. 'It has flowed between us, and it
still does--separating us.'

'What stream?' she murmured, with her eyes cast down, and her foot
playing with the moss. 'You speak in riddles, sir.'

'You understand this one only too well, mademoiselle, 'I answered. 'Are
you not young and gay and beautiful, while I am old, or almost old,
and dull and grave? You are rich and well-thought-of at Court, and I a
soldier of fortune, not too successful. What did you think of me
when you first saw me at St. Jean? What when I came to Rosny? That,
mademoiselle,' I continued with fervour, 'is the stream which flows
between us and separates us; and I know of but one stepping-stone that
can bridge it.'

She looked aside, toying with a piece of thorn-blossom she had picked.
It was not redder than her cheeks.

'That one stepping-stone,' I said, after waiting vainly for any word or
sign from her, 'is Love. Many weeks ago, mademoiselle, when I had little
cause to like you, I loved you; I loved you whether I would or not, and
without thought or hope of return. I should have been mad had I spoken
to you then. Mad, and worse than mad. But now, now that I owe you my
life, now that I have drunk from your hand in fever, and, awaking early
and late, have found you by my pillow--now that, seeing you come in and
out in the midst of fear and hardship, I have learned to regard you as
a woman kind and gentle as my mother--now that I love you, so that to be
with you is joy, and away from you grief, is it presumption in me now,
mademoiselle, to think that that stream may be bridged?'

I stopped, out of breath, and saw that she was trembling. But she spoke
presently. 'You said one stepping-stone?' she murmured.

'Yes,' I answered hoarsely, trying in vain to look at her face, which
she kept averted from me.

'There should be two,' she said, almost in a whisper. 'Your love, sir,
and--and mine. You have said much of the one, and nothing of the other.
In that you are wrong, for I am proud still. And I would not cross the
stream you speak of for any love of yours!'

'Ah!' I cried in sharpest pain.

'But,' she continued, looking up at me on a sudden with eyes that told
me all, 'because I love you I am willing to cross it--to cross it once
for ever, and to live beyond it all my life--if I may live my life with
you.'

I fell on my knee and kissed her hand again and again in a rapture of
joy and gratitude. By-and-by she pulled it from me. 'If you will, sir,'
she said, 'you may kiss my lips. If you do not, no man ever will.'

After that, as may be guessed, we walked every day in the forest, making
longer and longer excursions as my strength came back to me, and the
nearer parts grew familiar. From early dawn, when I brought my love a
posy of flowers, to late evening, when Fanchette hurried her from me,
our days were passed in a long round of delight; being filled full of
all beautiful things--love, and sunshine, and rippling streams, and
green banks, on which we sat together under scented limes, telling one
another all we had ever thought, and especially all we had ever thought
of one another. Sometimes--when the light was low in the evening--we
spoke of my mother; and once--but that was in the sunshine, when the
bees were humming and my blood had begun to run strongly in my veins--I
spoke of my great and distant kinsman, Rohan. But mademoiselle would
hear nothing of him, murmuring again and again in my ear, 'I have
crossed, my love, I have crossed.'

Truly the sands of that hour-glass were of gold. But in time they
ran out. First M. Francois, spurred by the restlessness of youth, and
convinced that madame would for a while yield no further, left us, and
went back to the world. Then news came of great events that could not
fail to move us. The King of France and the King of Navarre had met at
Tours, and embracing in the sight of an immense multitude, had repulsed
the League with slaughter in the suburb of St. Symphorien. Fast on this
followed the tidings of their march northwards with an overwhelming army
of fifty-thousand men of both religions, bent, rumour had it, on the
signal punishment of Paris.

I grew--shame that I should say it--to think more and more of these
things; until mademoiselle, reading the signs, told me one day that we
must go. 'Though never again,' she added with a sigh, 'shall we be so
happy.'

'Then why go?' I asked foolishly.

'Because you are a man,' she answered with a wise smile, 'as I would
have you be, and you need something besides love. To-morrow we will go.'

'Whither?' I said in amazement.

'To the camp before Paris,' she answered. 'We will go back in the light
of day--seeing that we have done nothing of which to be ashamed--and
throw ourselves on the justice of the King of Navarre. You shall place
me with Madame Catherine, who will not refuse to protect me; and
so, sweet, you will have only yourself to think of. Come, sir,' she
continued, laying her little hand in mine, and looking into my eyes,
'you are not afraid?'

'I am more afraid than ever I used to be,' I said trembling.

'So I would have it,' she whispered, hiding her face on my shoulder.
'Nevertheless we will go.'

And go we did. The audacity of such a return in the face of Turenne,
who was doubtless in the King of Navarre's suite, almost took my breath
away; nevertheless, I saw that it possessed one advantage which no other
course promised--that, I mean, of setting us right in the eyes of the
world, and enabling me to meet in a straightforward manner such
as maligned us. After some consideration I gave my assent, merely
conditioning that until we reached the Court we should ride masked, and
shun as far as possible encounters by the road.



CHAPTER XXXII. A TAVERN BRAWL.

On the following day, accordingly, we started. But the news of the two
kings' successes, and particularly the certainty which these had bred in
many minds that nothing short of a miracle could save Paris, had moved
so many gentlemen to take the road that we found the inns crowded beyond
example, and were frequently forced into meetings which made the task
of concealing our identity more difficult and hazardous than I had
expected. Sometimes shelter was not to be obtained on any terms, and
then we had to lie in the fields or in any convenient shed. Moreover,
the passage of the army had swept the country so bare both of food and
forage, that these commanded astonishing prices; and a long day's ride
more than once brought us to our destination without securing for us the
ample meal we had earned, and required.

Under these circumstances, it was with joy little short of transport
that I recognised the marvellous change which had come over my mistress.
Bearing all without a murmur, or a frown, or so much as one complaining
word, she acted on numberless occasions so as to convince me that she
spoke truly--albeit I scarcely dared to believe it--when she said that
she had but one trouble in the world, and that was the prospect of our
coming separation.

For my part, and despite some gloomy moments, when fear of the future
overcame me, I rode in Paradise riding by my mistress. It was her
presence which glorified alike the first freshness of the morning, when
we started with all the day before us, and the coolness of the late
evening, when we rode hand-in-hand. Nor could I believe without an
effort that I was the same Gaston de Marsac who she had once spurned
and disdained. God knows I was thankful for her love. A thousand times,
thinking of my grey hairs, I asked her if she did not repent; and a
thousand times she answered No, with so much happiness in her eyes that
I was fain to thank God again and believe her.

Notwithstanding the inconvenience of the practice, we made it a rule
to wear our masks whenever we appeared in public; and this rule me kept
more strictly as we approached Paris. It exposed us to some comment and
more curiosity, but led to no serious trouble until we reached Etampes,
twelve leagues from the capital; where we found the principal inn so
noisy and crowded, and so much disturbed by the constant coming and
going of couriers, that it required no experience to predicate the
neighbourhood of the army. The great courtyard seemed to be choked with
a confused mass of men and horses, through which we made our way with
difficulty. The windows of the house were all open, and offered us a
view of tables surrounded by men eating and drinking hastily, as the
manner of travellers is. The gateway and the steps of the house were
lined with troopers and servants and sturdy rogues; who scanned all who
passed in or out, and not unfrequently followed them with ribald jests
and nicknames. Songs and oaths, brawling and laughter, with the neighing
of horses and the huzzas of the beggars, who shouted whenever a fresh
party arrived, rose above all, and increased the reluctance with which I
assisted madame and mademoiselle to dismount.

Simon was no match for such an occasion as this; but the stalwart aspect
of the three men whom Maignan had left with me commanded respect, and
attended by two of these I made a way for the ladies--not without some
opposition and a few oaths--to enter the house. The landlord, whom we
found crushed into a corner inside, and entirely overborne by the crowd
which had invaded his dwelling, assured me that he had not the smallest
garret he could place at my disposal; but I presently succeeded in
finding a small room at the top, which I purchased from the four men who
had taken possession of it. As it was impossible to get anything to
eat there, I left a man on guard, and myself descended with madame and
mademoiselle to the eating-room, a large chamber set with long boards,
and filled with a rough and noisy crew. Under a running fire of
observations we entered, and found with difficulty three seats in an
inner corner of the room.

I ran my eye over the company, and noticed among them, besides a dozen
travelling parties like our own, specimens of all those classes which
are to be found in the rear of an army. There were some officers and
more horse-dealers; half a dozen forage-agents and a few priests; with a
large sprinkling of adventurers, braves, and led-captains, and here and
there two or three whose dress and the deference paid to them by their
neighbours seemed to indicate a higher rank. Conspicuous among these
last were a party of four who occupied a small table by the door. An
attempt had been made to secure some degree of privacy for them by
interposing a settle between them and the room; and their attendants,
who seemed to be numerous, did what they could to add to this by filling
the gap with their persons. One of the four, a man of handsome dress
and bearing, who sat in the place of honour, was masked, as we were. The
gentleman at his right hand I could not see. The others, whom I could
see, were strangers to me.

Some time elapsed before our people succeeded in procuring us any food,
and during the interval we were exposed to an amount of comment on the
part of those round us which I found very little to my liking. There
were not half a dozen women present, and this and our masks rendered my
companions unpleasantly conspicuous. Aware, however, of the importance
of avoiding an altercation which might possibly detain us, and would
be certain to add to our notoriety, I remained quiet; and presently the
entrance of a tall, dark-complexioned man, who carried himself with
a peculiar swagger, and seemed to be famous for something or other,
diverted the attention of the company from us.

The new-comer was somewhat of Maignan's figure. He wore a back and
breast over a green doublet, and had an orange feather in his cap and an
orange-lined cloak on his shoulder. On entering he stood a moment in the
doorway, letting his bold black eyes rove round the room, the while he
talked in a loud braggart fashion to his companions. There was a lack of
breeding in the man's air, and something offensive in his look; which I
noticed produced wherever it rested a momentary silence and constraint.
When he moved farther into the room I saw that he wore a very long
sword, the point of which trailed a foot behind him.

He chose out for his first attentions the party of four whom I have
mentioned; going up to them and accosting them with a ruffling air,
directed especially to the gentleman in the mask. The latter lifted his
head haughtily on finding himself addressed by a stranger, but did not
offer to answer. Someone else did, however, for a sudden bellow like
that of an enraged bull proceeded from behind the settle. The words were
lost in noise, the unseen speaker's anger seeming so overpowering that
he could not articulate; but the tone and voice, which were in some way
familiar to me, proved enough for the bully, who, covering his retreat
with a profound bow, backed out rapidly, muttering what was doubtless an
apology. Cocking his hat more fiercely to make up for this repulse,
he next proceeded to patrol the room, scowling from side to side as he
went, with the evident intention of picking a quarrel with someone less
formidable.

By ill-chance his eye lit, as he turned, on our masks. He said something
to his companions; and encouraged, no doubt, by the position of
our seats at the board, which led him to think us people of small
consequence, he came to a stop opposite us.

'What! more dukes here?' he cried scoffingly. 'Hallo, you sir!' he
continued to me, 'will you not unmask and drink a glass with me?'

I thanked him civilly, but declined.

His insolent eyes were busy, while I spoke, with madame's fair hair and
handsome figure, which her mask failed to hide. 'Perhaps the ladies will
have better taste, sir,' he said rudely. 'Will they not honour us with a
sight of their pretty faces?'

Knowing the importance of keeping my temper I put constraint on myself,
and answered, still with civility, that they were greatly fatigued and
were about to retire.

'Zounds!' he cried, 'that is not to be borne. If we are to lose them so
soon, the more reason we should enjoy their BEAUX YEUX while we can.
A short life and a merry one, sir. This is not a nunnery, nor, I dare
swear, are your fair friends nuns.'

Though I longed to chastise him for this insult, I feigned deafness,
and went on with my meal as if I had not heard him; and the table being
between us prevented him going beyond words. After he had uttered one or
two coarse jests of a similar character, which cost us less as we were
masked, and our emotions could only be guessed, the crowd about us,
seeing I took the thing quietly, began to applaud him; but more as it
seemed to me out of fear than love. In this opinion I was presently
confirmed on hearing from Simon who whispered the information in my
ear as he handed a dish--that the fellow was an Italian captain in the
king's pay, famous for his skill with the sword and the many duels in
which he had displayed it.

Mademoiselle, though she did not know this, bore with his insolence with
a patience which astonished me; while madame appeared unconscious of it.
Nevertheless, I was glad when he retired and left us in peace. I seized
the moment of his absence to escort the ladies through the room and
upstairs to their apartment, the door of which I saw locked and secured.
That done I breathed more freely; and feeling thankful that I had been
able to keep my temper, took the episode to be at an end.

But in this I was mistaken, as I found when I returned to the room in
which we had supped, my intention being to go through it to the stables.
I had not taken two paces across the floor before I found my road
blocked by the Italian, and read alike in his eyes and in the faces
of the company--of whom many hastened to climb the tables to see what
passed--that the meeting was premeditated. The man's face was flushed
with wine; proud of his many victories, he eyed me with a boastful
contempt my patience had perhaps given him the right to feel.

'Ha! well met, sir,' he said, sweeping the floor with his cap in an
exaggeration of respect, 'now, perhaps, your high-mightiness will
condescend to unmask? The table is no longer between us, nor are your
fair friends here to protect their CHER AMI!'

'If I still refuse, sir,' I said civilly, wavering between anger and
prudence, and hoping still to avoid a quarrel which might endanger
us all, 'be good enough to attribute it to private motives, and to no
desire to disoblige you.'

'No, I do not think you wish to disoblige me,' he answered, laughing
scornfully--and a dozen voices echoed the gibe. 'But for your private
motives, the devil take them! Is that plain enough, sir?'

'It is plain enough to show me that you are an ill-bred man!' I
answered, choler getting the better of me. 'Let me pass, sir.'

'Unmask!' he retorted, moving so as still to detain me, 'or shall I call
in the grooms to perform the office for you?'

Seeing at last that all my attempts to evade the man only fed his
vanity, and encouraged him to further excesses, and that the motley
crowd, who filled the room and already formed a circle round us, had
made up their minds to see sport, I would no longer balk them; I could
no longer do it, indeed, with honour. I looked round, therefore, for
someone whom I might enlist as my second, but I saw no one with whom
I had the least acquaintance. The room was lined from table to ceiling
with mocking faces and scornful eyes all turned to me.

My opponent saw the look, and misread it; being much accustomed, I
imagine, to a one-sided battle. He laughed contemptuously. 'No, my
friend, there is no way out of it,' he said. 'Let me see your pretty
face, or fight.'

'So be it,' I said quietly. 'If I have no other choice, I will fight.'

'In your mask?' he cried incredulously.

'Yes,' I said sternly, feeling every nerve tingle with long-suppressed
rage. 'I will fight as I am. Off with your back and breast, if you are
a man. And I will so deal with you that if you see to-morrow's sun you
shall need a mask for the rest of your days!'

'Ho! ho!' he answered, scowling at me in surprise, 'you sing in a
different key now. But I will put a term to it. There is space enough
between these tables, if you can use your weapon; and much more than you
will need to-morrow.'

'To-morrow will show,' I retorted.

Without more ado he unfastened the buckles of his breast-piece, and
relieving himself of it, stepped back a pace. Those of the bystanders
who occupied the part of the room he indicated--a space bounded by
four tables, and not unfit for the purpose, though somewhat
confined--hastened to get out of it, and seize instead upon neighbouring
posts of 'vantage. The man's reputation was such, and his fame so great,
that on all sides I heard naught but wagers offered against me at odds;
but this circumstance, which might have flurried a younger man and
numbed his arm, served only to set me on making the most of such
openings as the fellow's presumption and certainty of success would be
sure to afford.

The news of the challenge running through the house had brought together
by this time so many people as to fill the room from end to end, and
even to obscure the light, which was beginning to wane. At the last
moment, when we were on the point of engaging, a slight commotion marked
the admission to the front of three or four persons, whose consequence
or attendants gained them this advantage. I believed them to be the
party of four I have mentioned, but at the time I could not be certain.

In the few seconds of waiting while this went forward I examined our
relative positions with the fullest intention of killing the man--whose
glittering eyes and fierce smile filled me with a loathing which was
very nearly hatred--if I could. The line of windows lay to my right and
his left. The evening light fell across us, whitening the row of faces
on my left, but leaving those on my right in shadow. It occurred to me
on the instant that my mask was actually an advantage, seeing that it
protected my sight from the side-light, and enabled me to watch his eyes
and point with more concentration.

'You will be the twenty-third man I have killed!' he said boastfully, as
we crossed swords and stood an instant on guard.

'Take care!' I answered. 'You have twenty-three against you!'

A swift lunge was his only answer. I parried it, and thrust, and we fell
to work. We had not exchanged half a dozen blows, however, before I saw
that I should need all the advantage which my mask and greater caution
gave me. I had met my match, and it might be something more; but that
for a time it was impossible to tell. He had the longer weapon, and I
the longer reach. He preferred the point, after the new Italian fashion,
and I the blade. He was somewhat flushed with wine, while my arm had
scarcely recovered the strength of which illness had deprived me.

On the other hand, excited at the first by the cries of his backers,
he played rather wildly; while I held myself prepared, and keeping up a
strong guard, waited cautiously for any opening or mistake on his part.

The crowd round us, which had hailed our first passes with noisy cries
of derision and triumph, fell silent after a while, surprised and taken
aback by their champion's failure to spit me at the first onslaught. My
reluctance to engage had led them to predict a short fight and an easy
victory.

Convinced of the contrary, they began to watch each stroke with bated
breath; or now and again, muttering the name of Jarnac, broke into
brief exclamations as a blow more savage than usual drew sparks from our
blades, and made the rafters ring with the harsh grinding of steel on
steel.

The surprise of the crowd, however, was a small thing compared with that
of my adversary. Impatience, disgust, rage and doubt chased one another
in turn across his flushed features. Apprised that he had to do with
a swordsman, he put forth all his power. With spite in his eyes he
laboured blow on blow, he tried one form of attack after another, he
found me equal, if barely equal, to all. And then at last there came a
change. The perspiration gathered on his brow, the silence disconcerted
him; he felt his strength failing under the strain, and suddenly, I
think, the possibility of defeat and death, unthought of before, burst
upon him. I heard him groan, and for a moment he fenced wildly. Then
he again recovered himself. But now I read terror in his eyes, and knew
that the moment of retribution was at hand. With his back to the table,
and my point threatening his breast, he knew at last what those others
had felt!

He would fain have stopped to breathe, but I would not let him though my
blows also were growing feeble, and my guard weaker; for I knew that
if I gave him time to recover himself he would have recourse to other
tricks, and might out-manoeuvre me in the end. As it was, my black
unchanging mask, which always confronted him, which hid all emotions
and veiled even fatigue, had grown to be full of terror to him--full
of blank, passionless menace. He could not tell how I fared, or what I
thought, or how my strength stood. Superstitious dread was on him, and
threatened, to overpower him. Ignorant who I was or whence I came,
he feared and doubted, grappling with monstrous suspicions, which the
fading light encouraged. His face broke out in blotches, his breath
came and went in gasps, his eyes began to protrude. Once or twice they
quitted mine for a part of a second to steal a despairing glance at the
rows of onlookers that ran to right and left of us. But he read no pity
there.

At last the end came--more suddenly than I had looked for it, but I
think he was unnerved. His hand lost its grip of the hilt, and a parry
which I dealt a little more briskly than usual sent the weapon
flying among the crowd, as much to my astonishment as to that of the
spectators. A volley of oaths and exclamations hailed the event; and for
a moment I stood at gaze, eyeing him watchfully. He shrank back; then he
made for a moment as if he would fling himself upon me dagger in
hand. But seeing my point steady, he recoiled a second time, his face
distorted with rage and fear.

'Go!' I said sternly. 'Begone! Follow your sword! But spare the next man
you conquer.'

He stared at me, fingering his dagger as if he did not understand, or
as if in the bitterness of his shame at being so defeated even life were
unwelcome. I was about to repeat my words when a heavy hand fell on my
shoulder.

'Fool!' a harsh growling voice muttered in my ear. 'Do you want him to
serve you as Achon served Matas? This is the way to deal with him.'

And before I knew who spoke or what to expect a man vaulted over the
table beside me. Seizing the Italian by the neck and waist, he flung him
bodily--without paying the least regard to his dagger--into the crowd.
'There!' the new-comer cried, stretching his arms as if the effort had
relieved him, 'so much for him! And do you breathe yourself. Breathe
yourself, my friend,' he continued with a vain-glorious air of
generosity. 'When you are rested and ready, you and I will have a bout.
Mon dieu! what a thing it is to see a man! And by my faith you are a
man!'

'But, sir,' I said, staring at him in the utmost bewilderment, 'we have
no quarrel.'

'Quarrel?' he cried in his loud, ringing voice. 'Heaven forbid! Why
should we? I love a man, however, and when I see one I say to him, "I am
Crillon! Fight me!" But I see you are not yet rested. Patience! There is
no hurry. Berthon de Crillon is proud to wait your convenience. In the
meantime, gentlemen,' he continued, turning with a grand air to the
spectators, who viewed this sudden BOULEVERSEMENT with unbounded
surprise, 'let us do what we can. Take the word from me, and cry all,
"VIVE LE ROI, ET VIVE L'INCONNU!"'

Like people awaking from a dream--so great was their astonishment the
company complied and with the utmost heartiness. When the shout died
away, someone cried in turn, 'Vive Crillon!' and this was honoured with
a fervour which brought the tears to the eyes of that remarkable man,
in whom bombast was so strangely combined with the firmest and most
reckless courage. He bowed again and again, turning himself about in the
small space between the tables, while his face shone with pleasure and
enthusiasm. Meanwhile I viewed him with perplexity. I comprehended that
it was his voice I had heard behind the settle; but I had neither the
desire to fight him nor so great a reserve of strength after my illness
as to be able to enter on a fresh contest with equanimity. When he
turned to me, therefore, and again asked, 'Well, sir, are you ready?'
I could think of no better answer than that I had already made to him,
'But, sir, I have no quarrel with you.'

'Tut, tut!' he answered querulously, 'if that is all, let us engage.'

'That is not all, however,' I said, resolutely putting up my sword. 'I
have not only no quarrel with M. de Crillon, but I received at his hands
when I last saw him a considerable service.'

'Then now is the time to return it,' he answered briskly, and as if
that settled the matter.

I could not refrain from laughing. 'Nay, but I have still an excuse,'
I said. 'I am barely recovered from an illness, and am weak. Even so,
I should be loth to decline a combat with some; but a better man than I
may give the wall to M. de Crillon and suffer no disgrace.'

'Oh, if you put it that way--enough said,' he answered in a tone of
disappointment. 'And, to be sure, the light is almost gone. That is a
comfort. But you will not refuse to drink a cup of wine with me? Your
voice I remember, though I cannot say who you are or what service I did
you. For the future, however, count on me. I love a man who is brave as
well as modest, and know no better friend than a stout swordsman.'

I was answering him in fitting terms--while the fickle crowd, which a
few minutes earlier had been ready to tear me, viewed us from a distance
with respectful homage--when the masked gentleman who had before been in
his company drew near and saluted me with much stateliness.

'I congratulate you, sir,' he said, in the easy tone of a great man
condescending. 'You use the sword as few use it, and fight with your
head as well as your hands. Should you need a friend or employment,
you will honour me by remembering that you are known to the Vicomte de
Turenne.'

I bowed low to hide the start which the mention of his name caused
me. For had I tried, ay, and possessed to aid me all the wit of M.
de Brantome, I could have imagined nothing more fantastic than this
meeting; or more entertaining than that I, masked, should talk with the
Vicomte de Turenne masked, and hear in place of reproaches and threats
of vengeance a civil offer of protection. Scarcely knowing whether I
should laugh or tremble, or which should occupy me more, the diverting
thing that had happened or the peril we had barely escaped, I made shift
to answer him, craving his indulgence if I still preserved my incognito.
Even while I spoke a fresh fear assailed me: lest M. de Crillon,
recognising my voice or figure, should cry my name on the spot, and
explode in a moment the mine on which we stood.

This rendered me extremely impatient to be gone. But M. le Vicomte
had still something to say, and I could not withdraw myself without
rudeness.

'You are travelling north like everyone else?' he said, gazing at me
curiously. 'May I ask whether you are for Meudon, where the King of
Navarre lies, or for the Court at St. Cloud?'

I muttered, moving restlessly under his keen eyes, that I was for
Meudon.

'Then, if you care to travel with a larger company,' he rejoined, bowing
with negligent courtesy, 'pray command me. I am for Meudon also, and
shall leave here three hours before noon.'

Fortunately he took my assent to his gracious invitation for granted,
and turned away before I had well begun to thank him. From Crillon I
found it more difficult to escape. He appeared to have conceived a
great fancy for me, and felt also, I imagine, some curiosity as to
my identity. But I did even this at last, and, evading the obsequious
offers which were made me on all sides, escaped to the stables, where
I sought out the Cid's stall, and lying down in the straw beside him,
began to review the past, and plan the future. Under cover of the
darkness sleep soon came to me; my last waking thoughts being divided
between thankfulness for my escape and a steady purpose to reach Meudon
before the Vicomte, so that I might make good my tale in his absence.
For that seemed to be my only chance of evading the dangers I had chosen
to encounter.



CHAPTER XXXIII. AT MEUDON.

Making so early a start from Etampes that the inn, which had continued
in an uproar till long after midnight, lay sunk in sleep when we rode
out of the yard, we reached Meudon about noon next day. I should be
tedious were I to detail what thoughts my mistress and I had during that
day's journey--the last, it might be, which we should take together;
or what assurances we gave one another, or how often we, repented the
impatience which had impelled us to put all to the touch. Madame, with
kindly forethought, detached herself from us, and rode the greater part
of the distance with Fanchette; but the opportunities she gave us
went for little; for, to be plain, the separation we dreaded seemed to
overshadow us already. We uttered few words, through those few were to
the purpose, but riding hand-in-hand, with full hearts, and eyes which
seldom quitted one another, looked forward to Meudon and its perils
with such gloomy forebodings as our love and my precarious position
suggested.

Long before we reached the town, or could see more of it than the
Chateau, over which the Lilies of France and the broad white banner
of the Bourbons floated in company, we found ourselves swept into the
whirlpool which surrounds an army. Crowds stood at all the cross-roads,
wagons and sumpter-mules encumbered the bridges; each moment a horseman
passed us at a gallop, or a troop of disorderly rogues, soldiers only in
name, reeled, shouting and singing, along the road. Here and there, for
a warning to the latter sort, a man, dangled on a rude gallows; under
which sportsmen returning from the chase and ladies who had been for an
airing rode laughing on their way.

Amid the multitude entering the town we passed unnoticed. A little way
within the walls we halted to inquire where the Princess of Navarre had
her lodging. Hearing that she occupied a house in the town, while her
brother had his quarters in the Chateau, and the King of France at St.
Cloud, I stayed my party in a by-road, a hundred paces farther on, and,
springing from the Cid, went to my mistress's knee.

'Mademoiselle,' I said formally, and so loudly that all my men might
hear, 'the time is come. I dare not go farther with you. I beg you,
therefore, to bear me witness that as I took you so I have brought you
back, and both with your good-will. I beg that you will give me this
quittance, for it may serve me.'

She bowed her head and laid her ungloved hand on mine, which I had
placed on, the pommel of her saddle. 'Sir,' she answered in a broken
voice, 'I will not give you this quittance, nor any quittance from me
while I live.' With that she took off her mask before them all, and I
saw the tears running down her white face. 'May God protect you, M. de
Marsac,' she continued, stooping until her face almost touched mine,
'and bring you to the thing you desire. If not, sir, and you pay too
dearly for what you have done for me, I will live a maiden all my days.
And, if I do not, these men may shame me!'

My heart was too full for words, but I took the glove she held out to
me, and kissed her hand with my knee bent. Then I waved--for I could not
speak--to madame to proceed; and with Simon Fleix and Maignan's men to
guard them they went on their way. Mademoiselle's white face looked back
to me until a bend in the road hid them, and I saw them no more.

I turned when all were gone, and going heavily to where my Sard stood
with his head drooping, I climbed to the saddle, and rode at a foot-pace
towards the Chateau. The way was short and easy, for the next turning
showed me the open gateway and a crowd about it. A vast number of people
were entering and leaving, while others rested in the shade of the wall,
and a dozen grooms led horses up and down. The sunshine fell hotly on
the road and the courtyard, and flashed back by the cuirasses of the
men on guard, seized the eye and dazzled it with gleams of infinite
brightness. I was advancing alone, gazing at all this with a species
of dull indifference which masked for the moment the suspense I felt at
heart, when a man, coming on foot along the street, crossed quickly to
me and looked me in the face.

I returned his look, and seeing he was a stranger to me, was for passing
on without pausing. But he wheeled beside me and uttered my name in a
low voice.

I checked the Cid and looked down at him. 'Yes,' I said mechanically, 'I
am M. de Marsac. But I do not know you.'

'Nevertheless I have been watching for you for three days,' he replied.
'M. de Rosny received your message. This is for you.'

He handed me a scrap of paper. 'From whom?' I asked.

'Maignan,' he answered briefly. And with that, and a stealthy look
round, he left me, and went the way he had been going before.

I tore open the note, and knowing that Maignan could not write, was
not surprised to find that it lacked any signature. The brevity of its
contents vied with the curtness of its bearer. 'In Heaven's name go back
and wait,' it ran. 'Your enemy is here, and those who wish you well are
powerless.'

A warning so explicit, and delivered under such circumstances, might
have been expected to make me pause even then. But I read the message
with the same dull indifference, the same dogged resolve with which the
sight of the crowded gateway before me had inspired me. I had not come
so far and baffled Turenne by an hour to fail in my purpose at the last;
nor given such pledges to another to prove false to myself. Moreover,
the distant rattle of musketry, which went to show that a skirmish was
taking place on the farther side of the Castle, seemed an invitation to
me to proceed; for now, if ever, my sword might earn protection and a
pardon. Only in regard to M. de Rosny, from whom I had no doubt that the
message came, I resolved to act with prudence; neither making any appeal
to him in public nor mentioning his name to others in private.

The Cid had borne me by this time into the middle of the throng about
the gateway, who, wondering to see a stranger of my appearance arrive
without attendants, eyed me with a mixture of civility and forwardness.
I recognised more than one man whom I had seen about the Court at St.
Jean d'Angely six months before; but so great is the disguising power of
handsome clothes and equipments that none of these knew me. I beckoned
to the nearest, and asked him if the King of Navarre was in the Chateau.

'He has gone to see the King of France at St. Cloud,' the man answered,
with something of wonder that anyone should be ignorant of so important
a fact. 'He is expected here in an hour.'

I thanked him, and calculating that I should still have time and to
spare before the arrival of M. de Turenne, I dismounted, and taking the
rein over my arm, began to walk up and down in the shade of the wall.
Meanwhile the loiterers increased in numbers as the minutes passed. Men
of better standing rode up, and, leaving their horses in charge of their
lackeys, went into the Chateau. Officers in shining corslets, or with
boots and scabbards dulled with dust, arrived and clattered in through
the gates. A messenger galloped up with letters, and was instantly
surrounded by a curious throng of questioners; who left him only to
gather about the next comers, a knot of townsfolk, whose downcast
visages and glances of apprehension seemed to betoken no pleasant or
easy mission.

Watching many of these enter and disappear, while only the humbler
sort remained to swell the crowd at the gate, I began to experience the
discomfort and impatience which are the lot of the man who finds himself
placed in a false position. I foresaw with clearness the injury I was
about to do my cause by presenting myself to the king among the common
herd; and yet I had no choice save to do this, for I dared not run the
risk of entering, lest I should be required to give my name, and fail to
see the King of Navarre at all.

As it was I came very near to being foiled in this way; for I presently
recognised, and was recognised in turn, by a gentleman who rode up to
the gates and, throwing his reins to a groom, dismounted with an air
of immense gravity. This was M. Forget, the king's secretary, and the
person to whom I had on a former occasion presented a petition. He
looked at me with eyes of profound astonishment, and saluting me stiffly
from a distance, seemed in two minds whether he should pass in or
speak to me. On second thoughts, however, he came towards me, and again
saluted me with a peculiarly dry and austere aspect.

'I believe, sir, I am speaking to M. de Marsac?' he said in a low voice,
but not impolitely.

I replied in the affirmative.

'And that, I conclude, is your horse?' he continued, raising his cane,
and pointing to the Cid, which I had fastened to a hook in the wall.

I replied again in the affirmative.

'Then take a word of advice,' he answered, screwing up his features, and
speaking in a dry sort of way. 'Get upon its back without an instant's
delay, and put as many leagues between yourself and Meudon as horse and
man may.'

'I am obliged to you,' I said, though I was greatly startled by his
words. 'And what if I do not take your advice?'

He shrugged his shoulders. 'In that case look to yourself!' he retorted.
'But you will look in vain!'

He turned on his heel, as he spoke, and in a moment was gone. I watched
him enter the Chateau, and in the uncertainty which possessed me whether
he was not gone--after salving his conscience by giving me warning--to
order my instant arrest, I felt, and I doubt not I looked, as ill at
ease for the time being as the group of trembling townsfolk who stood
near me. Reflecting that he should know his master's mind, I recalled
with depressing clearness the repeated warnings the King of Navarre
had given me that I must not look to him for reward or protection. I
bethought me that I was here against his express orders: presuming on
those very services which he had given me notice he should repudiate.
I remembered that Rosny had always been in the same tale. And en fin
I began to see that mademoiselle and I had together decided on a step
which I should never have presumed to take on my own motion.

I had barely arrived at this conclusion when the trampling of hoofs and
a sudden closing in of the crowd round the gate announced the King of
Navarre's approach. With a sick heart I drew nearer, feeling that the
crisis was at hand; and in a moment he came in sight, riding beside an
elderly man, plainly dressed and mounted, with whom he was carrying on
an earnest conversation. A train of nobles and gentlemen, whose martial
air and equipments made up for the absence of the gewgaws and glitter,
to which my eyes had become accustomed at Blois, followed close on his
heels. Henry himself wore a suit of white velvet, frayed in places
and soiled by his armour; but his quick eye and eager, almost fierce,
countenance could not fail to win and keep the attention of the least
observant. He kept glancing from side to side as he came on; and that
with so cheerful an air and a carriage so full at once of dignity and
good-humour that no one could look on him and fail to see that here was
a leader and a prince of men, temperate in victory and unsurpassed in
defeat.

The crowd raising a cry of 'VIVE NAVARRE!' as he drew near, he bowed,
with a sparkle in his eye. But when a few by the gate cried 'VIVENT LES
ROIS!' he held up his hand for silence, and said in a loud, clear voice,
'Not that, my friends. There is but one king in France. Let us say
instead, "Vive le Roi!"'

The spokesman of the little group of townsfolk, who, I learned, were
from Arcueil, and had come to complain of the excessive number of troops
quartered upon them, took advantage of the pause to approach him. Henry
received the old man with a kindly look, and bent from his saddle to
hear what he had to say. While they were talking I pressed forward, the
emotion I felt on my own account heightened by my recognition of the man
who rode by the King of Navarre--who was no other than M. de la Noue. No
Huguenot worthy of the name could look on the veteran who had done
and suffered more for the cause than any living man without catching
something of his stern enthusiasm; and the sight, while it shamed
me, who a moment before had been inclined to prefer my safety to the
assistance I owed my country, gave me courage to step to the king's
rein, so that I heard his last words to the men of Arcueil.

'Patience, my friends,' he said kindly. 'The burden is heavy, but the
journey is a short one. The Seine is ours; the circle is complete. In a
week Paris must surrender. The king, my cousin, will enter, and you will
be rid of us. For France's sake one week, my friends.'

The men fell back with low obeisances, charmed by his good-nature, and
Henry, looking up, saw me before him. In the instant his jaw fell. His
brow, suddenly contracting above eyes, which flashed with surprise and
displeasure, altered in a moment the whole aspect of his face; which
grew dark and stern as night. His first impulse was to pass by me; but
seeing that I held my ground, he hesitated, so completely chagrined by
my appearance that he did not know how to act, or in what way to deal
with me. I seized the occasion, and bending my knee with as much respect
as I had ever used to the King of France, begged to bring myself to his
notice, and to crave his protection and favour.

'This is no time to trouble me, sir,' he retorted, eyeing me with an
angry side-glance. 'I do not know you. You are unknown to me, sir. You
must go to M. de Rosny.'

'It would be useless sire,' I answered, in desperate persistence.

'Then I can do nothing for you,' he rejoined peevishly. 'Stand on one
side, sir.'

But I was desperate. I knew that I had risked all on the event, and must
establish my footing before M. de Turenne's return, or run the risk
of certain recognition and vengeance. I cried out, caring nothing who
heard, that I was M. de Marsac, that I had come back to meet whatever my
enemies could allege against me.

'VENTRE SAINT GRIS!' Henry exclaimed, starting in his saddle with
well-feigned surprise. 'Are you that man?'

'I am, sire,' I answered.

'Then you must be mad!' he retorted, appealing to those behind him.
'Stark, staring mad to show your face here! 'VENTRE SAINT GRIS! Are we
to have all the ravishers and plunderers in the country come to us?'

'I am neither the one nor the other!' I answered, looking with
indignation from him to the gaping train behind him.

'That you will have to settle with M. de Turenne!' he retorted, frowning
down at me with his whole face turned gloomy and fierce. 'I know you
well, sir, now. Complaint has been made that you abducted a lady from
his Castle of Chize some time back.'

'The lady, sire, is now in charge of the Princess of Navarre.'

'She is?' he exclaimed, quite taken aback.

'And if she has aught of complaint against me,' I continued with pride,'
I will submit to whatever punishment you order or M. de Turenne demands.
But if she has no complaint to make, and vows that she accompanied me
of her own free-will and accord, and has suffered neither wrong nor
displeasure at my hands, then, sire, I claim that this is a private
matter between myself and M. de Turenne.'

'Even so I think you will have your hands full,' he answered grimly.
At the same time he stopped by a gesture those who would have cried out
upon me, and looked at me himself with an altered countenance. 'Do I
understand that you assert that the lady went of her own accord?' he
asked.

'She went and has returned, sire,' I answered.

'Strange!' he ejaculated. 'Have you married her?'

'No, sire,' I answered. 'I desire leave to do so.'

'Mon dieu! she is M. de Turenne's ward,' he rejoined, almost dumbfounded
by my audacity.

'I do not despair of obtaining his assent, sire,' I said patiently.

'SAINT GRIS! the man is mad!' he cried, wheeling his horse and facing
his train with a gesture of the utmost wonder. 'It is the strangest
story I ever heard.'

'But somewhat more to the gentleman's credit than the lady's!' one said
with a smirk and a smile.

'A lie!' I cried, springing forward on the instant with a boldness which
astonished myself. 'She is as pure as your Highness's sister! I swear
it. That man lies in his teeth, and I will maintain it.'

'Sir!' the King of Navarre cried, turning on me with the utmost
sternness, 'you forget yourself in my presence! Silence, and beware
another time how you let your tongue run on those above you. You have
enough trouble, let me tell you, on your hands already.'

'Yet the man lies!' I answered doggedly, remembering Crillon and his
ways. 'And if he will do me the honour of stepping aside with me, I will
convince him of it!'

'VENTRE SAINT GRIS!' Henry replied, frowning, and dwelling on each
syllable of his favourite oath. 'Will you be silent, sir, and let me
think? Or must I order your instant arrest?'

'Surely that at least, sire,' a suave voice interjected. And with that
a gentleman pressed forward from the rest, and gaining a place, of
'vantage by the King's side, shot at me a look of extreme malevolence.
'My lord of Turenne will expect no less at your Highness's hands,' he
continued warmly. 'I beg you will give the order on the spot, and hold
this person to answer for his misdeeds. M. de Turenne returns to-day.
He should be here now. I say again, sire, he will expect no less than
this.'

The king, gazing at me with gloomy eyes, tugged at his moustaches.
Someone had motioned the common herd to stand back out of hearing;
at the same time the suite had moved up out of curiosity and formed a
half-circle; in the midst of which I stood fronting the king, who had
La Noue and the last speaker on either hand. Perplexity and annoyance
struggled for the mastery in his face as he looked darkly down at
me, his teeth showing through his beard. Profoundly angered by my
appearance, which he had taken at first to be the prelude to disclosures
which must detach Turenne at a time when union was all-important, he
had now ceased to fear for himself; and perhaps saw something in the
attitude I adopted which appealed to his nature and sympathies.

'If the girl is really back,' he said at last, 'M. d'Aremburg, I do-not
see any reason why I should interfere. At present, at any rate.'

'I think, sire, M. de Turenne will see reason,' the gentleman answered
drily.

The king coloured. 'M. de Turenne,' he began--

'Has made many sacrifices at your request, sire,' the other said with
meaning. 'And buried some wrongs, or fancied wrongs, in connection with
this very matter. This person has outraged him in the grossest manner,
and in M. le Vicomte's name I ask, nay I press upon you, that he be
instantly arrested, and held to answer for it.'

'I am ready to answer for it now!' I retorted, looking from face to face
for sympathy, and finding none save in M. de la Noue's, who appeared
to regard me with grave approbation. 'To the Vicomte de Turenne, or the
person he may appoint to represent him.'

'Enough!' Henry said, raising his hand and speaking in the tone of
authority he knew so well how to adopt. 'For you, M. d'Aremburg, I thank
you. Turenne is happy in his friend. But; this gentleman came to me of
his own free will and I do not think it consistent with my honour to
detain him without warning given. I grant him an hour to remove himself
from my neighbourhood. If he be found after that time has elapsed,' he
continued solemnly, 'his fate be on his own head. Gentlemen, we are late
already. Let us on.'

I looked at him as he pronounced this sentence, and strove to find words
in which to make a final appeal to him. But no words came; and when he
bade me stand aside, I did so mechanically, remaining with my head bared
to the sunshine while the troop rode by. Some looked back at me with
curiosity, as at a man of whom they had heard a tale, and some with a
jeer on their lips; a few with dark looks of menace. When they were all
gone, and the servants who followed them had disappeared also, and I was
left to the inquisitive glances of the rabble who stood gaping after the
sight, I turned and went to the Cid, and loosed the horse with a feeling
of bitter disappointment.

The plan which mademoiselle had proposed and I had adopted in the forest
by St. Gaultier--when it seemed to us that our long absence and the
great events of which we heard must have changed the world and opened a
path for our return--had failed utterly. Things were as they had been;
the strong were still strong, and friendship under bond to fear. Plainly
we should have shewn ourselves wiser had we taken the lowlier course,
and, obeying the warnings given us, waited the King of Navarre's
pleasure or the tardy recollection of Rosny. I had not then stood, as I
now stood, in instant jeopardy, nor felt the keen pangs of a separation
which bade fair to be lasting. She was safe, and that was much; but I,
after long service and brief happiness, must go out again alone, with
only memories to comfort me.

It was Simon Fleix's voice which awakened me from this unworthy
lethargy--as selfish as it was useless--and, recalling me to myself,
reminded me that precious time was passing while I stood inactive. To
get at me he had forced his way through the curious crowd, and his face
was flushed. He plucked me by the sleeve, regarding the varlets round
him with a mixture of anger and fear.

'Nom de Dieu! do they take you for a rope-dancer?' he muttered in my
ear. 'Mount, sir, and come. There is not a moment to be lost.'

'You left her at Madame Catherine's?' I said.

'To be sure,' he answered impatiently. 'Trouble not about her. Save
yourself, M. de Marsac. That is the thing to be done now.'

I mounted mechanically, and felt my courage return as the horse moved
under me. I trotted through the crowd, and without thought took the road
by which we had come. When we had ridden a hundred yards, however, I
pulled up 'An hour is a short start,' I said sullenly. 'Whither?'

'To St. Cloud,' he answered promptly. 'The protection of the King of
France may avail for a day or two. After that, there will still be the
League, if Paris have not fallen.'

I saw there was nothing else for it, and assented, and we set off. The
distance which separates Meudon from St. Cloud we might have ridden
under the hour, but the direct road runs across the Scholars' Meadow,
a wide plain north of Meudon. This lay exposed to the enemy's fire, and
was, besides, the scene of hourly conflicts between the horse of both
parties, so that to cross it without an adequate force was impossible.
Driven to make a circuit, we took longer to reach our destination, yet
did so without mishap; finding the little town, when we came in sight
of it, given up to all the bustle and commotion which properly belong to
the Court and camp.

It was, indeed, as full as it could be, for the surrender of Paris being
momentarily expected, St. Cloud had become the rendezvous as well of
the few who had long followed a principle as of the many who wait
upon success. The streets, crowded in, every part, shone with glancing
colours, with steel and velvet, the garb of fashion and the plumes of
war. Long lines of flags obscured the eaves and broke the sunshine,
while, above all, the bells of half a dozen churches rang merry answer
to the distant crash of guns. Everywhere on flag and arch and streamer
I read the motto, 'Vive le Roi!'--words written, God knew then, and we
know now, in what a mockery of doom!



CHAPTER XXXIV. ''TIS AN ILL WIND.'

We had made our way slowly and with much jostling as far as the
principal street, finding the press increase as we advanced, when I
heard, as I turned a corner, my name called, and, looking up, saw at
a window the face of which I was in search. After that half a minute
sufficed to bring M. d'Agen flying to my side, when nothing, as I
had expected, would do but I must dismount where I was and share his
lodging. He made no secret of his joy and surprise at sight of me, but
pausing only to tell Simon where the stable was, haled me through the
crowd and up his stairs with a fervour and heartiness which brought the
tears to my eyes, and served to impress the company whom I found above
with a more than sufficient sense of my importance.

Seeing him again in the highest feather and in the full employment of
all those little arts and graces which served as a foil to his real
worth, I took it as a great honour that he laid them aside for the
nonce; and introduced me to the seat of honour and made me known to his
companions with a boyish directness and a simple thought for my comfort
which infinitely pleased me. He bade his landlord, without a moment's
delay, bring wine and meat and everything which could refresh a
traveller, and was himself up and down a hundred times in a minute,
calling to his servants for this or that, or railing at them for their
failure to bring me a score of things I did not need. I hastened to make
my excuses to the company for interrupting them in the midst of their
talk; and these they were kind enough to accept in good part. At the
same time, reading clearly in M. d'Agen's excited face and shining eyes
that he longed to be alone with me, they took the hint, and presently
left us together.

'Well,' he said, coming back from the door, to which he had conducted
them, 'what have you to tell me, my friend? She is not with you?'

'She is with Mademoiselle de la Vire at Meudon,' I answered, smiling.
'And for the rest, she is well and in better spirits.'

'She sent me some message? he asked.

I shook my head. 'She did not know I should see you,' I answered.

'But she--she has spoken of me lately?' he continued, his face falling.

'I do not think she has named your name for a fortnight,' I answered,
laughing. 'There's for you! Why, man,' I continued, adopting a different
tone, and laying my hand on his shoulder in a manner which reassured
him at least; as much as my words, 'are you so young a lover as to be
ignorant that a woman says least of that of which she thinks most?
Pluck up, courage! Unless I am mistaken, you have little to be afraid of
except the past. Only have patience.'

'You think so?' he said gratefully.

I assured him that I had no doubt of it; and on that he fell into a
reverie, and I to watching him. Alas for the littleness of our natures!
He had received me with open arms, yet at sight of the happiness which
took possession of his handsome face I gave way to the pettiest feeling
which can harbour in a man's breast. I looked at him with eyes of envy,
bitterly comparing my lot with that which fate had reserved for him. He
had fortune, good looks, and success on his side, great relations, and
high hopes; I stood in instant jeopardy, my future dark, and every path
which presented itself so hazardous that I knew not which to adopt. He
was young, and I past my prime; he in favour, and I a fugitive.

To such reflections he put an end in a way which made me blush for my
churlishness. For, suddenly awaking out, of his pleasant dream, he asked
me about myself and my fortunes, inquiring eagerly how I came to be in
St. Cloud, and listening to the story of my adventures with a generous
anxiety which endeared him to me more and more. When I had done--and by
that time Simon had joined us, and was waiting at the lower end of the
room--he pronounced that I must see the king.

'There is nothing else for it,' he said.

'I have come to see him,' I answered.

'Mon dieu, yes!' he continued, rising from his seat and looking at me
with a face of concern. 'No one else can help you.'

I nodded.

'Turenne has four thousand men here. You can do nothing against so
many?'

'Nothing,' I said. 'The question is, will the king protect me?'

'It is he or no one,' M. d'Agen answered warmly. 'You cannot see him
to-night: he has a Council. To-morrow at daybreak you may. You must lie
here to-night, and I will set my fellows to watch, and I think you will
be safe. I will away now and see if my uncle will help. Can you think of
anyone else who would speak for you?'

I considered, and was about to answer in the negative, when Simon, who
had listened with a scared face, suggested M. de Crillon.

'Yes, if he would,' M. d'Agen exclaimed, looking at the lad with
approbation. 'He has weight with the king.'

'I think he might,' I replied slowly. 'I had a curious encounter with
him last night. And with that I told M. d'Agen of the duel I fought at
the inn.

'Good!' he said, his eyes sparkling. 'I wish I had been there to see. At
any rate we will try him. Crillon fears no one, not even the king.'

So it was settled. For that night I was to keep close in my friend's
lodging, showing not even my nose at the window.

When he had gone on his errand, and I found myself alone in the room,
I am fain to confess that I fell very low in my spirits. M. d'Agen's
travelling equipment lay about the apartment, but failed to give any but
an untidy air to its roomy bareness. The light was beginning to
wane, the sun was gone. Outside, the ringing of bells and the distant
muttering of guns, with the tumult of sounds which rose from the crowded
street, seemed to tell of joyous life and freedom, and all the hopes and
ambitions from which I was cut off.

Having no other employment, I watched the street, and keeping myself
well retired from the window saw knots of gay riders pass this way and
that through the crowd, their corslets shining and their voices
high. Monks and ladies, a cardinal and an ambassador, passed under my
eyes--these and an endless procession of townsmen and beggars, soldiers
and courtiers, Gascons, Normans and Picards. Never had I seen such a
sight or so many people gathered together. It seemed as if half Paris
had come out to make submission, so that while my gorge rose against my
own imprisonment, the sight gradually diverted my mind from my private
distresses, by bidding me find compensation for them in the speedy and
glorious triumph of the cause.

Even when the light failed the pageant did not cease, but, torches and
lanthorns springing into life, turned night into day. From every side
came sounds of revelry or strife. The crowd continued to perambulate
the streets until a late hour, with cries of 'VIVE LE ROI!' and 'VIVE
NAVARRE!' while now and again the passage of a great noble with his
suite called forth a fresh outburst of enthusiasm. Nothing seemed
more certain, more inevitable, more clearly predestinated than that
twenty-four hours must see the fall of Paris.

Yet Paris did not fall.

When M. d'Agen returned a little before midnight, he found me still
sitting in the dark looking from the window. I heard him call roughly
for lights, and apprised by the sound of his voice that something was
wrong, I rose to meet him. He stood silent awhile, twirling his small
moustaches, and then broke into a passionate tirade, from which I was
not slow to gather that M. de Rambouillet declined to serve me.

'Well,' I said, feeling for the young man's distress and embarrassment,
'perhaps he is right.'

'He says that word respecting you came this evening,' my friend
answered, his cheeks red with shame, 'and that to countenance you after
that would only be to court certain humiliation. I did not let him off
too easily, I assure you,' M. d'Agen continued, turning away to evade
my gaze; 'but I got no satisfaction. He said you had his good-will, and
that to help you he would risk something, but that to do so under these
circumstances would be only to injure himself.'

'There is still Crillon,' I said, with as much cheerfulness as I could
assume. 'Pray Heaven he be there early! Did M. de Rambouillet say
anything else?'

'That your only chance was to fly as quickly and secretly as possible.'

'He thought; my situation desperate, then?'

My friend nodded; and scarcely less depressed on my account than ashamed
on his own, evinced so much feeling that it was all I could do to
comfort him; which I succeeded in doing only when I diverted the
conversation to Madame de Bruhl. We passed the short night together,
sharing the same room and the same bed, and talking more than we
slept--of madame and mademoiselle, the castle on the hill, and the camp
in the woods, of all old days en fin, but little of the future. Soon
after dawn Simon, who lay on a pallet across the threshold, roused me
from a fitful sleep into which I had just fallen, and a few minutes
later I stood up dressed and armed, ready to try the last chance left to
me.

M. d'Agen had dressed stage for stage with me, and I had kept silence.
But when he took up his cap, and showed clearly that he had it in his
mind to go with me, I withstood him. 'No, I said, 'you can do me little
good, and may do yourself much harm.'

'You shall not go without one friend,' he cried fiercely.

'Tut, tut!' I said. 'I shall have Simon.'

But Simon, when I turned to speak to him, was gone. Few men are at their
bravest in the early hours of the day, and it did not surprise me that
the lad's courage had failed him. The defection only strengthened,
however, the resolution I had formed that I would not injure M. d'Agen;
though it was some time before I could persuade him that I was in
earnest, and would go alone or not at all. In the end he had to content
himself with lending me his back and breast, which I gladly put on,
thinking it likely enough that I might be set upon before I reached the
castle. And then, the time being about seven, I parted from him with
many embraces and kindly words, and went into the street with my sword
under my cloak.

The town, late in rising after its orgy, lay very still and quiet. The
morning was grey and warm, with a cloudy sky. The flags, which had made
so gay, a show yesterday, hung close to the poles, or flapped idly and
fell dead again. I walked slowly along beneath them, keeping a sharp
look-out on every side; but there were few persons moving in the
streets, and I reached the Castle gates without misadventure. Here was
something of life; a bustle of officers and soldiers passing in and out,
of courtiers whose office made their presence necessary, of beggars who
had flocked hither in the night for company. In the middle of these I
recognised on a sudden and with great surprise Simon Fleix walking my
horse up and down. On seeing me he handed it to a boy, and came up to
speak to me with a red face, muttering that four legs were better than
two. I did not say much to him, my heart being full and my thoughts
occupied with the presence chamber and what I should say there; but
I nodded kindly to him, and he fell in behind me as the sentries
challenged me. I answered them that I sought M. de Crillon, and so
getting by, fell into the rear of a party of three who seemed bent on
the same errand as myself.

One of these was a Jacobin monk, whose black and white robes, by
reminding me of Father Antoine, sent a chill to my heart. The
second, whose eye I avoided, I knew to be M. la Guesle, the king's
Solicitor-General. The third was a stranger to me. Enabled by M. la
Guesle's presence to pass the main guards without challenge, the party
proceeded through a maze of passages and corridors, conversing together
in a low tone; while I, keeping in their train with my face cunningly
muffled, got as far by this means as the ante-chamber, which I found
almost empty. Here I inquired of the usher for M. de Crillon, and
learned with the utmost consternation that he was not present.

This blow, which almost stunned me, opened my eyes to the precarious
nature of my position, which only the early hour and small attendance
rendered possible for a moment. At any minute I might be recognised
and questioned, or my name be required; while the guarded doors of the
chamber shut me off as effectually from the king's face and grace as
though I were in Paris, or a hundred leagues away. Endeavouring to the
best of my power to conceal the chagrin and alarm which possessed me as
this conviction took hold of me, I walked to the window; and to hide my
face more completely and at the same time gain a moment to collect my
thoughts, affected to be engaged in looking through it.

Nothing which passed in the room, however, escaped me. I marked
everything and everyone, though all my thought was how I might get to
the king. The barber came out of the chamber with a silver basin, and
stood a moment, and went in again with an air of vast importance. The
guards yawned, and an officer entered, looked round, and retired. M. la
Guesle, who had gone in to the presence, came out again and stood near
me talking with the Jacobin, whose pale nervous face and hasty movements
reminded me somehow of Simon Fleix. The monk held a letter or petition
in his hand, and appeared to be getting it by heart, for his lips moved
continually. The light which fell on his face from the window showed it
to be of a peculiar sweaty pallor, and distorted besides. But supposing
him to be devoted, like many of his kind, to an unwholesome life, I
thought nothing of this; though I liked him little, and would have
shifted my place but for the convenience of his neighbourhood.

Presently, while I was cudgelling my brains, a person came out and spoke
to La Guesle; who called in his turn to the monk, and started hastily
towards the door. The Jacobin followed. The third person who had entered
in their company had his attention directed elsewhere at the moment; and
though La Guesle called to him, took no heed. On the instant I grasped
the situation. Taking my courage in my hands, I crossed the floor behind
the monk; who, hearing me, or feeling his robe come in contact with
me, presently started and looked round suspiciously, his face wearing a
scowl so black and ugly that I almost recoiled from him, dreaming for
a moment that I saw before me the very spirit of Father Antoine. But as
the man said nothing, and the next instant averted his gaze, I hardened
my heart and pushed on behind him, and passing the usher, found myself
as by magic in the presence which had seemed a while ago as unattainable
by my wits as it was necessary to my safety.

It was not this success alone, however, which caused my heart to beat
more hopefully. The king was speaking as I entered, and the gay tones
of his voice seemed to promise a favourable reception. His Majesty sat
half-dressed on a stool at the farther end of the apartment, surrounded
by five or six noblemen, while as many attendants, among whom I hastened
to mingle, waited near the door.

La Guesle made as if he would advance, and then, seeing the king's
attention was not on him, held back. But in a moment the king saw him
and called to him. 'Ha, Guesle!' he said with good-temper, 'is it you?
Is your friend with you?'

The Solicitor went forward with the monk at his elbow, and I had leisure
to remark the favourable change which had taken place in the king, who
spoke more strongly and seemed in better health than of old. His
face looked less cadaverous under the paint, his form a trifle less
emaciated. That which struck me more than anything, however, was the
improvement in his spirits. His eyes sparkled from time to time, and he
laughed continually, so that I could scarcely believe that he was the
same man whom I had seen overwhelmed with despair and tortured by his
conscience.

Letting his attention slip from La Guesle, he began to bandy words with
the nobleman who stood nearest to him; looking up at him with a roguish
eye, and making bets on the fall of Paris.

'Morbleu!' I heard him cry gaily, 'I would give a thousand pounds to see
the 'Montpensier this morning! She may keep her third crown for
herself. Or, PESTE! we might put her in a convent. That would be a fine
vengeance!'

'The veil for the tonsure,' the nobleman said with a smirk.

'Ay. Why not? She would have made a monk of me,' the king rejoined
smartly. 'She must be ready to hang herself with her garters this
morning, if she is not dead of spite already. Or, stay, I had forgotten
her golden scissors. Let her open a vein with them. Well, what does your
friend want, La Guesle?'

I did not hear the answer, but it was apparently satisfactory, for in
a minute all except the Jacobin fell back, leaving the monk standing
before the king; who, stretching out his hand, took from him a letter.
The Jacobin, trembling visibly, seemed scarcely able to support the
honour done him, and the king, seeing this, said in a voice audible
to all, 'Stand up, man. You are welcome. I love a cowl as some love a
lady's hood. And now, what is this?'

He read a part of the letter and rose. As he did so the monk leaned
forward as though to receive the paper back again, and then so swiftly,
so suddenly, with so unexpected a movement that no one stirred until all
was over, struck the king in the body with a knife! As the blade flashed
and was hidden, and His Majesty with a deep sob fell back on the stool,
then, and not till then, I knew that I had missed a providential chance
of earning pardon and protection. For had I only marked the Jacobin as
we passed the door together, and read his evil face aright, a word, one
word, had done for me more than the pleading of a score of Crillons!

Too late a dozen sprang forward to the king's assistance; but before
they reached him he had himself drawn the knife from the wound and
struck the assassin with it on the head. While some, with cries of
grief, ran to support Henry, from whose body the blood was already
flowing fast, others seized and struck down the wretched monk. As they
gathered round him I saw him raise himself for a moment on his knees and
look upward; the blood which ran down his face, no less than the
mingled triumph and horror of his features, impressed the sight on
my recollection. The next instant three swords were plunged into
his breast, and his writhing body, plucked up from the floor amid a
transport of curses, was forced headlong through the casement and flung
down to make sport for the grooms and scullions who stood below.

A scene of indescribable confusion followed, some crying that the
king was dead, while others called for a doctor, and some by name for
Dortoman. I expected to see the doors closed and all within secured,
that if the man had confederates they might be taken. But there was no
one to give the order. Instead, many who had neither the ENTREE nor
any business in the chamber forced their way in, and by their cries and
pressure rendered the hub-bub and tumult a hundred times worse. In the
midst of this, while I stood stunned and dumbfounded, my own risks and
concerns forgotten, I felt my sleeve furiously plucked, and, looking
round, found Simon at my elbow. The lad's face was crimson, his eyes
seemed, starting from his head.

'Come,' he muttered, seizing my arm. 'Come!' And without further
ceremony or explanation he dragged me towards the door, while his face
and manner evinced as much heat and impatience as if he had been himself
the assassin. 'Come, there is not a moment to be lost,' he panted,
continuing his exertions without the least intermission.

'Whither?' I said, in amazement, as I reluctantly permitted him to
force me along the passage and through the gaping crowd on the stairs.
'Whither, man?'

'Mount and ride!' was the answer he hissed in my ear. 'Ride for your
life to the King of Navarre--to the King of France it may be! Ride as
you have never ridden before, and tell him the news, and bid him look
to himself! Be the first, and, Heaven helping us, Turenne may do his
worst!'

I felt every nerve in my body tingle as I awoke to his meaning. Without
a word I left his arm, and flung myself into the crowd which filled the
lower passage to suffocation. As I struggled fiercely with them Simon
aided me by crying 'A doctor! a doctor! make way there!' and this
induced many to give place to me under the idea that I was an accredited
messenger. Eventually I succeeded in forcing my way through and reaching
the courtyard; being, as it turned out, the first person to issue from
the Chateau. A dozen people sprang towards me with anxious eyes and
questions on their lips; but I ran past them and, catching the Cid,
which was fortunately at hand, by the rein, bounded into the saddle.

As I turned the horse to the gate I heard Simon cry after me. 'The
Scholars' Meadow! Go that way!' and then I heard no more. I was out of
the yard and galloping bare-headed down the pitched street, while women
snatched their infants up and ran aside, and men came startled to the
doors, crying that the League was upon us. As the good horse flung up
his head and bounded forward, hurling the gravel behind him with hoofs
which slid and clattered on the pavement, as the wind began to whistle
by me, and I seized the reins in a shorter grip, I felt my heart bound
with exultation. I experienced such a blessed relief and elation as the
prisoner long fettered and confined feels when restored to the air of
heaven.

Down one street and through a narrow lane we thundered, until a broken
gateway stopped with fascines--through which the Cid blundered and
stumbled--brought us at a bound into the Scholars' Meadow just as the
tardy sun broke through the clouds and flooded the low, wide plain with
brightness. Half a league in front of us the towers of Meudon rose to
view on a hill. In the distance, to the left, lay the walls of Paris,
and nearer, on the same side, a dozen forts and batteries; while here
and there, in that quarter, a shining clump of spears or a dense mass of
infantry betrayed the enemy's presence.

I heeded none of these things, however, nor anything except the towers
of Meudon, setting the Cid's head straight for these and riding on at
the top of his speed. Swiftly ditch and dyke came into view before us
and flashed away beneath us. Men lying in pits rose up and aimed at us;
or ran with cries to intercept us. A cannon-shot fired from the fort
by Issy tore up the earth to one side; a knot of lancers sped from the
shelter of an earthwork in the same quarter, and raced us for half a
mile, with frantic shouts and threats of vengeance. But all such efforts
were vanity. The Cid, fired by this sudden call upon his speed, and
feeling himself loosed--rarest of events--to do his best, shook the foam
from his bit, and opening his blood-red nostrils to the wind, crouched
lower and lower; until his long neck, stretched out before him, seemed,
as the sward swept by, like the point of an arrow speeding resistless to
its aim.

God knows, as the air rushed by me and the sun shone in my face, I cried
aloud like a boy, and though I sat still and stirred neither hand nor
foot, lest I should break the good Sard's stride, I prayed wildly that
the horse which I had groomed with my own hands and fed with my last
crown might hold on unfaltering to the end. For I dreamed that the fate
of a nation rode in my saddle; and mindful alike of Simon's words, 'Bid
him look to himself,' and of my own notion that the League would not be
so foolish as to remove one enemy to exalt another, I thought nothing
more likely than that, with all my fury, I should arrive too late, and
find the King of Navarre as I had left the King of France.

In this strenuous haste I covered a mile as a mile has seldom been
covered before; and I was growing under the influence of the breeze
which whipped my temples somewhat more cool and hopeful, when I saw on
a sudden right before me, and between me and Meudon, a handful of men
engaged in a MELEE. There were red and white jackets in it--leaguers and
Huguenots--and the red coats seemed to be having the worst of it. Still,
while I watched, they came off in order, and unfortunately in such a way
and at such a speed that I saw they must meet me face to face whether
I tried to avoid the encounter or not. I had barely time to take in the
danger and its nearness, and discern beyond both parties the main-guard
of the Huguenots, enlivened by a score of pennons, when the Leaguers
were upon me.

I suppose they knew that no friend would ride for Meudon at that pace,
for they dashed at me six abreast with a shout of triumph; and before
I could count a score we met. The Cid was still running strongly, and I
had not thought to stay him, so that I had no time to use my pistols. My
sword I had out, but the sun dazzled me and the men wore corslets, and I
made but poor play with it; though I struck out savagely, as we crashed
together, in my rage at this sudden crossing of my hopes when all seemed
done and gained. The Cid faced them bravely--I heard the distant huzza
of the Huguenots--and I put aside one point which threatened my throat.
But the sun was in my eyes and something struck me on the head. Another
second, and a blow in the breast forced me fairly from the saddle.
Gripping furiously at the air I went down, stunned and dizzy, my last
thought as I struck the ground being of mademoiselle, and the little
brook with the stepping-stones.



CHAPTER XXXV. 'LE ROI EST MORT!'

It was M. d'Agen's breastpiece saved my life by warding off the point
of the varlet's sword, so that the worst injury I got was the loss of
my breath for five minutes, with a swimming in the head and a kind of
syncope. These being past, I found myself on my back on the ground, with
a man's knee on my breast and a dozen horsemen standing round me. The
sky reeled dizzily before my eyes and the men's figures loomed gigantic;
yet I had sense enough to know what had happened to me, and that matters
might well be worse.

Resigning myself to the prospect of captivity, I prepared to ask for
quarter; which I did not doubt I should receive, since they had taken
me in an open skirmish, and honestly, and in the daylight. But the man
whose knee already incommoded me sufficiently, seeing me about to speak,
squeezed me on a sudden so fiercely, bidding me at the same time in a
gruff whisper be silent, that I thought I could not do better than obey.

Accordingly I lay still, and as in a dream, for my brain was still
clouded, heard someone say, 'Dead! Is he? I hoped we had come in time.
Well, he deserved a better fate. Who is he, Rosny?'

'Do you know him, Maignan?' said a voice which sounded strangely
familiar.

The man who knelt; upon me answered, 'No, my lord. He is a stranger to
me. He has the look of a Norman.'

'Like enough!' replied a high-pitched voice I had not heard before. 'For
he rode a good horse. Give me a hundred like it, and a hundred men to
ride as straight, and I would not envy the King of France.'

'Much less his poor cousin of Navarre,' the first speaker rejoined in a
laughing tone, 'without a whole shirt to his back or a doublet that is
decently new. Come, Turenne, acknowledge that you are not so badly off
after all!'

At that word the cloud which had darkened my faculties swept on a sudden
aside. I saw that the men into whose hands I had fallen wore white
favours, their leader a white plume; and comprehended without more that
the King of Navarre had come to my rescue, and beaten off the Leaguers
who had dismounted me. At the same moment the remembrance of all that
had gone before, and especially of the scene I had witnessed in the
king's chamber, rushed upon my mind with such overwhelming force that I
fell into a fury of impatience at the thought of the time I had wasted;
and rising up suddenly I threw off Maignan with all my force, crying out
that I was alive--that I was alive, and had news.

The equerry did his best to restrain me, cursing me under his breath for
a fool, and almost; squeezing the life out of me. But in vain, for the
King of Navarre, riding nearer, saw me struggling. 'Hallo! hallo! 'tis a
strange dead man,' he cried, interposing. 'What is the meaning of this?
Let him go! Do you hear, sirrah? Let him go!'

The equerry obeyed and stood back sullenly, and I staggered to my feet,
and looked round with eyes which still swam and watered. On the
instant a cry of recognition greeted me, with a hundred exclamations
of astonishment. While I heard my name uttered on every side in a dozen
different tones, I remarked that M. de Rosny, upon whom my eyes
first fell, alone stood silent, regarding me with a face of sorrowful
surprise.

'By heavens, sir, I knew nothing of this!' I heard the King of Navarre
declare, addressing himself to the Vicomte de Turenne. 'The man is here
by no connivance of mine. Interrogate him yourself, if you will. Or I
will. Speak, sir,' he continued, turning to me with his countenance hard
and forbidding. 'You heard me yesterday, what I promised you? Why, in
God's name, are you here to-day?'

I tried to answer, but Maignan had so handled me that I had not breath
enough, and stood panting.

'Your Highness's clemency in this matter,' M. de Turenne said, with a
sneer, 'has been so great he trusted to its continuance. And doubtless
he thought to find you alone. I fear I am in the way.'

I knew him by his figure and his grand air, which in any other company
would have marked him for master; and forgetting the impatience which
a moment before had consumed me--doubtless I was still light-headed--I
answered him. 'Yet I had once the promise of your lordship's
protection,' I gasped.

'My protection, sir?' he exclaimed, his eyes gleaming angrily.

'Even so,' I answered. 'At the inn at Etampes, where M. de Crillon would
have fought me.'

He was visibly taken aback. 'Are you that man?' he cried.

'I am. But I am not here to prate of myself,' I replied. And with
that--the remembrance of my neglected errand flashing on me again--I
staggered to the King of Navarre's side, and, falling on my knees,
seized his stirrup. 'Sire, I bring you news! great news! dreadful news!'
I cried, clinging to it. 'His Majesty was but a quarter of an hour ago
stabbed in the body in his chamber by a villain monk. And is dying, or,
it may be, dead.'

'Dead? The King!' Turenne cried with an oath. 'Impossible!'

Vaguely I heard others crying, some this, some that, as surprise and
consternation, or anger, or incredulity moved them. But I did not answer
them, for Henry, remaining silent, held me spellbound and awed by the
marvellous change which I saw fall on his face. His eyes became on a
sudden suffused with blood, and seemed to retreat under his heavy brows;
his cheeks turned of a brick-red colour; his half-open lips showed his
teeth gleaming through his beard; while his great nose, which seemed
to curve and curve until it well-nigh met his chin, gave to his mobile
countenance an aspect as strange as it was terrifying. Withal he uttered
for a time no word, though I saw his hand, grip the riding-whip he held
in a convulsive grasp, as though his thought were ''Tis mine! Mine!
Wrest it away who dares!'

'Bethink you, sir,' he said at last, fixing his piercing eyes on me, and
speaking in a harsh, low tone, like the growling of a great dog, 'this
is no jesting-time. Nor will you save your skin by a ruse. Tell me, on
your peril, is this a trick?'

'Heaven forbid, sire!' I answered with passion. 'I was in the chamber,
and saw it; with my own eyes. I mounted on the instant, and rode hither
by the shortest route to warn your Highness to look to yourself. Monks
are many, and the Holy Union is not apt to stop half-way.'

I saw he believed me, for his face relaxed. His breath seemed to come
and go again, and for the tenth part of a second his eyes sought M. de
Rosny's. Then he looked at me again.

'I thank you, sir, he said, bowing gravely and courteously, 'for your
care for me--not for your tidings, which are of the sorriest. God grant
my good cousin and king may be hurt only. Now tell us exactly--for these
gentlemen are equally interested with myself--had a surgeon seen him?'

I replied in the negative, but added that the wound was in the groin,
and bled much.

'You said a few minutes ago, "dying or already dead!"' the King of
Navarre rejoined. 'Why?'

'His Majesty's face was sunken,' I stammered.

He nodded. 'You may be mistaken,' he said. 'I pray that you are. But
here comes Mornay. He may know more.'

In a moment I was abandoned, even by M. de Turenne, so great was the
anxiety which possessed all to learn the truth. Maignan alone, under
pretence of adjusting a stirrup, remained beside me, and entreated me in
a low voice to begone. 'Take this horse, M. de Marsac, if you will,' he
urged, 'and ride back the way you came. You have done what you came to
do. Go back, and be thankful.'

'Chut!' I said, 'there is no danger.'

'You will see,' he replied darkly, 'if you stay here. Come, come, take
my advice and the horse,' he persisted, 'and begone! Believe me, it will
be for the best.'

I laughed outright at his earnestness and his face of perplexity. 'I see
you have M. de Rosny's orders to get rid of me,' I said. 'But I am not
going, my friend. He must find some other way out of his embarrassment,
for here I stay.'

'Well, your blood be on your own head,' Maignan retorted, swinging
himself into the saddle with a gloomy face. 'I have done my best to save
you!'

'And your master!' I answered, laughing.

For flight was the last thing I had in my mind. I had ridden this ride
with a clear perception that the one thing I needed was a footing at
Court. By the special kindness of Providence I had now gained this;
and I was not the man to resign it because it proved to be scanty and
perilous. It was something that I had spoken to the great Vicomte face
to face and not been consumed, that I had given him look for look and
still survived, that I had put in practice Crillon's lessons and come to
no harm.

Nor was this all. I had never in the worst times blamed the King of
Navarre for his denial of me, I had been foolish, indeed, seeing that it
was in the bargain, had I done so; nor had I ever doubted his good-will
or his readiness to reward me should occasion arise. Now, I flattered
myself, I had given him that which he needed, and had hitherto
lacked--an excuse, I mean, for interference in my behalf.

Whether I was right or wrong in this notion I was soon to learn, for at
this moment Henry's cavalcade, which had left me a hundred paces behind,
came to a stop, and while some of the number waved to me to come on, one
spurred back to summon me to the king. I hastened to obey the order
as fast as I could, but I saw on approaching that though all was at a
standstill till I came up, neither the King of Navarre nor M. de Turenne
was thinking principally of me. Every face, from Henry's to that of his
least important courtier, wore an air of grave preoccupation; which I
had no difficulty in ascribing to the doubt present in every mind, and
outweighing every interest, whether the King of France was dead, or
dying, or merely wounded.

'Quick, sir!' Henry said with impatience, as soon as I came within
hearing. 'Do not detain me with your affairs longer than is necessary.
M. de Turenne presses me to carry into effect the order I gave
yesterday. But as you have placed yourself in jeopardy on my account I
feel that something is due to you. You will be good enough, therefore,
to present yourself at once at M. la Varenne's lodging, and give me
your parole to remain there without stirring abroad until your affair is
concluded.'

Aware that I owed this respite, which at once secured my present safety
and promised well for the future, to the great event that, even in M. de
Turenne's mind, had overshadowed all others, I bowed in silence. Henry,
however, was not content with this. 'Come, sir,' he said sharply, and
with every appearance of anger, 'do you agree to that?'

I replied humbly that I thanked him for his clemency.

'There is no need of thanks,' he replied coldly. 'What I have done is
without prejudice to M. de Turenne's complaint. He must have justice.'

I bowed again, and in a moment the troop were gone at a gallop towards
Meudon, whence, as I afterwards learned, the King of Navarre, attended
by a select body of five-and-twenty horsemen, wearing private arms,
rode on at full speed to St. Cloud to present himself at his Majesty's
bedside. A groom who had caught the Cid, which had escaped into the town
with no other injury than a slight wound in the shoulder, by-and-by met
me with the horse; and in this way I was enabled to render myself with
some decency at Varenne's lodging, a small house at the foot of the
hill, not far from the Castle-gate.

Here I found myself under no greater constraint than that which my own
parole laid upon me; and my room having the conveniency of a window
looking upon the public street, I was enabled from hour to hour to
comprehend and enter into the various alarms and surprises which made
that day remarkable. The manifold reports which flew from mouth to mouth
on the occasion, as well as the overmastering excitement which seized
all, are so well remembered, however, that I forbear to dwell upon them,
though they served to distract my mind from my own position. Suffice it
that at one moment we heard that His Majesty was dead, at another that
the wound was skin deep, and again that we might expect him at Meudon
before sunset. The rumour that the Duchess de Montpensier had taken
poison was no sooner believed than we were asked to listen to the guns
of Paris firing FEUX DE JOIE in honour of the King's death.

The streets were so closely packed with persons telling and hearing
these tales that I seemed from my window to be looking on a fair. Nor
was all my amusement withoutdoors; for a number of the gentlemen of the
Court, hearing that I had been at St. Cloud in the morning, and in the
very chamber, a thing which made me for the moment the most desirable
companion in the world, remembered on a sudden that they had a slight
acquaintance with me, and honoured me by calling upon me and sitting
a great part of the day with me. From which circumstance I confess I
derived as much hope as they diversion; knowing that courtiers are the
best weather-prophets in the world, who hate nothing so much as to be
discovered in the company of those on whom the sun does not shine.

The return of the King of Navarre, which happened about the middle of
the afternoon, while it dissipated the fears of some and dashed the
hopes of others, put an end to this state of uncertainty by confirming,
to the surprise of many, that His Majesty was in no danger. We learned
with varying emotions that the first appearances, which had deceived,
not myself only, but experienced leeches, had been themselves belied by
subsequent conditions; and that, in a word, Paris had as much to fear,
and loyal men as much to hope, as before this wicked and audacious
attempt.

I had no more than stomached this surprising information, which was less
welcome to me, I confess, than it should have been, when the arrival of
M. d'Agen, who greeted me with the affection which he never failed to
show me, distracted my thoughts for a time. Immediately on learning
where I was and, the strange adventures which had befallen me he had
ridden off; stopping only once, when he had nearly reached me, for the
purpose of waiting on Madame de Bruhl. I asked him how she had received
him.

'Like herself,' he replied with an ingenuous blush. 'More kindly than I
had a right to expect, if not as warmly as I had the courage to hope.'

'That will come with time,' I said, laughing. 'And Mademoiselle de la
Vire?'

'I did not see her,' he answered, 'but I heard she was well. And a
hundred fathoms deeper in love,' he added, eyeing me roguishly, 'than
when I saw her last.'

It was my turn to colour now, and I did so, feeling all the pleasure
and delight such a statement was calculated to afford me. Picturing
mademoiselle as I had seen her last, leaning from her horse with love
written so plainly on her weeping face that all who ran might read, I
sank into so delicious a reverie that M. la Varenne, entering suddenly,
surprised us both before another word passed on either side.

His look and tone were as abrupt as it was in his nature, which was soft
and compliant, to make them. 'M. de Marsac,' he said, 'I am sorry to
put any constraint upon you, but I am directed to forbid you to your
friends. And I must request this gentleman to withdraw.'

'But all day my friends have come in and out,' I said with surprise. 'Is
this a new order?'

'A written order, which reached me no farther back than two minutes ago,
'he answered plainly. 'I am also directed to remove you to a room at the
back of the house, that you may not overlook the street.'

'But my parole was taken,' I cried, with a natural feeling of
indignation.

He shrugged his shoulders. 'I am sorry to say that I have nothing to
do with that,' he answered. 'I can only obey orders. I must ask this
gentleman, therefore, to withdraw.'

Of course M. d'Agen had no option but to leave me; which he did, I could
see, notwithstanding his easy and confident expressions, with a good
deal of mistrust and apprehension. When he was gone, La Varenne lost
no time in carrying out the remainder of his orders. As a consequence I
found myself confined to a small and gloomy apartment which looked, at
a distance of three paces, upon the smooth face of the rock on which the
Castle stood. This change, from a window which commanded all the life
of the town, and intercepted every breath of popular fancy, to a closet
whither no sounds penetrated, and where the very transition from noon to
evening scarcely made itself known, could not fail to depress my spirits
sensibly; the more as I took it to be significant of a change in my
fortunes fully as grave. Reflecting that I must now appear to the King
of Navarre in the light of a bearer of false tidings, I associated the
order to confine me more closely with his return from St. Cloud; and
comprehending that M. de Turenne was once more at liberty to attend to
my affairs, I began to look about me with forebodings which were none
the less painful because the parole I had given debarred me from any
attempt to escape.

Sleep and habit enabled me, nevertheless, to pass the night in comfort.
Very early in the morning a great firing of guns, which made itself
heard even in my quarters, led me to suppose that Paris had surrendered;
but the servant who brought me my breakfast; declined in a surly fashion
to give me any information. In the end, I spent the whole day alone, my
thoughts divided between my mistress and my own prospects, which seemed
to grow more and more gloomy as the hours succeeded one another. No one
came near me, no step broke the silence of the house; and for a while
I thought my guardians had forgotten even that I needed food. This
omission, it is true, was made good about sunset, but still M. la
Varenne did not appear, the servant seemed to be dumb, and I heard no
sounds in the house.

I had finished my meal an hour or more, and the room was growing dark,
when the silence was at last broken by quick steps passing along the
entrance. They paused, and seemed to hesitate at the foot of the stairs,
but the next moment they came on again, and stopped at my door. I rose
from my seat on hearing the key turned in the lock, and my astonishment
may be conceived when I saw no other than M. de Turenne enter, and close
the door behind him.

He saluted me in a haughty manner as he advanced to the table, raising
his cap for an instant and then replacing it. This done he stood looking
at me, and I at him, in a silence which on my side was the result of
pure astonishment; on his, of contempt and a kind of wonder. The evening
light, which was fast failing, lent a sombre whiteness to his face,
causing it to stand out from the shadows behind him in a way which was
not without its influence on me.

'Well!' he said at, last, speaking slowly and with unimaginable
insolence, 'I am here to look at you!'

I felt my anger rise, and gave him back look for look. 'At your will,' I
said, shrugging my shoulders.

'And to solve a question,' he continued in the same tone. 'To learn
whether the man who was mad enough to insult and defy me was the old
penniless dullard some called him, or the dare-devil others painted
him.'

'You are satisfied now?' I said.

He eyed me for a moment closely; then with sudden heat he cried, 'Curse
me if I am! Nor whether I have to do with a man very deep or very
shallow, a fool or a knave!'

'You may say what you please to a prisoner,' I retorted coldly.

'Turenne commonly does--to whom he pleases!' he answered. The next
moment he made me start by saying, as he drew out a comfit-box and
opened it, 'I am just from the little fool you have bewitched. If she
were in my power I would have her whipped and put on bread and water
till she came to her senses. As she is not, I must take another way.
Have you any idea, may I ask,' he continued in his cynical tone, 'what
is going to become of you, M. de Marsac?'

I replied, my heart inexpressibly lightened by what he had said of
mademoiselle, that I placed the fullest confidence in the justice of the
King of Navarre.

He repeated the name in a tone, I did not understand.

'Yes, sir, the King of Navarre,' I answered firmly.

'Well, I daresay you have good reason to do so,' he rejoined with a
sneer. 'Unless I am mistaken he knew a little more of this affair than
he acknowledges.'

'Indeed? The King of Navarre?' I said, staring stolidly at him.

'Yes, indeed, indeed, the King of Navarre!' he retorted, mimicking me,
with a nearer approach to anger than I had yet witnessed in him. 'But
let him be a moment, sirrah!' he continued, 'and do you listen to me. Or
first look at that. Seeing is believing.'

He drew out as he spoke a paper, or, to speak more correctly, a
parchment, which he thrust with a kind of savage scorn into my hand.
Repressing for the moment the surprise I felt, I took it to the window,
and reading it with difficulty, found it to be a royal patent drawn,
as far as I could judge, in due form, and appointing some person
unknown--for the name was left blank--to the post of Lieutenant-Governor
of the Armagnac, with a salary of twelve thousand livres a year!

'Well, sir?' he said impatiently.

'Well?' I answered mechanically. For my brain reeled; the exhibition of
such a paper in such a way raised extraordinary thoughts in my mind.

'Can you read it?' he asked.

'Certainly,' I answered, telling myself that he would fain play a trick
on me.

'Very well,' he replied, 'then listen. I am going to condescend; to make
you an offer, M. de Marsac. I will procure you your freedom, and fill up
the blank, which you see there, with your name--upon one condition.'

I stared at him with all the astonishment it was natural for me to feel
in the face, of such a proposition. 'You will confer this office on me?'
I muttered incredulously.

'The king having placed it at my disposal,' he answered, 'I will. But
first let me remind you,' he went on proudly, 'that the affair has
another side. On the one hand I offer you such employment, M. de Marsac,
as should satisfy your highest ambition. On the other, I warn you that
my power to avenge myself is no less to-day than it was yesterday; and
that if I condescend to buy you, it is because that course commends
itself to me for reasons, not because it is the only one open.'

I bowed. 'The condition, M. le Vicomte?' I said huskily, beginning to
understand him.

'That you give up all claim and suit to the hand of my kinswoman,' he
answered lightly. 'That is all. It is a simple and easy condition.'

I looked at him in renewed astonishment, in wonder, in stupefaction;
asking myself a hundred questions. Why did he stoop to bargain, who
could command? Why did he condescend to treat, who held me at his mercy?
Why did he gravely discuss my aspirations, to whom they must seem the
rankest presumption? Why?--but I could not follow it. I stood looking at
him in silence; in perplexity as great as if he had offered me the Crown
of France; in amazement and doubt and suspicion that knew no bounds.

'Well!' he said at last, misreading the emotion which appeared in my
face. 'You consent, sir?'

'Never!' I answered firmly.

He started. 'I think I cannot have heard you aright,' he said, speaking
slowly and almost courteously. 'I offer you a great place and my
patronage, M. de Marsac. Do I understand that you prefer a prison and my
enmity?'

'On those conditions,' I answered.

'Think, think!' he said harshly.

'I have thought,' I answered.

'Ay, but have you thought where you are?' he retorted. 'Have you thought
how many obstacles lie between you and this little fool? How many
persons you must win over, how many friends you must gain? Have you
thought what it will be to have me against you in this, or which of us
is more likely to win in the end?'

'I have thought,' I rejoined.

But my voice shook, my lips were dry. The room had grown dark. The rock
outside, intercepting the light, gave it already the air of a dungeon.
Though I did not dream of yielding to him, though I even felt that in
this interview he had descended to my level, and I had had the better of
him, I felt my heart sink. For I remembered how men immured in prisons
drag out their lives always petitioning, always forgotten; how wearily
the days go, that to free men are bright with hope and ambition. And I
saw in a flash what it would be to remain here, or in some such place;
never to cross horse again, or breathe the free air of Heaven, never
to hear the clink of sword against stirrup, or the rich tones of M.
d'Agen's voice calling for his friend!

I expected M. de Turenne to go when I had made my answer, or else to
fall into such a rage as opposition is apt to cause in those who seldom
encounter it. To my surprise, however, he restrained himself. 'Come,' he
said, with patience which fairly astonished me, and so much the more
as chagrin was clearly marked in his voice, 'I know where you put your
trust. You think the King of Navarre will protect you. Well, I pledge
you the honour of Turenne that he will not; that the King of Navarre
will do nothing to save you. Now, what do you say?'

'As I said before,' I answered doggedly.

He took up the parchment from the table with a grim laugh. 'So much
the worse for you then!' he said, shrugging his shoulders. 'So much the
worse for you! I took you for a rogue! It seems you are a fool!'



CHAPTER XXXVI. 'VIVE LE ROI!'

He took his leave with those words. But his departure, which I
should have hailed a few minutes before with joy, as a relief from
embarrassment and humiliation, found me indifferent. The statement to
which he had solemnly pledged himself in regard to the King of Navarre,
that I could expect no further help from him, had prostrated me; dashing
my hopes and spirits so completely that I remained rooted to the spot
long after his step had ceased to sound on the stairs. If what he said
was true, in the gloom which darkened alike my room and my prospects
I could descry no glimmer of light. I knew His Majesty's weakness and
vacillation too well to repose any confidence in him; if the King
of Navarre also abandoned me, I was indeed without hope, as without
resource.

I had stood some time with my mind painfully employed upon this problem,
which my knowledge of M. de Turenne's strict honour in private matters
did not allow me to dismiss lightly, when I heard another step on the
stairs, and in a moment M. la Varenne opened the door. Finding me in the
dark he muttered an apology for the remissness of the servants; which I
accepted, seeing nothing else for it, in good part.

'We have been at sixes-and-sevens all day, and you have been forgotten,'
he continued. 'But you will have no reason to complain now. I am ordered
to conduct you to His Majesty without delay.'

'To St. Cloud?' I exclaimed, greatly astonished.

'No, the king of France is here,' he answered.

'At Meudon?'

'To be sure. Why not?'

I expressed my wonder at his Majesty's rapid recovery.

'Pooh!' he answered roughly. 'He is as well as he ever was. I will leave
you my light. Be good enough to descend as soon as you are ready, for it
is ill work keeping kings waiting. Oh! and I had forgotten one thing,'
he continued, returning when he had already reached the door. 'My orders
are to see that you do not hold converse with anyone until you have seen
the king, M. de Marsac. You will kindly remember this if we are kept
waiting in the antechamber.'

'Am I to be transported to--other custody?' I asked, my mind full of
apprehension.

He shrugged his shoulders. 'Possibly,' he replied. 'I do not know.'

Of course there was nothing for it but to murmur that I was at the
king's disposition; after which La Varenne retired, leaving me to put
the best face on the matter I could. Naturally I augured anything
but well of an interview weighted with such a condition; and this
contributed still further to depress my spirits, already lowered by the
long solitude in which I had passed the day. Fearing nothing, however,
so much as suspense, I hastened to do what I could to repair my costume,
and then descended to the foot of the stairs, where I found my custodian
awaiting me with a couple of servants, of whom one bore a link.

We went out side by side, and having barely a hundred yards to go,
seemed in a moment to be passing through the gate of the Castle. I
noticed that the entrance was very strongly guarded, but an instant's
reflection served to remind me that this was not surprising after what
had happened at St. Cloud. I remarked to M. la Varenne as we crossed the
courtyard that I supposed Paris had surrendered; but he replied in the
negative so curtly, and with so little consideration, that I forebore to
ask any other questions; and the Chateau being small, we found ourselves
almost at once in a long, narrow corridor, which appeared to serve as
the antechamber.

It was brilliantly lighted and crowded from end to end, and almost from
wall to wall, with a mob of courtiers; whose silence, no less than
their keen and anxious looks, took me by surprise. Here and there two or
three, who had seized upon the embrasure of a window, talked together in
a low tone; or a couple, who thought themselves sufficiently important
to pace the narrow passage between the waiting lines, conversed in
whispers as they walked. But even these were swift to take alarm, and
continually looked askance; while the general company stood at gaze,
starting and looking up eagerly whenever the door swung open or a
newcomer was announced. The strange silence which prevailed reminded me
of nothing so much as of the Court at Blois on the night of the Duke
of Mercoeur's desertion; but that stillness had brooded over empty
chambers, this gave a peculiar air of strangeness to a room thronged in
every part.

M. la Varenne, who was received by those about the door with silent
politeness, drew me into the recess of a window; whence I was able
to remark, among other things, that the Huguenots present almost
outnumbered the king's immediate following. Still, among those who were
walking up and down, I noticed M. de Rambouillet, to whom at another
time I should have hastened to pay my respects; with Marshal d'Aumont,
Sancy, and Humieres. Nor had I more than noted the presence of these
before the door of the chamber opened and added to their number Marshal
Biron, who came out leaning on the arm of Crillon. The sight of these
old enemies in combination was sufficient of itself to apprise me that
some serious crisis was at hand; particularly as their progress through
the crowd was watched, I observed, by a hundred curious and attentive
eyes.

They disappeared at last through the outer door, and the assemblage
turned as with one accord to see who came next. But nearly half an hour
elapsed before the Chamber door, which all watched so studiously, again
opened. This time it was to give passage to my late visitor, Turenne,
who came out smiling, and leaning, to my great surprise, on the arm of
M. de Rosny.

As the two walked down the room, greeting here and there an obsequious
friend, and followed in their progress by all eyes, I felt my heart sink
indeed; both at sight of Turenne's good-humour, and of the company in
which I found him. Aware that in proportion as he was pleased I was like
to meet with displeasure, I still might have had hope left had I had
Rosny left. Losing him, however--and I could not doubt, seeing him as I
saw him, that I had lost him--and counting the King of Navarre as gone
already, I felt such a failure of courage as I had never known before.
I told myself with shame that I was not made for Courts, or for such
scenes as these; and recalling with new and keen mortification the poor
figure I had cut in the King of Navarre's antechamber at St. Jean, I
experienced so strange a gush of pity for my mistress that nothing could
exceed the tenderness I felt for her. I had won her under false colours,
I was not worthy of her. I felt that my mere presence in her company in
such a place as this, and among these people, must cover her with shame
and humiliation.

To my great relief, since I knew my face was on fire, neither of the
two, as they walked down the passage, looked my way or seemed conscious
of my neighbourhood. At the door they stood a moment talking earnestly,
and it seemed as if M. de Rosny would have accompanied the Vicomte
farther. The latter would not suffer it, however, but took his leave
there; and this with so many polite gestures that my last hope based on
M. de Rosny vanished.

Nevertheless, that gentleman was not so wholly changed that on his
turning to re-traverse the room I did not see a smile flicker for an
instant on his features as the two lines of bowing courtiers opened
before him. The next moment his look fell on me, and though his face
scarcely altered, he stopped opposite me.

'M. de Marsac is waiting to see His Majesty?' he asked aloud, speaking
to M. la Varenne.

My companion remaining silent, I bowed.

'In five minutes,' M. de Rosny replied quietly, yet with a distant air,
which made me doubt whether I had not dreamed all I remembered of this
man. 'Ah! M. de Paul, what can I do for you?' he continued. And he bent
his head to listen to the application which a gentleman who stood next
me poured into his ear. 'I will see,' I heard him answer. 'In any case
you shall know to-morrow.'

'But you will be my friend?' M. Paul urged, detaining him by the sleeve.

'I will put only one before you,' he answered.

My neighbour seemed to shrink into himself with disappointment. 'Who is
it?' he murmured piteously.

'The king and his service, my friend,' M. de Rosny replied drily. And
with that he walked away. But half a dozen times at least; before he
reached the upper end of the room I saw the scene repeated.

I looked on at all this in the utmost astonishment, unable to guess or
conceive what had happened to give M. de Rosny so much importance. For
it did not escape me that the few words he had stopped to speak to me
had invested me with interest in the eyes of all who stood near.
They gave me more room and a wider breathing-space, and looking at me
askance, muttered my name in whispers. In my uncertainty, however, what
this portended I drew no comfort from it; and before I had found time to
weigh it thoroughly the door through which Turenne and Rosny had entered
opened again. The pages and gentlemen who stood about it hastened to
range themselves on either side. An usher carrying a white wand came
rapidly down the room, here and there requesting the courtiers to stand
back where the passage was narrow. Then a loud voice without cried, 'The
King, gentlemen! the King!' and one in every two of us stood a-tiptoe to
see him enter.

But there came in only Henry of Navarre, wearing a violet cloak and cap.

I turned to La Varenne and with my head full of confusion, muttered
impatiently, 'But the king, man! Where is the king?'

He grinned at me, with his hand before his mouth. 'Hush!' he whispered.
''Twas a jest we played on you! His late Majesty died at daybreak this
morning. This is the king.'

'This! the King of Navarre?' I cried; so loudly that some round us
called 'Silence!'

'No, the King of France, fool!' he replied. 'Your sword must be sharper
than your wits, or I have been told some lies!'

I let the gibe pass and the jest, for my heart was beating so fast and
painfully that I could scarcely preserve my outward composure. There was
a mist before my eyes, and a darkness which set the lights at defiance.
It was in vain I tried to think what this might mean--to me. I could not
put two thoughts together, and while I still questioned what reception
I might expect, and who in this new state of things were my friends, the
king stopped before me.

'Ha, M. de Marsac!' he cried cheerfully, signing to those who stood
before me to give place. 'You are the gentleman who rode so fast to warn
me the other morning. I have spoken to M. de Turenne about you, and he
is willing to overlook the complaint he had against you. For the rest,
go to my closet, my friend. Go! Rosny knows my will respecting you.'

I had sense enough left to kneel and kiss his hand; but it was in
silence, which he knew how to interpret. He had moved on and was
speaking to another before I recovered the use of my tongue, or the wits
which his gracious words had scattered. When I did so, and got on my
feet again I found myself the centre of so much observation and the
object of so many congratulations that I was glad to act upon the hint
which La Varenne gave me, and hurry away to the closet.

Here, though I had now an inkling of what I had to expect, I found
myself received with a kindness which bade fair to overwhelm me. Only M.
de Rosny was in the room, and he took me by both hands in a manner which
told me without a word that the Rosny of old days was back, and that;
for the embarrassment I had caused him of late I was more than forgiven.
When I tried to thank him for the good offices which I knew he had done
me with the king he would have none of it; reminding me with a smile
that he had eaten of my cheese when the choice lay between that and
Lisieux.

'And besides, my friend,' he continued, his eyes twinkling, 'You have
made me richer by five hundred crowns.'

'How so?' I asked, wondering more and more.

'I wagered that sum with Turenne that he could not bribe you,' he
answered, smiling. 'And see,' he continued, selecting from some on the
table the same parchment I had seen before, 'here is the bribe. Take
it; it is yours. I have given a score to-day, but none with the same
pleasure. Let me be the first to congratulate the Lieutenant-Governor of
the Armagnac.'

For a while I could not believe that he was in earnest; which pleased
him mightily, I remember. When I was brought at last to see that the
king had meant this for me from the first, and had merely lent the
patent to Turenne that the latter might make trial of me, my pleasure
and gratification were such that I could no more express them then than
I can now describe them. For they knew no bounds. I stood before Rosny
silent and confused, with long-forgotten tears welling up to my eyes,
and one regret only in my heart--that my dear mother had not lived to
see the fond illusions with which I had so often amused her turned to
sober fact. Not then, but afterwards, I remarked that the salary of my
office amounted to the exact sum which I had been in the habit of naming
to her; and I learned that Rosny had himself fixed it on information
given him by Mademoiselle de la Vire.

As my transports grew more moderate, and I found voice to thank my
benefactor, he had still an answer. 'Do not deceive yourself, my
friend,' he said gravely, 'or think this an idle reward. My master
is King of France, but he is a king without a kingdom, and a captain
without money. To-day, to gain his rights, he has parted with half his
powers. Before he win all back there will be blows--blows, my friend.
And to that end I have bought your sword.'

I told him that if no other left its scabbard for the king, mine should
be drawn.

'I believe you,' he answered kindly, laying his hand on my shoulder.
'Not by reason of your words--Heaven knows I have heard vows enough
to-day!--but because I have proved you. And now,' he continued, speaking
in an altered tone and looking at me with a queer smile, 'now I suppose
you are perfectly satisfied? You have nothing more to wish for, my
friend?'

I looked aside in a guilty fashion, not daring to prefer on the top of
all his kindness a further petition. Moreover, His Majesty might have
other views; or on this point Turenne might have proved obstinate. In
a word, there was nothing in what had happened, or on M. de Rosny's
communication, to inform me whether the wish of my heart was to be
gratified or not.

But I should have known that great man better than to suppose that he
was one to promise without performing, or to wound a friend when he
could not salve the hurt. After enjoying my confusion for a time he
burst into a great shout of laughter, and taking me familiarly by the
shoulders, turned me towards the door. 'There, go!' he said. 'Go up the
passage. You will find a door on the right, and a door on the left. You
will know which to open.'

Forbidding me to utter a syllable, he put me out. In the passage, where
I fain would have stood awhile to collect my thoughts, I was affrighted
by sounds which warned me that the king was returning that way. Fearing
to be surprised by him in such a state of perturbation, I hurried to the
end of the passage, where I discovered, as I had been told, two doors.

They were both closed, and there was nothing about either of them to
direct my choice. But M. de Rosny was correct in supposing that I had
not forgotten the advice he had offered me on the day when he gave me
so fine a surprise in his own house--'When you want a good wife, M.
de Marsac, turn to the right!' I remembered the words, and without a
moment's hesitation--for the king and his suite were already entering
the passage--I knocked boldly, and scarcely waiting for an invitation,
went in.

Fanchette was by the door, but stood aside with a grim smile, which I
was at liberty to accept as a welcome or not. Mademoiselle, who had been
seated on the farther side of the table, rose as I entered, and we stood
looking at one another. Doubtless she waited for me to speak first;
while I on my side was so greatly taken aback by the change wrought in
her by the Court dress she was wearing and the air of dignity with which
she wore it, that I stood gasping. I turned coward after all that had
passed between us. This was not the girl I had wooed in the greenwood
by St. Gaultier; nor the pale-faced woman I had lifted to the saddle
a score of times in the journey Paris-wards. The sense of unworthiness
which I had experienced a few minutes before in the crowded antechamber
returned in full force in presence of her grace and beauty, and once
more I stood tongue-tied before her, as I had stood in the lodgings at
Blois. All the later time, all that had passed between us was forgotten.

She, for her part, looked at me wondering at my silence. Her face, which
had grown rosy red at my entrance, turned pale again. Her eyes grew
large with alarm; she began to beat her foot on the floor in a manner I
knew. 'Is anything the matter, sir?' she muttered at last.

'On the contrary, mademoiselle,' I answered hoarsely, looking every way,
and grasping at the first thing I could think of, 'I am just from M. de
Rosny.'

'And he?'

'He has made me Lieutenant-Governor of the Armagnac.'

She curtseyed to me in a wonderful fashion. 'It pleases me to
congratulate you, sir,' she said, in a voice between laughing and
crying. 'It is not more than equal to your deserts.'

I tried to thank her becomingly, feeling at the same time more foolish
than I had ever felt in my life; for I knew that this was neither what I
had come to tell nor she to hear. Yet I could not muster up courage nor
find words to go farther, and stood by the table in a state of miserable
discomposure.

'Is that all, sir?' she said at last, losing patience.

Certainly it was now or never, and I knew it. I made the effort. 'No,
mademoiselle,' I said in a low voice. 'Far from it. But I do not see
here the lady to whom I came to address myself, and whom I have seen
a hundred times in far other garb than yours, wet and weary and
dishevelled, in danger and in flight. Her I have served and loved; and
for her I have lived. I have had no thought for months that has not been
hers, nor care save for her. I and all that I have by the king's bounty
are hers, and I came to lay them at her feet. But I do not see her
here.'

'No, sir?' she answered in a whisper, with her face averted.

'No, mademoiselle.'

With a sudden brightness and quickness which set my heart beating she
turned, and looked at me. 'Indeed!' she said. 'I am sorry for that. It
is a pity your love should be given elsewhere, M. de Marsac--since it is
the king's will that you should marry me.'

'Ah, mademoiselle!' I cried, kneeling before her--for she had come round
the table and stood beside me--'But you?'

'It is my will too, sir,' she answered, smiling through her tears.

* * *

On the following day Mademoiselle de la Vire became my wife; the king's
retreat from Paris, which was rendered necessary by the desertion of
many who were ill-affected to the Huguenots, compelling the instant
performance of the marriage, if we would have it read by M. d'Amours.
This haste notwithstanding, I was enabled by the kindness of M. d'Agen
to make such an appearance, in respect both of servants and equipment,
as became rather my future prospects than my past distresses. It is
true that His Majesty, out of a desire to do nothing which might offend
Turenne, did not honour us with his presence; but Madame Catherine
attended on his behalf, and herself gave me my bride. M. de Sully and M.
Crillon, with the Marquis de Rambouillet and his nephew, and my distant
connection, the Duke de Rohan, who first acknowledged me on that day,
were among those who earned my gratitude by attending me upon the
occasion.

The marriage of M. Francois d'Agen with the widow of my old rival and
opponent did not take place until something more than a year later, a
delay which was less displeasing to me than to the bridegroom, inasmuch
as it left madame at liberty to bear my wife company during my absence
on the campaign of Arques and Ivry. In the latter battle, which added
vastly to the renown of M. de Rosny, who captured the enemy's standard
with his own hand, I had the misfortune to be wounded in the second
of the two charges led by the king; and being attacked by two foot
soldiers, as I lay entangled I must inevitably have perished but for the
aid afforded me by Simon Fleix, who flew to the rescue with the courage
of a veteran. His action was observed by the king, who begged him
from me, and attaching him to his own person in the capacity of clerk,
started him so fairly on the road to fortune that he has since risen
beyond hope or expectation.

The means by which Henry won for a time the support of Turenne (and
incidentally procured his consent to my marriage) are now too notorious
to require explanation. Nevertheless, it was not until the Vicomte's
union a year later with Mademoiselle de la Marck, who brought him the
Duchy of Bouillon, that I thoroughly understood the matter; or the
kindness peculiar to the king, my master, which impelled that great
monarch, in the arrangement of affairs so vast, to remember the
interests of the least of his servants.

========================================
========================================

UNDER THE RED ROBE

By Stanley J. Weyman



Transcriber's Note:

In this Etext, text in italics has been written in capital letters.

Many French words in the text have accents, etc. which have been
omitted.




CONTENTS

     CHAPTER I.              AT ZATON'S

     CHAPTER II.             AT THE GREEN PILLAR

     CHAPTER III.            THE HOUSE IN THE WOOD

     CHAPTER IV.             MADAM AND MADEMOISELLE

     CHAPTER V.              REVENGE

     CHAPTER VI.             UNDER THE PIC DU MIDI

     CHAPTER VII.            A MASTER STROKE

     CHAPTER VIII.           A MASTER STROKE--Continued

     CHAPTER IX.             THE QUESTION

     CHAPTER X.              CLON

     CHAPTER XI.             THE ARREST

     CHAPTER XII.            THE ROAD TO PARIS

     CHAPTER XIII.           AT THE FINGER-POST

     CHAPTER XIV.            ST MARTIN'S EVE

     CHAPTER XV.             ST MARTIN'S SUMMER




UNDER THE RED ROBE



CHAPTER I. AT ZATON'S

'Marked cards!'

There were a score round us when the fool, little knowing the man with
whom he had to deal, and as little how to lose like a gentleman, flung
the words in my teeth. He thought, I'll be sworn, that I should storm
and swear and ruffle it like any common cock of the hackle. But that was
never Gil de Berault's way. For a few seconds after he had spoken I
did not even look at him. I passed my eye instead--smiling, BIEN
ENTENDU--round the ring of waiting faces, saw that there was no one
except De Pombal I had cause to fear; and then at last I rose and looked
at the fool with the grim face I have known impose on older and wiser
men.

'Marked cards, M. l'Anglais?' I said, with a chilling sneer. 'They are
used, I am told, to trap players--not unbirched schoolboys.'

'Yet I say that they are marked!' he replied hotly, in his queer foreign
jargon. 'In my last hand I had nothing. You doubled the stakes. Bah,
sir, you knew! You have swindled me!'

'Monsieur is easy to swindle--when he plays with a mirror behind him,' I
answered tartly.

At that there was a great roar of laughter, which might have been
heard in the street, and which brought to the table everyone in the
eating-house whom his voice had not already attracted. But I did not
relax my face. I waited until all was quiet again, and then waving aside
two or three who stood between us and the entrance, I pointed gravely to
the door.

'There is a little space behind the church of St Jacques, M.
l'Etranger,' I said, putting on my hat and taking my cloak on my arm.
'Doubtless you will accompany me thither?'

He snatched up his hat, his face burning with shame and rage.

'With pleasure!' he blurted out. 'To the devil, if you like!'

I thought the matter arranged, when the Marquis laid his hand on the
young fellow's arm and checked him.

'This must not be,' he said, turning from him to me with his grand,
fine-gentleman's air. 'You know me, M. de Berault. This matter has gone
far enough.'

'Too far! M. de Pombal,' I answered bitterly. 'Still, if you wish to
take your friend's place, I shall raise no objection.'

'Chut, man!' he retorted, shrugging his shoulders negligently. 'I
know you, and I do not fight with men of your stamp. Nor need this
gentleman.'

'Undoubtedly,' I replied, bowing low, 'if he prefers to be caned in the
streets.'

That stung the Marquis.

'Have a care! have a care!' he cried hotly. 'You go too far, M.
Berault.'

'De Berault, if you please,' I objected, eyeing him sternly. 'My family
has borne the DE as long as yours, M. de Pombal.'

He could not deny that, and he answered, 'As you please;' at the same
time restraining his friend by a gesture. 'But none the less,' he
continued, 'take my advice. The Cardinal has forbidden duelling, and
this time he means it! You have been in trouble once and gone free.
A second time it may fare worse with you. Let this gentleman go,
therefore, M. de Berault. Besides--why, shame upon you, man!' he
exclaimed hotly; 'he is but a lad!'

Two or three who stood behind me applauded that, But I turned and they
met my eye; and they were as mum as mice.

'His age is his own concern,' I said grimly. 'He was old enough a while
ago to insult me.'

'And I will prove my words!' the lad cried, exploding at last. He had
spirit enough, and the Marquis had had hard work to restrain him so
long. 'You do me no service, M. de Pombal,' he continued, pettishly
shaking off his friend's hand. 'By your leave, this gentleman and I will
settle this matter.'

'That is better,' I said, nodding drily, while the Marquis stood aside,
frowning and baffled. 'Permit me to lead the way.'

Zaton's eating-house stands scarcely a hundred paces from St Jacques la
Boucherie, and half the company went thither with us. The evening was
wet, the light in the streets was waning, the streets themselves were
dirty and slippery. There were few passers in the Rue St Antoine; and
our party, which earlier in the day must have attracted notice and a
crowd, crossed unmarked, and entered without interruption the paved
triangle which lies immediately behind the church. I saw in the distance
one of the Cardinal's guard loitering in front of the scaffolding round
the new Hotel Richelieu; and the sight of the uniform gave me pause for
a moment. But it was too late to repent.

The Englishman began at once to strip off his clothes. I closed mine
to the throat, for the air was chilly. At that moment, while we stood
preparing, and most of the company seemed a little inclined to stand off
from me, I felt a hand on my arm, and turning, saw the dwarfish tailor
at whose house, in the Rue Savonnerie, I lodged at the time. The
fellow's presence was unwelcome, to say the least of it; and though for
want of better company I had sometimes encouraged him to be free with
me at home, I took that to be no reason why I should be plagued with
him before gentlemen. I shook him off, therefore, hoping by a frown to
silence him.

He was not to be so easily put down, however, and perforce I had to
speak to him.

'Afterwards, afterwards,' I said hurriedly. 'I am engaged now.

'For God's sake, don't, sir!' the poor fool cried, clinging to my
sleeve. 'Don't do it! You will bring a curse on the house. He is but a
lad, and--'

'You, too!' I exclaimed, losing patience. 'Be silent, you scum! What do
you know about gentlemen's quarrels? Leave me; do you hear?'

'But the Cardinal!' he cried in a quavering voice. 'The Cardinal, M. de
Berault! The last man you killed is not forgotten yet. This time he will
be sure to--'

'Leave me, do you hear?' I hissed. The fellow's impudence passed all
bounds. It was as bad as his croaking. 'Begone!' I added. 'I suppose you
are afraid that he will kill me, and you will lose your money.'

Frison fell back at that almost as if I had struck him, and I turned
to my adversary, who had been awaiting my motions with impatience. God
knows he did look young as he stood with his head bare and his fair hair
drooping over his smooth woman's forehead--a mere lad fresh from the
college of Burgundy, if they have such a thing in England. I felt a
sudden chill as I looked at him: a qualm, a tremor, a presentiment. What
was it the little tailor had said? That I should--but there, he did not
know. What did he know of such things? If I let this pass I must kill a
man a day, or leave Paris and the eating-house, and starve.

'A thousand pardons,' I said gravely, as I drew and took my place. 'A
dun. I am sorry that the poor devil caught me so inopportunely. Now
however, I am at your service.'

He saluted and we crossed swords and began. But from the first I had
no doubt what the result would be. The slippery stones and fading
light gave him, it is true, some chance, some advantage, more than he
deserved; but I had no sooner felt his blade than I knew that he was no
swordsman. Possibly he had taken half-a-dozen lessons in rapier art,
and practised what he learned with an Englishman as heavy and awkward
as himself. But that was all. He made a few wild clumsy rushes, parrying
widely. When I had foiled these, the danger was over, and I held him at
my mercy.

I played with him a little while, watching the sweat gather on his brow
and the shadow of the church tower fall deeper and darker, like the
shadow of doom, on his face. Not out of cruelty--God knows I have never
erred in that direction!--but because, for the first time in my life,
I felt a strange reluctance to strike the blow. The curls clung to his
forehead; his breath came and went in gasps; I heard the men behind me
and one or two of them drop an oath; and then I slipped--slipped, and
was down in a moment on my right side, my elbow striking the pavement so
sharply that the arm grew numb to the wrist.

He held off. I heard a dozen voices cry, 'Now! now you have him!' But he
held off. He stood back and waited with his breast heaving and his point
lowered, until I had risen and stood again on my guard.

'Enough! enough!' a rough voice behind me cried. 'Don't hurt the man
after that.'

'On guard, sir!' I answered coldly--for he seemed to waver, and be in
doubt. 'It was an accident. It shall not avail you again.'

Several voices cried 'Shame!' and one, 'You coward!' But the Englishman
stepped forward, a fixed look in his blue eyes. He took his place
without a word. I read in his drawn white face that he had made up his
mind to the worst, and his courage so won my admiration that I would
gladly and thankfully have set one of the lookers-on--any of the
lookers-on--in his place; but that could not be. So I thought of Zaton's
closed to me, of Pombal's insult, of the sneers and slights I had long
kept at the sword's point; and, pressing him suddenly in a heat of
affected anger, I thrust strongly over his guard, which had grown
feeble, and ran him through the chest.

When I saw him lying, laid out on the stones with his eyes half shut,
and his face glimmering white in the dusk--not that I saw him thus long,
for there were a dozen kneeling round him in a twinkling--I felt an
unwonted pang. It passed, however, in a moment. For I found myself
confronted by a ring of angry faces--of men who, keeping at a distance,
hissed and cursed and threatened me, calling me Black Death and the
like.

They were mostly canaille, who had gathered during the fight, and had
viewed all that passed from the farther side of the railings. While
some snarled and raged at me like wolves, calling me 'Butcher!' and
'Cut-throat!' or cried out that Berault was at his trade again, others
threatened me with the vengeance of the Cardinal, flung the edict in my
teeth, and said with glee that the guard were coming--they would see me
hanged yet.

'His blood is on your head!' one cried furiously. 'He will be dead in an
hour. And you will swing for him! Hurrah!'

'Begone,' I said.

'Ay, to Montfaucon,' he answered, mocking me.

'No; to your kennel!' I replied, with a look which sent him a yard
backwards, though the railings were between us. And I wiped my blade
carefully, standing a little apart. For--well, I could understand it--it
was one of those moments when a man is not popular. Those who had come
with me from the eating-house eyed me askance, and turned their backs
when I drew nearer; and those who had joined us and obtained admission
were scarcely more polite.

But I was not to be outdone in SANG FROID. I cocked my hat, and drawing
my cloak over my shoulders, went out with a swagger which drove the
curs from the gate before I came within a dozen paces of it. The rascals
outside fell back as quickly, and in a moment I was in the street.
Another moment and I should have been clear of the place and free to lie
by for a while--when, without warning, a scurry took place round me. The
crowd fled every way into the gloom, and in a hand-turn a dozen of the
Cardinal's guards closed round me.

I had some acquaintance with the officer in command, and he saluted me
civilly.

'This is a bad business, M. de Berault,' he said. 'The man is dead they
tell me.'

'Neither dying nor dead,' I answered lightly. 'If that be all you may go
home again.'

'With you,' he replied, with a grin, 'certainly. And as it rains, the
sooner the better. I must ask you for your sword, I am afraid.'

'Take it,' I said, with the philosophy which never deserts me. 'But the
man will not die.'

'I hope that may avail you,' he answered in a tone I did not like. 'Left
wheel, my friends! To the Chatelet! March!'

'There are worse places,' I said, and resigned myself to fate. After
all, I had been in a prison before, and learned that only one jail lets
no prisoner escape.

But when I found that my friend's orders were to hand me over to the
watch, and that I was to be confined like any common jail-bird caught
cutting a purse or slitting a throat, I confess my heart sank. If I
could get speech with the Cardinal, all would probably be well; but if
I failed in this, or if the case came before him in strange guise, or if
he were in a hard mood himself, then it might go ill with me. The edict
said, death!

And the lieutenant at the Chatelet did not put himself to much trouble
to hearten me. 'What! again M. de Berault?' he said, raising his
eyebrows as he received me at the gate, and recognised me by the light
of the brazier which his men were just kindling outside. 'You are a very
bold man, or a very foolhardy one, to come here again. The old business,
I suppose?'

'Yes, but he is not dead,' I answered coolly. 'He has a trifle--a mere
scratch. It was behind the church of St Jacques.'

'He looked dead enough, my friend,' the guardsman interposed. He had not
yet left us.

'Bah!' I answered scornfully. 'Have you ever known me make a mistake
When I kill a man I kill him. I put myself to pains, I tell you, not to
kill this Englishman. Therefore he will live.'

'I hope so,' the lieutenant said, with a dry smile. 'And you had better
hope so, too, M. de Berault, For if not--'

'Well?' I said, somewhat troubled. 'If not, what, my friend?'

'I fear he will be the last man you will fight,' he answered. 'And even
if he lives, I would not be too sure, my friend. This time the Cardinal
is determined to put it down.'

'He and I are old friends,' I said confidently.

'So I have heard,' he answered, with a short laugh. 'I think that the
same was said of Chalais. I do not remember that it saved his head.'

This was not reassuring. But worse was to come. Early in the morning
orders were received that I should be treated with especial strictness,
and I was given the choice between irons and one of the cells below
the level. Choosing the latter, I was left to reflect upon many things;
among others, on the queer and uncertain nature of the Cardinal, who
loved, I knew, to play with a man as a cat with a mouse; and on the ill
effects which sometimes attend a high chest-thrust however carefully
delivered. I only rescued myself at last from these and other unpleasant
reflections by obtaining the loan of a pair of dice; and the light being
just enough to enable me to reckon the throws, I amused myself for hours
by casting them on certain principles of my own. But a long run
again and again upset my calculations; and at last brought me to the
conclusion that a run of bad luck may be so persistent as to see out the
most sagacious player. This was not a reflection very welcome to me at
the moment.

Nevertheless, for three days it was all the company I had. At the end
of that time, the knave of a jailor who attended me, and who had never
grown tired of telling me, after the fashion of his kind, that I should
be hanged, came to me with a less assured air.

'Perhaps you would like a little water?' he said civilly.

'Why, rascal?' I asked.

'To wash with,' he answered.

'I asked for some yesterday, and you would not bring it,' I grumbled.
'However, better late than never. Bring it now. If I must hang, I will
hang like a gentleman. But depend upon it, the Cardinal will not serve
an old friend so scurvy a trick.'

'You are to go to him,' he announced, when he came back with the water.

'What? To the Cardinal?' I cried.

'Yes,' he answered.

'Good!' I exclaimed; and in my joy and relief I sprang up at once, and
began to refresh my dress. 'So all this time I have been doing him an
injustice,' I continued. 'VIVE MONSEIGNEUR! Long live the little Bishop
of Luchon! I might have known it, too.'

'Don't make too sure!' the man answered spitefully. Then he went on, 'I
have something else for you. A friend of yours left it at the gate,' and
he handed me a packet.

'Quite so!' I said, leading his rascally face aright. 'And you kept it
as long as you dared--as long as you thought I should hang, you knave!
Was not that so? But there, do not lie to me. Tell me instead which
of my friends left it.' For, to confess the truth, I had not so many
friends at this time and ten good crowns--the packet contained no less
a sum--argued a pretty staunch friend, and one of whom a man might
reasonably be proud.

The knave sniggered maliciously. 'A crooked dwarfish man left it,' he
said. 'I doubt I might call him a tailor and not be far out.'

'Chut!' I answered--but I was a little out of countenance, nevertheless.
'I understand. An honest fellow enough, and in debt to me! I am glad he
remembered. But when am I to go, friend?'

'In an hour,' he answered sullenly. Doubtless he had looked to get one
of the crowns; but I was too old a hand for that. If I came back I could
buy his services; and if I did not I should have wasted my money.

Nevertheless, a little later, when I found myself on my way to the Hotel
Richelieu under so close a guard that I could see nothing in the street
except the figures that immediately surrounded me, I wished that I had
given him the money. At such times, when all hangs in the balance and
the sky is overcast, the mind runs on luck and old superstitions, and
is prone to think a crown given here may avail there--though THERE be a
hundred leagues away.

The Palais Richelieu was at this time in building, and we were required
to wait in a long, bare gallery, where the masons were at work. I was
kept a full hour here, pondering uncomfortably on the strange whims
and fancies of the great man who then ruled France as the King's
Lieutenant-General, with all the King's powers, and whose life I
had once been the means of saving by a little timely information. On
occasion he had done something to wipe out the debt; and at other times
he had permitted me to be free with him, and so far we were not unknown
to one another.

Nevertheless, when the doors were at last thrown open, and I was led
into his presence, my confidence underwent a shock. His cold glance,
that, roving over me, regarded me not as a man but an item, the steely
glitter of his southern eyes, chilled me to the bone. The room was bare,
the floor without carpet or covering. Some of the woodwork lay about,
unfinished and in pieces. But the man--this man, needed no surroundings.
His keen pale face, his brilliant eyes, even his presence--though he was
of no great height, and began already to stoop at the shoulders--were
enough to awe the boldest. I recalled, as I looked at him, a hundred
tales of his iron will, his cold heart, his unerring craft. He had
humbled the King's brother, the splendid Duke of Orleans, in the dust.
He had curbed the Queen-mother. A dozen heads, the noblest in France,
had come to the block through him. Only two years before he had quelled
Rochelle; only a few months before he had crushed the great insurrection
in Languedoc: and though the south, stripped of its old privileges,
still seethed with discontent, no one in this year 1630 dared lift
a hand against him--openly, at any rate. Under the surface a hundred
plots, a thousand intrigues, sought his life or his power; but these, I
suppose, are the hap of every great man.

No wonder, then, that the courage on which I plumed myself sank low at
sight of him; or that it was as much as I could do to mingle with
the humility of my salute some touch of the SANG FROID of old
acquaintanceship.

And perhaps that had been better left out. For it seemed that this
man was without bowels. For a moment, while he stood looking at me, and
before he spoke to me, I gave myself up for lost. There was a glint
of cruel satisfaction in his eyes that warned me, before he opened his
mouth, what he was going to say to me.

'I could not have made a better catch, M. de Berault,' he said, smiling
villainously, while he gently smoothed the fur of a cat that had sprung
on the table beside him. 'An old offender, and an excellent example. I
doubt it will not stop with you. But later, we will make you the warrant
for flying at higher game.'

'Monseigneur has handled a sword himself,' I blurted out. The very room
seemed to be growing darker, the air colder. I was never nearer fear in
my life.

'Yes?' he said, smiling delicately. 'And so--?'

'Will not be too hard on the failings of a poor gentleman.'

'He shall suffer no more than a rich one,' he replied suavely as he
stroked the cat. 'Enjoy that satisfaction, M. de Berault. Is that all?'

'Once I was of service to your Eminence,' I said desperately.

'Payment has been made,' he answered, 'more than once. But for that I
should not have seen you.'

'The King's face!' I cried, snatching at the straw he seemed to hold
out.

He laughed cynically, smoothly. His thin face, his dark moustache, and
whitening hair, gave him an air of indescribable keenness.

'I am not the King,' he said. 'Besides, I am told that you have killed
as many as six men in duels. You owe the King, therefore, one life at
least. You must pay it. There is no more to be said, M. de Berault,'
he continued coldly, turning away and beginning to collect some papers.
'The law must take its course.'

I thought that he was about to nod to the lieutenant to withdraw me, and
a chilling sweat broke out down my back. I saw the scaffold, I felt the
cords. A moment, and it would be too late!

'I have a favour to ask,' I stammered desperately, 'if your Eminence
will give me a moment alone.'

'To what end?' he answered, turning and eyeing me with cold disfavour.
'I know you--your past--all. It can do no good, my friend.'

'No harm!' I cried. 'And I am a dying man, Monseigneur!'

'That is true,' he said thoughtfully. Still he seemed to hesitate; and
my heart beat fast. At last he looked at the lieutenant. 'You may
leave us,' he said shortly. 'Now,' he continued, when the officer had
withdrawn and left us alone, 'what is it? Say what you have to say
quickly. And, above all, do not try to fool me, M. de Berault.'

But his piercing eyes so disconcerted me now that I had my chance,
and was alone with him, that I could not find a word to say, and stood
before him mute. I think this pleased him, for his face relaxed.

'Well?' he said at last. 'Is that all?'

'The man is not dead,' I muttered.

He shrugged his shoulders contemptuously.

'What of that?' he said. 'That was not what you wanted to say to me.'

'Once I saved your Eminence's life,' I faltered miserably.

'Admitted,' he answered, in his thin, incisive voice. 'You mentioned the
fact before. On the other hand, you have taken six to my knowledge,
M. de Berault. You have lived the life of a bully, a common bravo, a
gamester. You, a man of family! For shame! Do you wonder that it has
brought you to this! Yet on that one point I am willing to hear more,'
he added abruptly.

'I might save your Eminence's life again,' I cried. It was a sudden
inspiration.

'You know something?' he said quickly, fixing me with his eyes. 'But
no,' he continued, shaking his head gently. 'Pshaw! The trick is old. I
have better spies than you, M. de Berault.'

'But no better sword,' I cried hoarsely. 'No, not in all your guard!'

'That is true,' he said slowly. 'That is true.' To my surprise, he spoke
in a tone of consideration; and he looked down at the floor. 'Let me
think, my friend,' he continued.

He walked two or three times up and down the room, while I stood
trembling. I confess it, trembling. The man whose pulses danger has no
power to quicken, is seldom proof against suspense; and the sudden hope
his words awakened in me so shook me that his figure as he trod lightly
to and fro with the cat rubbing against his robe and turning time for
time with him, wavered before my eyes. I grasped the table to steady
myself. I had not admitted even in my own mind how darkly the shadow of
Montfaucon and the gallows had fallen across me.

I had leisure to recover myself, for it was some time before he spoke.
When he did, it was in a voice harsh, changed, imperative. 'You have the
reputation of a man faithful, at least, to his employer,' he said. 'Do
not answer me. I say it is so. Well, I will trust you. I will give you
one more chance--though it is a desperate one. Woe to you if you fail
me! Do you know Cocheforet in Bearn? It is not far from Auch.'

'No, your Eminence.'

'Nor M. de Cocheforet?'

'No, your Eminence.'

'So much the better,' he replied. 'But you have heard of him. He has
been engaged in every Gascon plot since the late King's death, and gave
more trouble last year in the Vivarais than any man twice his years.
At present he is at Bosost in Spain, with other refugees, but I have
learned that at frequent intervals he visits his wife at Cocheforet
which is six leagues within the border. On one of these visits he must
be arrested.'

'That should be easy,' I said.

The Cardinal looked at me. 'Chut, man! what do you know about it?' he
answered bluntly. 'It is whispered at Cocheforet if a soldier crosses
the street at Auch. In the house are only two or three servants, but
they have the countryside with them to a man, and they are a dangerous
breed. A spark might kindle a fresh rising. The arrest, therefore, must
be made secretly.'

I bowed.

'One resolute man inside the house,' the Cardinal continued,
thoughtfully glancing at a paper which lay on the table, 'with the help
of two or three servants whom he could summon to his aid at will, might
effect it. The question is, Will you be the man, my friend?'

I hesitated; then I bowed. What choice had I?

'Nay, nay, speak out!' he said sharply. 'Yes or no, M. de Berault?'

'Yes, your Eminence,' I said reluctantly. Again, I say, what choice had
I?

'You will bring him to Paris, and alive. He knows things, and that is
why I want him. You understand?'

'I understand, Monseigneur,' I answered.

'You will get into the house as you can,' he continued with energy. 'For
that you will need strategy, and good strategy. They suspect everybody.
You must deceive them. If you fail to deceive them, or, deceiving them,
are found out later, I do not think that you will trouble me again, or
break the edict a second time. On the other hand, should you deceive
me'--he smiled still more subtly, but his voice sank to a purring
note--'I will break you on the wheel like the ruined gamester you are!'

I met his look without quailing. 'So be it!' I said recklessly. 'If I
do not bring M. de Cocheforet to Paris, you may do that to me, and more
also!'

'It is a bargain!' he answered slowly. 'I think that you will be
faithful. For money, here are a hundred crowns. That sum should suffice;
but if you succeed you shall have twice as much more. That is all, I
think. You understand?'

'Yes, Monseigneur.'

'Then why do you wait?'

'The lieutenant?' I said modestly.

The Cardinal laughed to himself, and sitting down wrote a word or two on
a slip of paper. 'Give him that,' he said in high good-humour. 'I fear,
M. de Berault, you will never get your deserts--in this world!'



CHAPTER II. AT THE GREEN PILLAR

Cocheforet lies in a billowy land of oak and beech and chestnuts--a land
of deep, leafy bottoms and hills clothed with forest. Ridge and valley,
glen and knoll, the woodland, sparsely peopled and more sparsely tilled,
stretches away to the great snow mountains that here limit France. It
swarms with game--with wolves and bears, deer and boars. To the end of
his life I have heard that the great king loved this district, and would
sigh, when years and State fell heavily on him, for the beech groves and
box-covered hills of South Bearn. From the terraced steps of Auch you
can see the forest roll away in light and shadow, vale and upland, to
the base of the snow peaks; and, though I come from Brittany and love
the smell of the salt wind, I have seen few sights that outdo this.

It was the second week of October, when I came to Cocheforet, and,
dropping down from the last wooded brow, rode quietly into the place at
evening. I was alone, and had ridden all day in a glory of ruddy beech
leaves, through the silence of forest roads, across clear brooks and
glades still green. I had seen more of the quiet and peace of the
country than had been my share since boyhood, and for that reason, or
because I had no great taste for the task before me--the task now
so imminent--I felt a little hipped. In good faith, it was not a
gentleman's work that I was come to do, look at it how you might.

But beggars must not be choosers, and I knew that this feeling would
not last. At the inn, in the presence of others, under the spur of
necessity, or in the excitement of the chase, were that once begun, I
should lose the feeling. When a man is young he seeks solitude, when he
is middle-aged, he flies it and his thoughts. I made therefore for the
'Green Pillar,' a little inn in the village street, to which I had been
directed at Auch, and, thundering on the door with the knob of my riding
switch, railed at the man for keeping me waiting.

Here and there at hovel doors in the street--which was a mean,
poor place, not worthy of the name--men and women looked out at me
suspiciously. But I affected to ignore them; and at last the host came.
He was a fair-haired man, half-Basque, half-Frenchman, and had scanned
me well, I was sure, through some window or peephole; for when he came
out he betrayed no surprise at the sight of a well-dressed stranger--a
portent in that out-of-the-way village--but eyed me with a kind of
sullen reserve.

'I can lie here to-night, I suppose?' I said, dropping the reins on the
sorrel's neck. The horse hung its head.

'I don't know,' he answered stupidly.

I pointed to the green bough which topped a post that stood opposite the
door.

'This is an inn, is it not?' I said.

'Yes,' he answered slowly. 'It is an inn. But--'

'But you are full, or you are out of food, or your wife is ill, or
something else is amiss,' I answered peevishly. 'All the same, I am
going to lie here. So you must make the best of it, and your wife
too--if you have one.'

He scratched his head, looking at me with an ugly glitter in his eyes.
But he said nothing, and I dismounted.

'Where can I stable my horse?' I asked.

'I'll put it up,' he answered sullenly, stepping forward and taking the
reins in his hand.

'Very well,' I said. 'But I go with you. A merciful man is merciful to
his beast, and wherever I go I see my horse fed.'

'It will be fed,' he said shortly. And then he waited for me to go
into the house. 'The wife is in there,' he continued, looking at me
stubbornly.

'IMPRIMIS--if you understand Latin, my friend,' I answered, 'the horse
in the stall.'

He saw that it was no good, turned the sorrel slowly round, and began
to lead it across the village street. There was a shed behind the inn,
which I had already marked, and taken for the stable, I was surprised
when I found that he was not going there, but I made no remark, and in
a few minutes saw the horse made comfortable in a hovel which seemed to
belong to a neighbour.

This done, the man led the way back to the inn, carrying my valise.

'You have no other guests?' I said, with a casual air. I knew that he
was watching me closely.

'No,' he answered.

'This is not much in the way to anywhere, I suppose?'

'No.'

That was so evident, that I never saw a more retired place. The hanging
woods, rising steeply to a great height, so shut the valley in that I
was puzzled to think how a man could leave it save by the road I had
come. The cottages, which were no more than mean, small huts, ran in
a straggling double line, with many gaps--through fallen trees and
ill-cleared meadows. Among them a noisy brook ran in and out, and the
inhabitants--charcoal-burners, or swine-herds, or poor devils of the
like class, were no better than their dwellings. I looked in vain for
the Chateau. It was not to be seen, and I dared not ask for it.

The man led me into the common room of the tavern--a low-roofed, poor
place, lacking a chimney or glazed windows, and grimy with smoke and
use. The fire--a great half-burned tree--smouldered on a stone hearth,
raised a foot from the floor. A huge black pot simmered over it, and
beside one window lounged a country fellow talking with the goodwife. In
the dusk I could not see his face, but I gave the woman a word, and sat
down to wait for my supper.

She seemed more silent than the common run of her kind; but this might
be because her husband was present. While she moved about getting my
meal, he took his place against the door-post and fell to staring at
me so persistently that I felt by no means at my ease. He was a tall,
strong fellow, with a shaggy moustache and brown beard, cut in the mode
Henri Quatre; and on the subject of that king--a safe one, I knew, with
a Bearnais--and on that alone, I found it possible to make him talk.
Even then there was a suspicious gleam in his eyes that bade me abstain
from questions; so that as the darkness deepened behind him, and the
firelight played more and more strongly on his features, and I thought
of the leagues of woodland that lay between this remote valley and
Auch, I recalled the Cardinal's warning that if I failed in my attempt I
should be little likely to trouble Paris again.

The lout by the window paid no attention to me; nor I to him, when I
had once satisfied myself that he was really what he seemed to be.
But by-and-by two or three men--rough, uncouth fellows--dropped in to
reinforce the landlord, and they, too seemed to have no other business
than to sit in silence looking at me, or now and again to exchange a
word in a PATOIS of their own. By the time my supper was ready, the
knaves numbered six in all; and, as they were armed to a man with huge
Spanish knives, and made it clear that they resented my presence in
their dull rustic fashion--every rustic is suspicious--I began to think
that, unwittingly, I had put my head into a wasps' nest.

Nevertheless, I ate and drank with apparent appetite; but little that
passed within the circle of light cast by the smoky lamp escaped me. I
watched the men's looks and gestures at least as sharply as they watched
mine; and all the time I was racking my wits for some mode of disarming
their suspicions, or failing that, of learning something more of the
position, which far exceeded in difficulty and danger anything that I
had expected. The whole valley, it would seem, was on the look-out to
protect my man!

I had purposely brought with me from Auch a couple of bottles of choice
Armagnac; and these had been carried into the house with my saddle bags.
I took one out now and opened it and carelessly offered a dram of the
spirit to the landlord. He took it. As he drank it, I saw his face
flush; he handed back the cup reluctantly, and on that hint I offered
him another, The strong spirit was already beginning to work, and he
accepted, and in a few minutes began to talk more freely and with less
of the constraint which had before marked us all. Still, his tongue ran
chiefly on questions--he would know this, he would learn that; but even
this was a welcome change. I told him openly whence I had come, by what
road, how long I had stayed in Auch, and where; and so far I satisfied
his curiosity. Only, when I came to the subject of my visit to
Cocheforet I kept a mysterious silence, hinting darkly at business in
Spain and friends across the border, and this and that; in this way
giving the peasants to understand, if they pleased, that I was in the
same interest as their exiled master.

They took the bait, winked at one another, and began to look at me in
a more friendly way--the landlord foremost. But when I had led them so
far, I dared go no farther, lest I should commit myself and be found
out. I stopped, therefore, and, harking back to general subjects,
chanced to compare my province with theirs. The landlord, now become
almost talkative, was not slow to take up this challenge; and it
presently led to my acquiring a curious piece of knowledge. He was
boasting of his great snow mountains, the forests that propped them, the
bears that roamed in them, the izards that loved the ice, and the boars
that fed on the oak mast.

'Well,' I said, quite by chance, 'we have not these things, it is true.
But we have things in the north you have not. We have tens of thousands
of good horses--not such ponies as you breed here. At the horse fair at
Fecamp my sorrel would be lost in the crowd. Here in the south you will
not meet his match in a long day's journey.'

'Do not make too sure of that,' the man replied, his eyes bright with
triumph and the dram. 'What would you say if I showed you a better--in
my own stable?'

I saw that his words sent a kind of thrill through his other hearers,
and that such of them as understood for two or three of them talked
their PATOIS only--looked at him angrily; and in a twinkling I began to
comprehend. But I affected dullness, and laughed in scorn.

'Seeing is believing,' I said. 'I doubt if you knows good horse when you
see one, my friend.'

'Oh, don't I?' he said, winking. 'Indeed!'

'I doubt it,' I answered stubbornly.

'Then come with me, and I will show you one,' he retorted, discretion
giving way to vain-glory. His wife and the others, I saw, looked at him
dumbfounded; but, without paying any heed to them, he rose, took up
a lanthorn, and, assuming an air of peculiar wisdom, opened the door.
'Come with me,' he continued. 'I don't know a good horse when I see one,
don't I? I know a better than yours, at any rate!'

I should not have been surprised if the other men had interfered; but
I suppose he was a leader among them, they did not, and in a moment we
were outside. Three paces through the darkness took us to the stable, an
offset at the back of the inn. My man twirled the pin, and, leading the
way in, raised his lanthorn. A horse whinnied softly, and turned its
bright, mild eyes on us--a baldfaced chestnut, with white hairs in its
tail and one white stocking.

'There!' my guide exclaimed, waving the lanthorn to and fro boastfully,
that I might see its points. 'What do you say to that? Is that an
undersized pony?'

'No,' I answered, purposely stinting my praise. 'It is pretty fair--for
this country.'

'Or any country,' he answered wrathfully. 'Or any country, I say--I
don't care where it is! And I have reason to know! Why, man, that horse
is--But there, that is a good horse, if ever you saw one!' And with
that he ended--abruptly and lamely; lowered the lanthorn with a sudden
gesture, and turned to the door. He was on the instant in such hurry to
leave that he almost shouldered me out.

But I understood. I knew that he had neatly betrayed all--that he had
been on the point of blurting out that that was M. de Cocheforet's
horse! M. Cocheforet's COMPRENEZ BIEN! And while I turned away my face
in the darkness that he might not see me smile, I was not surprised
to find the man in a moment changed, and become, in the closing of the
door, as sober and suspicious as before, ashamed of himself and enraged
with me, and in a mood to cut my throat for a trifle.

It was not my cue to quarrel, however. I made therefore, as if I
had seen nothing, and when we were back in the inn praised the horse
grudgingly, and like a man but half convinced. The ugly looks and ugly
weapons I saw round me were fine incentives to caution; and no Italian,
I flatter myself, could have played his part more nicely than I did. But
I was heartily glad when it was over, and I found myself, at last, left
alone for the night in a little garret--a mere fowl-house--upstairs,
formed by the roof and gable walls, and hung with strings of apples and
chestnuts. It was a poor sleeping-place--rough, chilly, and unclean. I
ascended to it by a ladder; my cloak and a little fern formed my only
bed. But I was glad to accept it, for it enabled me to be alone and to
think out the position unwatched.

Of course M. de Cocheforet was at the Chateau. He had left his horse
here, and gone up on foot; probably that was his usual plan. He was
therefore within my reach, in one sense--I could not have come at a
better time--but in another he was as much beyond it as if I were still
in Paris. For so far was I from being able to seize him that I dared not
ask a question, or let fall a rash word, or even look about me freely.
I saw I dared not. The slightest hint of my mission, the faintest breath
of distrust, would lead to throat-cutting--and the throat would be mine;
while the longer I lay in the village, the greater suspicion I should
incur, and the closer would be the watch kept upon me.

In such a position some men might have given up the attempt in despair,
and saved themselves across the border. But I have always valued myself
on my fidelity, and I did not shrink. If not to-day, to-morrow; if
not this time, next time. The dice do not always turn up aces. Bracing
myself, therefore, to the occasion, I crept, as soon as the house was
quiet, to the window, a small, square, open lattice, much cobwebbed, and
partly stuffed with hay. I looked out. The village seemed to be asleep.
The dark branches of trees hung a few feet away, and almost obscured
a grey, cloudy sky, through which a wet moon sailed drearily. Looking
downwards, I could at first see nothing; but as my eyes grew used to the
darkness--I had only just put out my rushlight--I made out the stable
door and the shadowy outlines of the lean-to roof.

I had hoped for this, for I could now keep watch, and learn at least
whether Cocheforet left before morning. If he did not, I should know
he was still here. If he did, I should be the better for seeing his
features, and learning, perhaps, other things that might be of use to me
in the future.

Making up my mind to the uncomfortable, I sat down on the floor by the
lattice, and began a vigil that might last, I knew, until morning. It
did last about an hour, at the end of which time I heard whispering
below, then footsteps; then, as some persons turned a corner, a voice
speaking aloud and carelessly. I could not catch the words or meaning,
but the voice was a gentleman's, and its bold accents and masterful
tone left me in no doubt that the speaker was M. de Cocheforet himself.
Hoping to learn more, I pressed my face nearer to the opening, and had
just made out through the gloom two figures--one that of a tall, slight
man, wearing a cloak, the other, I fancied, a woman's, in a sheeny white
dress--when a thundering rap on the door of my garret made me spring
back a yard from the lattice, and lie down hurriedly on my couch. The
summons was repeated.

'Well?' I cried, rising on my elbow, and cursing the untimely
interruption. I was burning with anxiety to see more. 'What is it? What
is the matter?'

The trap-door was lifted a foot or more. The landlord thrust up his
head.

'You called, did you not?' he said.

He held up a rushlight, which illumined half the room and lit up his
grinning face.

'Called--at this hour of the night, you fool?' I answered angrily. 'No!
I did not call. Go to bed, man!'

But he remained on the ladder, gaping stupidly. 'I heard you,' he said.

'Go to bed! You are drunk,' I answered, sitting up. 'I tell you I did
not call.'

'Oh, very well,' he answered slowly. 'And you do not want anything?'

'Nothing--except to be left alone,' I replied sourly.

'Umph!' he said. 'Good-night!'

'Good-night! Good-night!' I answered with what patience I might. The
tramp of the horse's hoofs as it was led out of the stable was in my
ears at the moment. 'Good-night!' I continued feverishly, hoping that he
would still retire in time, and I have a chance to look out. 'I want to
sleep.'

'Good,' he said, with a broad grin. 'But it is early yet, and you have
plenty of time.'

And then, at last, he slowly let down the trap-door, and I heard him
chuckle as he went down the ladder.

Before he reached the bottom I was at the window. The woman, whom I had
seen, still stood below in the same place, and beside her was a man in
a peasant's dress, holding a lanthorn. But the man, the man I wanted
to see, was no longer there. He was gone, and it was evident that the
others no longer feared me; for while I gazed the landlord came out to
them with another lanthorn swinging in his hand, and said something to
the lady, and she looked up at my window and laughed.

It was a warm night, and she wore nothing over her white dress. I could
see her tall, shapely figure and shining eyes, and the firm contour of
her beautiful face, which, if any fault might be found with it, erred
in being too regular. She looked like a woman formed by nature to
meet dangers and difficulties, and to play a great part; even here, at
midnight, in the midst of these desperate men, she did not seem out of
place. I could fancy--I did not find it impossible to fancy--that under
her queenly exterior, and behind the contemptuous laugh with which she
heard the landlord's story, there lurked a woman's soul, a soul capable
of folly and tenderness. But no outward sign betrayed its presence--as I
saw her then.

I scanned her very carefully; and secretly, if the truth be told, I was
glad to find that Madame de Cocheforet was such a woman. I was glad that
she had laughed as she had--with a ring of disdain and defiance; glad
that she was not a little, tender, child-like woman, to be crushed
by the first pinch of trouble. For if I succeeded in my task, if I
contrived to--but, pish! Women, I told myself, were all alike. She would
find consolation quickly enough.

I watched until the group broke up, and Madame, with one of the men,
went her way round the corner of the inn, and out of my sight. Then I
retired to bed again, feeling more than ever perplexed what course I
should adopt. It was clear that to succeed I must obtain admission to
the house, which was garrisoned, according to my instructions, by two
or three old men-servants only, and as many women; since Madame, to
disguise her husband's visits the more easily, lived, and gave out that
she lived, in great retirement. To seize her husband at home, therefore,
might be no impossible task; though here, in the heart of the village, a
troop of horse might make the attempt, and fail.

But how was I to gain admission to the house--a house guarded by
quick-witted women, and fenced with all the precautions love could
devise? That was the question; and dawn found me still debating it,
still as far as ever from an answer. Anxious and feverish, I was glad
when the light came, and I could get up. I thought that the fresh
air might inspire me, and I was tired of my stuffy closet. I crept
stealthily down the ladder, and managed to pass unseen through the lower
room, in which several persons were snoring heavily. The outer door was
not fastened, and in a hand-turn I was in the street.

It was still so early that the trees stood up black against the
reddening sky, but the bough upon the post before the door was growing
green, and in a few minutes the grey light would be everywhere. Already,
even in the roadway, there was a glimmering of it; and as I stood at the
corner of the house--where I could command both the front and the side
on which the stable opened--sniffing the fresh air, and looking for
any trace of the midnight departure, my eyes detected something
light-coloured lying on the ground. It was not more than two or three
paces from me, and I stepped to it and picked it up curiously, hoping
that it might be a note. It was not a note, however, but a tiny
orange-coloured sachet such as women carry in the bosom. It was full
of some faintly-scented powder, and bore on one side the initial 'E,'
worked in white silk; and was altogether a dainty little toy, such as
women love.

Doubtless Madame de Cocheforet had dropped it in the night. I turned it
over and over; and then I put it in my pouch with a smile, thinking that
it might be useful sometime, and in some way. I had scarcely done this,
and turned with the intention of exploring the street, when the door
behind me creaked on its leather hinges, and in a moment the host stood
at my elbow, and gave me a surly greeting.

Evidently his suspicions were again aroused, for from this time he
managed to be with me, on one pretence or another until noon. Moreover,
his manner grew each moment more churlish, his hints plainer; until
I could scarcely avoid noticing the one or the other. About mid-day,
having followed me for the twentieth time into the street, he came to
the point by asking me rudely if I did not need my horse.

'No,' I said. 'Why do you ask?'

'Because,' he answered, with an ugly smile, 'this is not a very healthy
place for strangers.'

'Ah!' I retorted. 'But the border air suits me, you see,'

It was a lucky answer, for, taken with my talk the night before, it
puzzled him, by suggesting that I was on the losing side, and had my
reasons for lying near Spain. Before he had done scratching his head
over it, the clatter of hoofs broke the sleepy quiet of the village
street, and the lady I had seen the night before rode quickly round the
corner, and drew her horse on to its haunches. Without looking at me,
she called to the innkeeper to come to her stirrup.

He went. The moment his back was turned, I slipped away, and in a
twinkling was hidden by a house. Two or three glum-looking fellows
stared at me as I passed down the street, but no one moved; and in two
minutes I was clear of the village, and in a half-worn track which ran
through the wood, and led--if my ideas were right--to the Chateau.
To discover the house and learn all that was to be learned about its
situation were my most pressing needs; and these, even at the risk of a
knife thrust, I was determined to satisfy.

I had not gone two hundred paces along the path, however, before I
heard the tread of a horse behind me, and I had just time to hide myself
before Madame came up and rode by me, sitting her horse gracefully, and
with all the courage of a northern woman. I watched her pass, and then,
assured by her presence that I was in the right road, I hurried after
her. Two minutes walking at speed brought me to a light wooden bridge
spanning a stream. I crossed this, and, as the wood opened, saw before
me first a wide, pleasant meadow, and beyond this a terrace. On the
terrace, pressed upon on three sides by thick woods, stood a grey
mansion, with the corner tourelles, steep, high roofs, and round
balconies, that men loved and built in the days of the first Francis.

It was of good size, but wore a gloomy aspect. A great yew hedge, which
seemed to enclose a walk or bowling-green, hid the ground floor of the
east wing from view, while a formal rose garden, stiff even in neglect,
lay in front of the main building. The west wing, of which the lower
roofs fell gradually away to the woods, probably contained the stables
and granaries.

I stood a moment only, but I marked all, and noted how the road reached
the house, and which windows were open to attack; then I turned and
hastened back. Fortunately, I met no one between the house and the
village, and was able to enter my host's with an air of the most
complete innocence.

Short as had been my absence, however, I found things altered there.
Round the door lounged three strangers--stout, well-armed fellows, whose
bearing, as they loitered and chattered, suggested a curious mixture of
smugness and independence. Half a dozen pack-horses stood tethered to
the post in front of the house; and the landlord's manner, from being
rude and churlish only, had grown perplexed and almost timid. One of
the strangers, I soon found, supplied him with wine; the others were
travelling merchants, who rode in the first one's company for the sake
of safety. All were substantial men from Tarbes--solid burgesses; and
I was not long in guessing that my host, fearing what might leak out
before them, and, particularly, that I might refer to the previous
night's disturbance, was on tenter-hooks while they remained.

For a time this did not suggest anything to me. But when we had all
taken our seats for supper, there came an addition to the party. The
door opened, and the fellow whom I had seen the night before with Madame
de Cocheforet entered and took a stool by the fire. I felt sure that
he was one of the servants at the Chateau; and in a flash his presence
inspired me with the most feasible plan for obtaining admission which
I had yet hit upon. I felt myself grow hot at the thought--it seemed so
full of promise, yet so doubtful--and, on the instant, without giving
myself time to think too much, I began to carry it into effect.

I called for two or three bottles of better wine, and, assuming a jovial
air, passed it round the table. When we had drunk a few glasses I fell
to talking, and, choosing politics, took the side of the Languedoc party
and the malcontents in so reckless a fashion that the innkeeper was
beside himself at my imprudence. The merchants, who belonged to the
class with whom the Cardinal was always most popular, looked first
astonished and then enraged. But I was not to be checked; hints and sour
looks were lost upon me. I grew more outspoken with every glass, I drank
to the Rochellois, I swore it would not be long before they raised their
heads again; and, at last, while the innkeeper and his wife were engaged
lighting the lamp, I passed round the bottle and called on all for a
toast.

'I'll give you one to begin,' I bragged noisily. 'A gentleman's toast!
A southern toast! Here is confusion to the Cardinal, and a health to all
who hate him!'

'MON DIEU!' one of the strangers cried, springing from his seat in
a rage. 'I am not going to stomach that! Is your house a common
treason-hole,' he continued, turning furiously on the landlord, 'that
you suffer this?'

'Hoity-toity!' I answered, coolly keeping my seat. 'What is all this?
Don't you relish my toast, little man?'

'No--nor you!' he retorted hotly; 'whoever you may be!'

'Then I will give you another,' I answered, with a hiccough. 'Perhaps it
will be more to your taste. Here is the Duke of Orleans, and may he soon
be King!'



CHAPTER III. THE HOUSE IN THE WOOD

Words so reckless fairly shook the three men out of their anger. For
a moment they glared at me as if they had seen a ghost. Then the wine
merchant clapped his hand on the table.

'That is enough,' he said, with a look at his companions. 'I think that
there can be no mistake about that. As damnable treason as ever I heard
whispered! I congratulate you, sir, on your boldness. As for you,' he
continued, turning with an ugly sneer to the landlord, 'I shall know now
the company you keep! I was not aware that my wine wet whistles to such
a tune!'

But if he was startled, the innkeeper was furious, seeing his character
thus taken away; and, being at no time a man of many words, he vented
his rage exactly in the way I wished, raising in a twinkling such an
uproar as can scarcely be conceived. With a roar like a bull's, he ran
headlong at the table, and overturned it on the top of me. Fortunately
the woman saved the lamp, and fled with it into a corner, whence she and
the man from the Chateau watched the skirmish in silence; but the pewter
cups and platters flew spinning across the floor, while the table
pinned me to the ground among the ruins of my stool. Having me at this
disadvantage--for at first I made no resistance the landlord began to
belabour me with the first thing he snatched up, and when I tried to
defend myself, cursed me with each blow for a treacherous rogue and a
vagrant. Meanwhile the three merchants, delighted with the turn things
had taken, skipped round us laughing, and now hounded him on, now
bantered me with 'how is that for the Duke of Orleans?' and 'How now,
traitor?'

When I thought that this had lasted long enough--or, to speak more
plainly, when I could stand the innkeeper's drubbing no longer--I threw
him off, and struggled to my feet; but still, though the blood was
trickling down my face, I refrained from drawing my sword. I caught
up instead a leg of the stool which lay handy, and, watching my
opportunity, dealt the landlord a shrewd blow under the ear, which laid
him out in a moment on the wreck of his own table.

'Now,' I cried, brandishing my new weapon, which fitted the hand to a
nicety, 'come on! Come on! if you dare to strike a blow, you peddling,
truckling, huckstering knaves! A fig for you and your shaveling
Cardinal!'

The red-faced wine merchant drew his sword in a one-two.

'Why, you drunken fool,' he said wrathfully, 'put that stick down, or I
will spit you like a lark!'

'Lark in your teeth!' I cried, staggering as if the wine were in my
head. 'And cuckoo, too! Another word, and I--'

He made a couple of savage passes at me, but in a twinkling his sword
flew across the room.

'VOILA!' I shouted, lurching forward, as if I had luck and not skill
to thank for my victory. 'Now, the next! Come on, come on--you
white-livered knaves!' And, pretending a drunken frenzy, I flung my
weapon bodily amongst them, and seizing the nearest, began to wrestle
with him.

In a moment they all threw themselves upon me, and, swearing copiously,
bore me back to the door. The wine merchant cried breathlessly to
the woman to open it, and in a twinkling they had me through it, and
half-way across the road. The one thing I feared was a knife-thrust in
the MELEE; but I had to run that risk, and the men were honest, and,
thinking me drunk, indulgent. In a trice I found myself on my back in
the dirt, with my head humming; and heard the bars of the door fall
noisily into their places.

I got up and went to the door, and, to play out my part, hammered on it
frantically; crying out to them to let me in. But the three travellers
only jeered at me, and the landlord, coming to the window, with his head
bleeding, shook his fist at me, and cursed me for a mischief-maker.

Baffled in this, I retired to a log which lay in the road a few paces
from the house, and sat down on it to await events. With torn clothes
and bleeding face, hatless and covered with dirt, I was in little better
case than my opponent. It was raining, too, and the dripping branches
swayed over my head. The wind was in the south--the coldest quarter.
I began to feel chilled and dispirited. If my scheme failed, I had
forfeited roof and bed to no purpose, and placed future progress out of
the question. It was a critical moment.

But at last that happened for which I had been looking. The door swung
open a few inches, and a man came noiselessly out; it was quickly barred
behind him. He stood a moment, waiting on the threshold and peering
into the gloom; and seemed to expect to be attacked. Finding himself
unmolested, however, and all quiet, he went off steadily down the
street--towards the Chateau.

I let a couple of minutes go by, and then I followed. I had no
difficulty in hitting on the track at the end of the street, but when
I had once plunged into the wood, I found myself in darkness so intense
that I soon strayed from the path, and fell over roots, and tore my
clothes with thorns, and lost my temper twenty times before I found
the path again. However, I gained the bridge at last, and thence caught
sight of a light twinkling before me. To make for it across the meadow
and terrace was an easy task; yet, when I had reached the door and had
hammered upon it, I was so worn out, and in so sorry a plight that I
sank down, and had little need to play a part, or pretend to be worse
than I was.

For a long time no one answered. The dark house towering above me
remained silent. I could hear, mingled with the throbbings of my heart,
the steady croaking of the frogs in a pond near the stables; but no
other sound. In a frenzy of impatience and disgust, I stood up again and
hammered, kicking with my heels on the nail-studded door, and crying out
desperately,--

'A MOI! A MOI!'

Then, or a moment later, I heard a remote door opened; footsteps as of
more than one person drew near. I raised my voice and cried again,--

'A MOI!'

'Who is there?' a voice asked.

'A gentleman in distress,' I answered piteously, moving my hands across
the door. 'For God's sake open and let me in. I am hurt, and dying of
cold.'

'What brings you here?' the voice asked sharply. Despite its tartness, I
fancied that it was a woman's.

'Heaven knows!' I answered desperately. 'I cannot tell. They maltreated
me at the inn, and threw me into the street. I crawled away, and have
been wandering in the wood for hours. Then I saw a light here.'

On that some muttering took place on the other side of the door--to
which I had my ear. It ended in the bars being lowered. The door swung
partly open, and a light shone out, dazzling me. I tried to shade my
eyes with my fingers, and, as did so, fancied I heard a murmur of pity.
But when I looked in under screen of my hand, I saw only one person--the
man who held the light, and his aspect was so strange, so terrifying,
that, shaken as I was by fatigue, I recoiled a step.

He was a tall and very thin man, meanly dressed in a short, scanty
jacket and well-darned hose. Unable, for some reason, to bend his neck,
he carried his head with a strange stiffness.

And that head--never did living man show a face so like death. His
forehead was bald and yellow, his cheek-bones stood out under the
strained skin, all the lower part of his face fell in, his jaws receded,
his cheeks were hollow, his lips and chin were thin and fleshless. He
seemed to have only one expression--a fixed grin.

While I stood looking at this formidable creature, he made a quick
movement to shut the door again, smiling more widely. I had the presence
of mind to thrust in my foot, and, before he could resent the act, a
voice in the background cried,--

'For shame, Clon! Stand back, stand back! do you hear? I am afraid,
Monsieur, that you are hurt.'

Those words were my welcome to that house; and, spoken at an hour and in
circumstances so gloomy, they made a lasting impression. Round the
hall ran a gallery, and this, the height of the apartment, and the dark
panelling seemed to swallow up the light. I stood within the entrance
(as it seemed to me) of a huge cave; the skull-headed porter had the air
of an ogre. Only the voice which greeted me dispelled the illusion. I
turned trembling towards the quarter whence it came, and, shading my
eyes, made out a woman's form standing in a doorway under the gallery. A
second figure, which I took to be that of the servant I had seen at the
inn, loomed uncertainly beside her.

I bowed in silence. My teeth were chattering. I was faint without
feigning, and felt a kind of terror, hard to explain, at the sound of
this woman's voice.

'One of our people has told me about you, she continued, speaking out of
the darkness. 'I am sorry that this has happened to you here, but I am
afraid that you were indiscreet.'

'I take all the blame, Madame,' I answered humbly. 'I ask only shelter
for the night.'

'The time has not yet come when we cannot give our friends that!' she
answered with noble courtesy. 'When it does, Monsieur, we shall be
homeless ourselves.'

I shivered, looking anywhere but at her; for, if the truth be told,
I had not sufficiently pictured this scene of my arrival--I had not
foredrawn its details; and now I took part in it I felt a miserable
meanness weigh me down. I had never from the first liked the work, but I
had had no choice, and I had no choice now. Luckily, the guise in which
I came, my fatigue, and wound were a sufficient mask, or I should have
incurred suspicion at once. For I am sure that if ever in this world a
brave man wore a hang-dog air, or Gil de Berault fell below himself,
it was then and there--on Madame de Cocheforet's threshold, with her
welcome sounding in my ears.

One, I think, did suspect me. Clon, the porter, continued to hold the
door obstinately ajar and to eye me with grinning spite, until his
mistress, with some sharpness, bade him drop the bars and conduct me to
a room.

'Do you go also, Louis,' she continued, speaking to the man beside her,
'and see this gentleman comfortably disposed. I am sorry,' she added,
addressing me in the graceful tone she had before used, and I thought
that I could see her head bend in the darkness, 'that our present
circumstances do not permit us to welcome you more fitly, Monsieur. But
the troubles of the times--however, you will excuse what is lacking.
Until to-morrow, I have the honour to bid you good-night.'

'Good-night, Madame,' I stammered, trembling. I had not been able to
distinguish her face in the gloom of the doorway, but her voice, her
greeting, her presence unmanned me. I was troubled and perplexed; I
had not spirit to kick a dog. I followed the two servants from the hall
without heeding how we went; nor was it until we came to a full stop
at a door in a white-washed corridor, and it was forced upon me that
something was in question between my two conductors that I began to take
notice.

Then I saw that one of them, Louis, wished to lodge me here where we
stood. The porter, on the other hand, who held the keys, would not. He
did not speak a word, nor did the other--and this gave a queer ominous
character to the debate; but he continued to jerk his head towards the
farther end of the corridor; and, at last, he carried his point. Louis
shrugged his shoulders, and moved on, glancing askance at me; and I, not
understanding the matter in debate, followed the pair in silence.

We reached the end of the corridor, and there for an instant the monster
with the keys paused and grinned at me. Then he turned into a narrow
passage on the left, and after following it for some paces, halted
before a small, strong door. His key jarred in the lock, but he forced
it shrieking round, and with a savage flourish threw the door open.

I walked in and saw a mean, bare chamber with barred windows. The floor
was indifferently clean, there was no furniture. The yellow light of
the lanthorn falling on the stained walls gave the place the look of
a dungeon. I turned to the two men. 'This is not a very good room,' I
said. 'And it feels damp. Have you no other?'

Louis looked doubtfully at his companion. But the porter shook his head
stubbornly.

'Why does he not speak?' I asked with impatience.

'He is dumb,' Louis answered.

'Dumb!' I exclaimed. 'But he hears.'

'He has ears,' the servant answered drily. 'But he has no tongue,
Monsieur.'

I shuddered. 'How did he lose it?' I asked.

'At Rochelle. He was a spy, and the king's people took him the day the
town surrendered. They spared his life, but cut out his tongue.'

'Ah!' I said. I wished to say more, to be natural, to show myself at my
ease. But the porter's eyes seemed to burn into me, and my own tongue
clave to the roof of my mouth. He opened his lips and pointed to his
throat with a horrid gesture, and I shook my head and turned from
him--'You can let me have some bedding?' I murmured hastily, for the
sake of saying something, and to escape.

'Of course, Monsieur,' Louis answered. 'I will fetch some.'

He went away, thinking doubtless that Clon would stay with me. But after
waiting a minute the porter strode off also with the lanthorn, leaving
me to stand in the middle of the damp, dark room and reflect on the
position. It was plain that Clon suspected me. This prison-like room,
with its barred window, at the back of the house, and in the wing
farthest from the stables, proved so much. Clearly, he was a dangerous
fellow, of whom I must beware. I had just begun to wonder how Madame
could keep such a monster in her house, when I heard his step returning.
He came in, lighting Louis, who carried a small pallet and a bundle of
coverings.

The dumb man had, besides the lanthorn, a bowl of water and a piece of
rag in his hand. He set them down, and going out again, fetched in a
stool. Then he hung up the lanthorn on a nail, took the bowl and rag,
and invited me to sit down.

I was loth to let him touch me; but he continued to stand over me,
pointing and grinning with dark persistence, and rather than stand on
a trifle I sat down at last and gave him his way. He bathed my head
carefully enough, and I daresay did it good; but I understood. I
knew that his only desire was to learn whether the cut was real or a
pretence, and I began to fear him more and more; until he was gone from
the room, I dared scarcely lift my face lest he should read too much in
it.

Alone, even, I felt uncomfortable, this seemed so sinister a business,
and so ill begun. I was in the house. But Madame's frank voice haunted
me, and the dumb man's eyes, full of suspicion and menace. When I
presently got up and tried my door, I found it locked. The room smelt
dank and close--like a vault. I could not see through the barred window,
but I could hear the boughs sweep it in ghostly fashion; and I guessed
that it looked out where the wood grew close to the walls of the house,
and that even in the day the sun never peeped through it.

Nevertheless, tired and worn out, I slept at last. When I awoke the room
was full of grey light, the door stood open, and Louis, looking ashamed
of himself, waited by my pallet with a cup of wine in his hand, and some
bread and fruit on a platter.

'Will Monsieur be good enough to rise?' he said. 'It is eight o'clock.'

'Willingly,' I answered tartly. 'Now that the door is unlocked.'

He turned red. 'It was an oversight,' he stammered 'Clon is accustomed
to lock the door, and he did it inadvertently, forgetting that there was
anyone--'

'Inside,' I said drily.

'Precisely, Monsieur.'

'Ah!' I replied. 'Well, I do not think the oversight would please Madame
de Cocheforet if she heard of it?'

'If Monsieur would have the kindness not to--'

'Mention it, my good fellow?' answered, looking at him with meaning as I
rose. 'No. But it must not occur again.'

I saw that this man was not like Clon. He had the instincts of the
family servant, and freed from the influences of fear and darkness felt
ashamed of his conduct. While he arranged my clothes, he looked round
the room with an air of distaste, and muttered once or twice that the
furniture of the principal chambers was packed away.

'M. de Cocheforet is abroad, I think?' I said as I dressed.

'And likely to remain there,' the man answered carelessly, shrugging his
shoulders. 'Monsieur will doubtless have heard that he is in trouble. In
the meantime, the house is TRISTE, and Monsieur must overlook much, if
he stays. Madame lives retired, and the roads are ill-made and visitors
few.'

'When the lion was ill the jackals left him,' I said.

Louis nodded. 'It is true,' he answered simply. He made no boast or
brag on his own account, I noticed; and it came home to me that he was
a faithful fellow, such as I love. I questioned him discreetly, and
learned that he and Clon and an older man who lived over the stables
were the only male servants left of a great household. Madame, her
sister-in-law, and three women completed the family.

It took me some time to repair my wardrobe, so that I daresay it was
nearly ten when I left my dismal little room. I found Louis waiting in
the corridor, and he told me that Madame de Cocheforet and Mademoiselle
were in the rose garden, and would be pleased to receive me. I nodded,
and he guided me through several dim passages to a parlour with an open
door, through which the sun shone gaily on the floor. Cheered by the
morning air and this sudden change to pleasantness and life, I stepped
lightly out.

The two ladies were walking up and down a wide path which bisected the
garden. The weeds grew rankly in the gravel underfoot, the rose
bushes which bordered the walk thrust their branches here and there in
untrained freedom, a dark yew hedge which formed the background bristled
with rough shoots and sadly needed trimming. But I did not see any of
these things. The grace, the noble air, the distinction of the two women
who paced slowly to meet me--and who shared all these qualities, greatly
as they differed in others--left me no power to notice trifles.

Mademoiselle was a head shorter than her BELLE-SOEUR--a slender woman
and petite, with a beautiful face and a fair complexion; a woman wholly
womanly. She walked with dignity, but beside Madame's stately figure she
had an air almost childish. And it was characteristic of the two
that Mademoiselle as they drew near to me regarded me with sorrowful
attention, Madame with a grave smile.

I bowed low. They returned the salute. 'This is my sister,' Madame de
Cocheforet said, with a very slight air of condescension, 'Will you
please to tell me your name, Monsieur?'

'I am M. de Barthe, a gentleman of Normandy,' I said, taking on impulse
the name of my mother. My own, by a possibility, might be known.

Madame's face wore a puzzled look. 'I do not know that name, I think,'
she said thoughtfully. Doubtless she was going over in her mind all the
names with which conspiracy had made her familiar.

That is my misfortune, Madame,' I said humbly.

'Nevertheless I am going to scold you,' she rejoined, still eyeing me
with some keenness. 'I am glad to see that you are none the worse for
your adventure--but others may be. And you should have borne that in
mind, sir.'

'I do not think that I hurt the man seriously,' I stammered.

'I do not refer to that,' she answered coldly. 'You know, or should
know, that we are in disgrace here; that the Government regards us
already with an evil eye, and that a very small thing would lead them to
garrison the village, and perhaps oust us from the little the wars have
left us. You should have known this, and considered it,' she continued.
'Whereas--I do not say that you are a braggart, M. de Barthe. But on
this one occasion you seem to have played the part of one.'

'Madame, I did not think,' I stammered.

'Want of thought causes much evil,' she answered, smiling. 'However, I
have spoken, and we trust that while you stay with us you will be more
careful. For the rest, Monsieur,' she continued graciously, raising her
hand to prevent me speaking, 'we do not know why you are here, or what
plans you are pursuing. And we do not wish to know. It is enough that
you are of our side. This house is at your service as long as you please
to use it. And if we can aid you in any other way we will do so.'

'Madame!' I exclaimed; and there I stopped. I could say no more. The
rose garden, with its air of neglect, the shadow of the quiet house that
fell across it, the great yew hedge which backed it, and was the pattern
of one under which I had played in childhood--all had points that
pricked me. But the women's kindness, their unquestioning confidence,
the noble air of hospitality which moved them! Against these and their
placid beauty in its peaceful frame I had no shield, no defence. I
turned away, and feigned to be overcome by gratitude.

'I have no words--to thank you!' I muttered presently. 'I am a little
shaken this morning. I--pardon me.'

'We will leave you for a while,' Mademoiselle de Cocheforet said in
gentle pitying tones. 'The air will revive you. Louis shall call you
when we go to dinner, M. de Barthe. Come, Elise.'

I bowed low to hide my face, and they nodded pleasantly--not looking
closely at me--as they walked by me to the house. I watched the two
gracious, pale-robed figures until the doorway swallowed them, and then
I walked away to a quiet corner where the shrubs grew highest and the
yew hedge threw its deepest shadow, and I stood to think.

And, MON DIEU, strange thoughts. If the oak can think at the moment the
wind uproots it, or the gnarled thorn-bush when the landslip tears it
from the slope, they may have such thoughts, I stared at the leaves,
at the rotting blossoms, into the dark cavities of the hedge; I stared
mechanically, dazed and wondering. What was the purpose for which I was
here? What was the work I had come to do? Above all, how--my God! how
was I to do it in the face of these helpless women, who trusted me, who
believed in me, who opened their house to me? Clon had not frightened
me, nor the loneliness of the leagued village, nor the remoteness of
this corner where the dread Cardinal seemed a name, and the King's writ
ran slowly, and the rebellion long quenched elsewhere, still smouldered.
But Madame's pure faith, the younger woman's tenderness--how was I to
face these?

I cursed the Cardinal--would he had stayed at Luchon. I cursed the
English fool who had brought me to this, I cursed the years of plenty
and scarceness, and the Quartier Marais, and Zaton's, where I had lived
like a pig, and--

A touch fell on my arm. I turned. It was Clon. How he had stolen up so
quietly, how long he had been at my elbow, I could not tell. But his
eyes gleamed spitefully in their deep sockets, and he laughed with his
fleshless lips; and I hated him. In the daylight the man looked more
like a death's-head than ever. I fancied that I read in his face that he
knew my secret, and I flashed into rage at sight of him.

'What is it?' I cried, with another oath. 'Don't lay your corpse-claws
on me!'

He mowed at me, and, bowing with ironical politeness, pointed to the
house.

'Is Madame served?' I said impatiently, crushing down my anger. 'Is that
what you mean, fool?'

He nodded.

'Very well,' I retorted. 'I can find my way then. You may go!'

He fell behind, and I strode back through the sunshine and flowers, and
along the grass-grown paths, to the door by which I had come I walked
fast, but his shadow kept pace with me, driving out the unaccustomed
thoughts in which I had been indulging. Slowly but surely it darkened my
mood. After all, this was a little, little place; the people who lived
here--I shrugged my shoulders. France, power, pleasure, life, everything
worth winning, worth having, lay yonder in the great city. A boy might
wreck himself here for a fancy; a man of the world, never. When I
entered the room, where the two ladies stood waiting for me by the
table, I was nearly my old self again. And a chance word presently
completed the work.

'Clon made you understand, then?' the young woman said kindly, as I took
my seat.

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' I answered. On that I saw the two smile at one
another, and I added: 'He is a strange creature. I wonder that you can
bear to have him near you.'

'Poor man! You do not know his story?' Madame said.

'I have heard something of it,' I answered. 'Louis told me.'

'Well, I do shudder at him sometimes,' she replied, in a low voice. 'He
has suffered--and horribly, and for us. But I wish that it had been on
any other service. Spies are necessary things, but one does not wish
to have to do with them! Anything in the nature of treachery is so
horrible.'

'Quick, Louis!' Mademoiselle exclaimed, 'the cognac, if you have any
there! I am sure that you are--still feeling ill, Monsieur.'

'No, I thank you,' I muttered hoarsely, making an effort to recover
myself. 'I am quite well. It was--an old wound that sometimes touches
me.'



CHAPTER IV. MADAME AND MADEMOISELLE

To be frank, however, it was not the old wound that touched me so
nearly, but Madame's words; which, finishing what Clon's sudden
appearance in the garden had begun, went a long way towards hardening
me and throwing me back into myself. I saw with bitterness--what I had
perhaps forgotten for a moment--how great was the chasm that separated
me from these women; how impossible it was that we could long think
alike; how far apart in views, in experience, in aims we were. And while
I made a mock in my heart of their high-flown sentiments--or thought I
did--I laughed no less at the folly which had led me to dream, even for
a moment, that I could, at my age, go back--go back and risk all for a
whim, a scruple, the fancy of a lonely hour.

I daresay something of this showed in my face; for Madame's eyes
mirrored a dim reflection of trouble as she looked at me, and
Mademoiselle talked nervously and at random. At any rate, I fancied so,
and I hastened to compose myself; and the two, in pressing upon me the
simple dainties of the table soon forgot, or appeared to forget, the
incident.

Yet in spite of this CONTRETEMPS, that first meal had a strange charm
for me. The round table whereat we dined was spread inside the open door
which led to the garden, so that the October sunshine fell full on the
spotless linen and quaint old plate, and the fresh balmy air filled the
room with the scent of sweet herbs. Louis served us with the mien of a
major-domo, and set on each dish as though it had been a peacock or a
mess of ortolans. The woods provided the larger portion of our meal; the
garden did its part; the confections Mademoiselle had cooked with her
own hand.

By-and-by, as the meal went on, as Louis trod to and fro across the
polished floor, and the last insects of summer hummed sleepily
outside, and the two gracious faces continued to smile at me out of the
gloom--for the ladies sat with their backs to the door--I began to
dream again, I began to sink again into folly, that was half-pleasure,
half-pain. The fury of the gaming-house and the riot of Zaton's seemed
far away. The triumphs of the fencing-room--even they grew cheap and
tawdry. I thought of existence as one outside it, I balanced this
against that, and wondered whether, after all, the red soutane were so
much better than the homely jerkin, or the fame of a day than ease and
safety.

And life at Cocheforet was all after the pattern of this dinner. Each
day, I might almost say each meal, gave rise to the same sequence
of thoughts. In Clon's presence, or when some word of Madame's,
unconsciously harsh, reminded me of the distance between us, I was
myself. At other times, in face of this peaceful and intimate life,
which was only rendered possible by the remoteness of the place and
the peculiar circumstances in which the ladies stood, I felt a strange
weakness, The loneliness of the woods that encircled the house, and
only here and there afforded a distant glimpse of snow-clad peaks; the
absence of any link to bind me to the old life, so that at intervals it
seemed unreal; the remoteness of the great world, all tended to sap my
will and weaken the purpose which had brought me to this place.

On the fourth day after my coming, however, something happened to break
the spell. It chanced that I came late to dinner, and entered the room
hastily and without ceremony, expecting to find Madame and her sister
already seated. Instead, I found them talking in a low tone by the open
door, with every mark of disorder in their appearance; while Clon and
Louis stood at a little distance with downcast faces and perplexed
looks.

I had time to see all this, and then my entrance wrought a sudden
change. Clon and Louis sprang to attention; Madame and her sister came
to the table and sat down, and all made a shallow pretence of being at
their ease. But Mademoiselle's face was pale, her hand trembled; and
though Madame's greater self-command enabled her to carry off the matter
better, I saw that she was not herself. Once or twice she spoke harshly
to Louis; she fell at other times into a brown study; and when she
thought that I was not watching her, her face wore a look of deep
anxiety.

I wondered what all this meant; and I wondered more when, after the
meal, the two walked in the garden for an hour with Clon. Mademoiselle
came from this interview alone, and I was sure that she had been
weeping. Madame and the dark porter stayed outside some time longer;
then she, too, came in, and disappeared.

Clon did not return with her, and when I went into the garden five
minutes later, Louis also had vanished. Save for two women who sat
sewing at an upper window, the house seemed to be deserted. Not a sound
broke the afternoon stillness of room or garden, and yet I felt that
more was happening in this silence than appeared on the surface. I begin
to grow curious--suspicious, and presently slipped out myself by way of
the stables, and skirting the wood at the back of the house, gained
with a little trouble the bridge which crossed the stream and led to the
village.

Turning round at this point I could see the house, and I moved a little
aside into the underwood, and stood gazing at the windows, trying to
unriddle the matter. It was not likely that M. de Cocheforet would
repeat his visit so soon; and, besides, the women's emotions had been
those of pure dismay and grief, unmixed with any of the satisfaction
to which such a meeting, though snatched by stealth, must give rise.
I discarded my first thought therefore--that he had returned
unexpectedly--and I sought for another solution.

But no other was on the instant forthcoming. The windows remained
obstinately blind, no figures appeared on the terrace, the garden lay
deserted, and without life. My departure had not, as I half expected it
would, drawn the secret into light.

I watched awhile, at times cursing my own meanness; but the excitement
of the moment and the quest tided me over that. Then I determined to go
down into the village and see whether anything was moving there. I had
been down to the inn once, and had been received half sulkily, half
courteously, as a person privileged at the great house, and therefore
to be accepted. It would not be thought odd if I went again, and after a
moment's thought, I started down the track.

This, where it ran through the wood, was so densely shaded that the
sun penetrated to it little, and in patches only. A squirrel stirred
at times, sliding round a trunk, or scampering across the dry leaves.
Occasionally a pig grunted and moved farther into the wood. But the
place was very quiet, and I do not know how it was that I surprised Clon
instead of being surprised by him.

He was walking along the path before me with his eyes on the
ground--walking so slowly, and with his lean frame so bent that I might
have supposed him ill if I had not remarked the steady movement of his
head from right to left, and the alert touch with which he now and again
displaced a clod of earth or a cluster of leaves. By-and-by he rose
stiffly, and looked round him suspiciously; but by that time I had
slipped behind a trunk, and was not to be seen; and after a brief
interval he went back to his task, stooping over it more closely, if
possible, than before, and applying himself with even greater care.

By that time I had made up my mind that he was tracking someone. But
whom? I could not make a guess at that. I only knew that the plot was
thickening, and began to feel the eagerness of the chase. Of course, if
the matter had not to do with Cocheforet, it was no affair of mine; but
though it seemed unlikely that anything could bring him back so soon,
he might still be at the bottom of this. And, besides, I felt a natural
curiosity. When Clon at last improved his pace, and went on to the
village, I took up his task. I called to mind all the wood-lore I had
ever learned, and scanned trodden mould and crushed leaves with eager
eyes. But in vain. I could make nothing of it all, and rose at last with
an aching back and no advantage.

I did not go on to the village after that, but returned to the house,
where I found Madame pacing the garden. She looked up eagerly on hearing
my step; and I was mistaken if she was not disappointed--if she had not
been expecting someone else. She hid the feeling bravely, however, and
met me with a careless word; but she turned to the house more than once
while we talked, and she seemed to be all the while on the watch, and
uneasy. I was not surprised when Clon's figure presently appeared in
the doorway, and she left me abruptly, and went to him. I only felt more
certain than before that there was something strange on foot. What it
was, and whether it had to do with M. de Cocheforet, I could not tell.
But there it was, and I grew more curious the longer I remained alone.

She came back to me presently, looking thoughtful and a trifle downcast.

'That was Clon, was it not?' I said, studying her face.

'Yes,' she answered. She spoke absently, and did not look at me.

'How does he talk to you?' I asked, speaking a trifle curtly.

As I intended, my tone roused her. 'By signs,' she said.

'Is he--is he not a little mad?' I ventured. I wanted to make her talk
and forget herself.

She looked at me with sudden keenness, then dropped her eyes.

'You do not like him?' she said, a note of challenge in her voice. 'I
have noticed that, Monsieur.'

'I think he does not like me,' I replied.

'He is less trustful than we are,' she answered naively. 'It is natural
that he should be. He has seen more of the world.'

That silenced me for a moment, but she did not seem to notice it.

'I was looking for him a little while ago, and I could not find him,' I
said, after a pause.

'He has been into the village,' she answered.

I longed to pursue the matter further; but though she seemed to
entertain no suspicion of me, I dared not run the risk. I tried her,
instead, on another tack.

'Mademoiselle de Cocheforet does not seem very well to-day?' I said.

'No?' she answered carelessly. 'Well, now you speak of it, I do not
think that she is. She is often anxious about--one we love.'

She uttered the last words with a little hesitation, and looked at me
quickly when she had spoken them. We were sitting at the moment on a
stone seat which had the wall of the house for a back; and, fortunately,
I was toying with the branch of a creeping plant that hung over it, so
that she could not see more than the side of my face. For I knew that it
altered. Over my voice, however, I had more control, and I hastened to
answer, 'Yes, I suppose so,' as innocently as possible.

'He is at Bosost, in Spain. You knew that, I conclude?' she said, with a
certain sharpness. And she looked me in the face again very directly.

'Yes,' I answered, beginning to tremble.

'I suppose you have heard, too, that he--that he sometimes crosses
the border?' she continued in a low voice, but with a certain ring of
insistence in her tone. 'Or, if you have not heard it, you guess it?'

I was in a quandary, and grew, in one second, hot all over. Uncertain
what amount of knowledge I ought to admit, I took refuge in gallantry.

'I should be surprised if he did not,' I answered, with a bow, 'being,
as he is, so close, and having such an inducement to return, Madame.'

She drew a long, shivering sigh, at the thought of his peril, I fancied,
and she sat back against the wall. Nor did she say any more, though I
heard her sigh again. In a moment she rose.

'The afternoons are growing chilly,' she said; 'I will go in and see how
Mademoiselle is. Sometimes she does not come to supper. If she
cannot descend this evening, I am afraid that you must excuse me too,
Monsieur.'

I said what was right, and watched her go in; and, as I did so, I
loathed my errand, and the mean contemptible curiosity which it had
planted in my mind, more than at any former time. These women--I could
find it in my heart to hate them for their frankness, for their foolish
confidence, and the silly trustfulness that made them so easy a prey!

NOM DE DIEU! What did the woman mean by telling me all this? To meet
me in such a way, to disarm one by such methods, was to take an unfair
advantage. It put a vile--ay, the vilest--aspect, on the work I had to
do.

Yet it was very odd! What could M. de Cocheforet mean by returning so
soon, if M. de Cocheforet was here? And, on the other hand, if it was
not his unexpected presence that had so upset the house, what was the
secret? Whom had Clon been tracking? And what was the cause of Madame's
anxiety? In a few minutes I began to grow curious again; and, as the
ladies did not appear at supper, I had leisure to give my brain full
licence, and, in the course of an hour, thought of a hundred keys to the
mystery. But none exactly fitted the lock, or laid open the secret.

A false alarm that evening helped to puzzle me still more. I was sitting
about an hour after supper, on the same seat in the garden--I had my
cloak and was smoking--when Madame came out like a ghost, and, without
seeing me, flitted away through the darkness toward the stables. For a
moment I hesitated, and then I followed her. She went down the path and
round the stables, and, so far, I saw nothing strange in her actions;
but when she had in this way gained the rear of the west wing, she took
a track through the thicket to the east of the house again, and so
came back to the garden. This gained, she came up the path and went in
through the parlour door, and disappeared--alter making a clear circuit
of the house, and not once pausing or looking to right or left! I
confess I was fairly baffled. I sank back on the seat I had left, and
said to myself that this was the lamest of all conclusions. I was sure
that she had exchanged no word with anyone. I was equally sure that she
had not detected my presence behind her. Why, then, had she made this
strange promenade, alone, unprotected, an hour after nightfall? No dog
had bayed, no one had moved, she had not once paused, or listened, like
a person expecting a rencontre. I could not make it out. And I came no
nearer to solving it, though I lay awake an hour beyond my usual time.

In the morning, neither of the ladies descended to dinner, and I heard
that Mademoiselle was not so well. After a lonely meal, therefore I
missed them more than I should have supposed--I retired to my favourite
seat and fell to meditating.

The day was fine, and the garden pleasant. Sitting there with my eyes on
the old fashioned herb-beds, with the old-fashioned scents in the air,
and the dark belt of trees bounding the view on either side, I could
believe that I had been out of Paris not three weeks, but three months.
The quiet lapped me round. I could fancy that I had never loved anything
else. The wood-doves cooed in the stillness; occasionally the harsh cry
of a jay jarred the silence. It was an hour after noon, and hot. I think
I nodded.

On a sudden, as if in a dream, I saw Clon's face peering at me round the
angle of the parlour door. He looked, and in a moment withdrew, and I
heard whispering. The door was gently closed. Then all was still again.

But I was wide awake now, and thinking. Clearly the people of the house
wished to assure themselves that I was asleep and safely out of the way.
As clearly, it was to my interest to be in the way. Giving place to
the temptation, I rose quietly, and, stooping below the level of the
windows, slipped round the east end of the house, passing between it
and the great yew hedge. Here I found all still and no one stirring; so,
keeping a wary eye about me, I went on round the house--reversing the
route which Madame had taken the night before--until I gained the rear
of the stables. Here I had scarcely paused a second to scan the ground
before two persons came out of the stable-court. They were Madame and
the porter.

They stood a brief while outside and looked up and down. Then Madame
said something to the man, and he nodded. Leaving him standing where he
was, she crossed the grass with a quick, light step, and vanished among
the trees.

In a moment my mind was made up to follow; and, as Clon turned at once
and went in, I was able to do so before it was too late. Bending low
among the shrubs, I ran hotfoot to the point where Madame had entered
the wood. Here I found a narrow path, and ran nimbly along it, and
presently saw her grey robe fluttering among the trees before me.
It only remained to keep out of her sight and give her no chance of
discovering that she was followed; and this I set myself to do. Once
or twice she glanced round, but the wood was of beech, the light
which passed between the leaves was mere twilight, and my clothes were
dark-coloured. I had every advantage, therefore, and little to fear
as long as I could keep her in view and still remain myself at such a
distance that the rustle of my tread would not disturb her.

Assured that she was on her way to meet her husband, whom my presence
kept from the house, I felt that the crisis had come at last, and I grew
more excited with each step I took. I detested the task of watching her;
it filled me with peevish disgust. But in proportion as I hated it I
was eager to have it done and be done with it, and succeed, and stuff my
ears and begone from the scene. When she presently came to the verge of
the beech wood, and, entering a little open clearing, seemed to loiter,
I went cautiously. This, I thought, must be the rendezvous; and I held
back warily, looking to see him step out of the thicket.

But he did not, and by-and-by she quickened her pace. She crossed the
open and entered a wide ride cut through a low, dense wood of alder and
dwarf oak--a wood so closely planted and so intertwined with hazel and
elder and box that the branches rose like a solid wall, twelve feet
high, on either side of the track.

Down this she passed, and I stood and watched her go, for I dared not
follow. The ride stretched away as straight as a line for four or five
hundred yards, a green path between green walls. To enter it was to be
immediately detected, if she turned, while the thicket itself permitted
no passage. I stood baffled and raging, and watched her pass along. It
seemed an age before she at last reached the end, and, turning sharply
to the right, was in an instant gone from sight.

I waited then no longer. I started off, and, running as lightly and
quietly as I could, I sped down the green alley. The sun shone into
it, the trees kept off the wind, and between heat and haste I sweated
finely. But the turf was soft, and the ground fell slightly, and in
little more than a minute I gained the end. Fifty yards short of the
turning I stopped, and, stealing on, looked cautiously the way she had
gone.

I saw before me a second ride, the twin of the other, and a hundred
and fifty paces down it her grey figure tripping on between the green
hedges. I stood and took breath, and cursed the wood and the heat
and Madame's wariness. We must have come a league, or two-thirds of a
league, at least. How far did the man expect her to plod to meet him?
I began to grow angry. There is moderation even in the cooking of eggs,
and this wood might stretch into Spain, for all I knew!

Presently she turned the corner and was gone again, and I had to repeat
my manoeuvre. This time, surely, I should find a change. But no! Another
green ride stretched away into the depths of the forest, with hedges of
varying shades--here light and there dark, as hazel and elder, or thorn,
and yew and box prevailed--but always high and stiff and impervious.
Halfway down the ride Madame's figure tripped steadily on, the only
moving thing in sight. I wondered, stood, and, when she vanished,
followed-only to find that she had entered another track, a little
narrower but in every other respect alike.

And so it went on for quite half an hour. Sometimes Madame turned to
the right, sometimes to the left. The maze seemed to be endless. Once or
twice I wondered whether she had lost her way, and was merely seeking to
return. But her steady, purposeful gait, her measured pace, forbade the
idea. I noticed, too, that she seldom looked behind her--rarely to
right or left. Once the ride down which she passed was carpeted not with
green, but with the silvery, sheeny leaves of some creeping plant that
in the distance had a shimmer like that of water at evening. As she trod
this, with her face to the low sun, her tall grey figure had a pure air
that for the moment startled me--she looked unearthly. Then I swore
in scorn of myself, and at the next corner I had my reward. She was no
longer walking on. She had stopped, I found, and seated herself on a
fallen tree that lay in the ride.

For some time I stood in ambush watching her, and with each minute I
grew more impatient. At last I began to doubt--to have strange thoughts.
The green walls were growing dark. The sun was sinking; a sharp, white
peak, miles and miles away, which closed the vista of the ride, began
to flush and colour rosily. Finally, but not before I had had leisure to
grow uneasy, she stood up and walked on more slowly. I waited, as usual,
until the next turning hid her. Then I hastened after her, and, warily
passing round the corner came face to face with her!

I knew all in a moment saw all in a flash: that she had fooled me,
tricked me, lured me away. Her face was white with scorn, her eyes
blazed; her figure, as she confronted me, trembled with anger and
infinite contempt.

'You spy!' she cried. 'You hound! You--gentleman! Oh, MON DIEU! if you
are one of us--if you are really not of the CANAILLE--we shall pay for
this some day! We shall pay a heavy reckoning in the time to come! I did
not think,' she continued, and her every syllable was like the lash of a
whip, 'that there was anything so vile as you in this world!'

I stammered something--I do not know what. Her words burned into
me--into my heart! Had she been a man, I would have struck her dead!

'You thought that you deceived me yesterday,' she continued, lowering
her tone, but with no lessening of the passion, the contempt, the
indignation, which curled her lip and gave fullness to her voice. 'You
plotter! You surface trickster! You thought it an easy task to delude
a woman--you find yourself deluded. God give you shame that you may
suffer!' she continued mercilessly. 'You talked of Clon, but Clon beside
you is the most spotless, the most honourable of men!'

'Madame,' I said hoarsely--and I know that my face was grey as
ashes--'let us understand one another.'

'God forbid!' she cried on the instant. 'I would not soil myself!'

'Fie! Madame,' I said, trembling. But then, you are a woman. That should
cost a man his life!'

She laughed bitterly.

'You say well,' she retorted. 'I am not a man--and if you are one, thank
God for it. Neither am I Madame. Madame de Cocheforet has spent this
afternoon--thanks to your absence and your imbecility--with her husband.
Yes, I hope that hurts you!' she went on, savagely snapping her little
white teeth together. 'I hope that stings you; to spy and do vile work,
and do it ill, Monsieur Mouchard--Monsieur de Mouchard, I should say--I
congratulate you!'

'You are not Madame de Cocheforet?' I cried, stunned, even in the midst
of my shame and rage, by this blow.

'No, Monsieur!' she answered grimly. 'I am not! I am not. And permit me
to point out--for we do not all lie easily--that I never said I was. You
deceived yourself so skilfully that we had no need to trick you.'

'Mademoiselle, then?' I muttered.

'Is Madame!' she cried. 'Yes, and I am Mademoiselle de Cocheforet. And
in that character, and in all others, I beg from this moment to close
our acquaintance, sir. When we meet again--if we ever do meet, which God
forbid!' she went on, her eyes sparkling--'do not presume to speak to
me, or I will have you flogged by the grooms. And do not stain our roof
by sleeping under it again. You may lie to-night in the inn. It shall
not be said that Cocheforet,' she continued proudly, 'returned even
treachery with inhospitality; and I will give orders to that end. But
to-morrow begone back to your master, like the whipped cur you are! Spy
and coward!'

With those last words she moved away. I would have said something, I
could almost have found it in my heart to stop her and make her hear.
Nay, I had dreadful thoughts; for I was the stronger, and I might have
done with her as I pleased. But she swept by me so fearlessly, as I
might pass some loathsome cripple on the road, that I stood turned to
stone. Without looking at me, without turning her head to see whether
I followed or remained, or what I did, she went steadily down the track
until the trees and the shadow and the growing darkness hid her grey
figure from me; and I found myself alone.



CHAPTER V. REVENGE

And full of black rage! Had she only reproached me, or, turning on me in
the hour of MY victory, said all that she had now said in the moment
of her own, I could have borne it. She might have shamed me then, and I
might have taken the shame to myself and forgiven her. But, as it was,
I stood there in the gathering dusk, between the darkening hedges,
baffled, tricked, defeated! And by a woman! She had pitted her wits
against mine, her woman's will against my experience, and she had come
off the victor. And then she had reviled me! As I took it all in, and
began to comprehend also the more remote results, and how completely her
move had made further progress on my part impossible, I hated her. She
had tricked me with her gracious ways and her slow-coming smile. And,
after all--for what she had said--it was this man's life or mine. 'What
had I done that another man would not do? MON DIEU! in the future there
was nothing I would not do. I would make her smart for those words of
hers! I would bring her to her knees!

Still, hot as I was, an hour might have restored me to coolness. But
when I started to return, I fell into a fresh rage, for I remembered
that I did not know my way out of the maze of rides and paths into which
she had drawn me; and this and the mishaps which followed, kept my rage
hot. For a full hour I wandered in the wood, unable, though I knew
where the village lay, to find any track which led continuously in one
direction. Whenever, at the end of each attempt, the thicket brought me
up short, I fancied that I heard her laughing on the farther side of the
brake; and the ignominy of this chance punishment, and the check which
the confinement placed on my rage, almost maddened me. In the darkness I
fell, and rose cursing; I tore my hands with thorns; I stained my suit,
which had suffered sadly once before. At length, when I had almost
resigned myself to lie in the wood, I caught sight of the lights of the
village, and, trembling between haste and anger, pressed towards them.
In a few minutes I stood in the little street.

The lights of the inn shone only fifty yards away; but before I could
show myself even there pride suggested that I should do something to
repair my clothes. I stopped, and scraped and brushed them; and, at the
same time, did what I could to compose my features. Then I advanced to
the door and knocked. Almost on the instant the landlord's voice cried
from the inside, 'Enter, Monsieur!'

I raised the latch and went in. The man was alone, squatting over the
fire warming his hands. A black pot simmered on the ashes, As I entered
he raised the lid and peeped inside. Then he glanced over his shoulder.

'You expected me?' I said defiantly, walking to the hearth, and setting
one of my damp boots on the logs.

'Yes,' he answered, nodding curtly. 'Your supper is just ready. I
thought that you would be in about this time.'

He grinned as he spoke, and it was with difficulty I suppressed my
wrath.

'Mademoiselle de Cocheforet told you,' I said, affecting indifference,
'where I was?'

'Ay, Mademoiselle--or Madame,' he replied, grinning afresh.

So she had told him; where she had left me, and how she had tricked me!
She had, made me the village laughing-stock! My rage flashed out afresh
at the thought, and, at the sight of his mocking face, I raised my fist.

But he read the threat in my eyes, and was up in a moment, snarling,
with his hand on his knife.

'Not again, Monsieur!' he cried, in his vile patois. 'My head is sore
still raise your hand and I will rip you up as I would a pig!'

'Sit down, fool,' I said. 'I am not going to harm you. Where is your
wife?'

'About her business.'

'Which should be getting my supper,' I retorted.

He rose sullenly, and, fetching a platter, poured the mess of broth and
vegetables into it. Then he went to a cupboard and brought out a loaf of
black bread and a measure of wine, and set them also on the table.

'You see it,' he said laconically.

'And a poor welcome!' I replied.

He flamed into sudden passion at that. Leaning with both his hands on
the table he thrust his rugged face and blood-shot eyes close to mine.
His moustachios bristled, his beard trembled.

'Hark ye, sirrah!' he muttered, with sullen emphasis, 'be content! I
have my suspicions. And if it were not for my lady's orders I would
put a knife into you, fair or foul, this very night. You would lie
snug outside, instead of inside, and I do not think anyone would be the
worse. But as it is, be content. Keep a still tongue; and when you turn
your back on Cocheforet to-morrow keep it turned.'

'Tut! tut!' I said--but I confess that I was a little out of
countenance. 'Threatened men live long, you rascal!'

'In Paris!' he answered significantly. 'Not here, Monsieur.'

He straightened himself with that, nodded once, and went back to the
fire; and I shrugged my shoulders and began to eat, affecting to forget
his presence. The logs on the hearth burned sullenly, and gave no light.
The poor oil-lamp, casting weird shadows from wall to wall, served only
to discover the darkness. The room, with its low roof and earthen floor,
and foul clothes flung here and there, reeked of stale meals and garlic
and vile cooking. I thought of the parlour at Cocheforet, and the dainty
table, and the stillness, and the scented pot-herbs; and though I was
too old a soldier to eat the worse because my spoon lacked washing, I
felt the change, and laid it savagely at Mademoiselle's door.

The landlord, watching me stealthily from his place by the hearth, read
my thoughts and chuckled aloud.

'Palace fare, palace manners!' he muttered scornfully. 'Set a beggar on
horseback, and he will ride--back to the inn!'

'Keep a civil tongue, will you!' I answered, scowling at him.

'Have you finished?' he retorted.

I rose, without deigning to reply, and, going to the fire, drew off my
boots, which were wet through. He, on the instant, swept off the wine
and loaf to the cupboard, and then, coming back for the platter I had
used, took it, opened the back door, and went out, leaving the door
ajar. The draught which came in beat the flame of the lamp this way and
that, and gave the dingy, gloomy room an air still more miserable. I
rose angrily from the fire, and went to the door, intending to close it
with a bang.

But when I reached it, I saw something, between door and jamb, which
stayed my hand. The door led to a shed in which the housewife washed
pots and the like. I felt some surprise, therefore, when I found a light
there at this time of night; still more surprise when I saw what she was
doing.

She was seated on the mud floor, with a rush-light before her, and on
either side of her a high-piled heap of refuse and rubbish. From one
of these, at the moment I caught sight of her, she was sorting
things--horrible filthy sweepings of road or floor--to the other;
shaking and sifting each article as she passed it across, and then
taking up another and repeating the action with it, and so on--all
minutely, warily, with an air of so much patience and persistence that I
stood wondering. Some things--rags--she held up between her eyes and
the light, some she passed through her fingers, some she fairly tore
in pieces. And all the time her husband stood watching her greedily, my
platter still in his hand, as if her strange occupation fascinated him.

I stood looking, also, for half a minute, perhaps; then the man's
eye, raised for a single second to the door-way, met mine. He started,
muttered something to his wife, and, quick as thought, he kicked
the light out, leaving the shed in darkness. Cursing him for an
ill-conditioned fellow, I walked back to the fire, laughing. In a
twinkling he followed me, his face dark with rage. 'VENTRE-SAINT-GRIS!'
he exclaimed, thrusting himself close to me. 'Is not a man's house his
own?'

'It is, for me,' I answered coolly, shrugging my shoulders. 'And
his wife: if she likes to pick dirty rags at this hour, that is your
affair.'

'Pig of a spy!' he cried, foaming with rage.

I was angry enough at bottom, but I had nothing to gain by quarrelling
with the fellow; and I curtly bade him remember himself.

'Your mistress gave you orders,' I said contemptuously. 'Obey them.'

He spat on the floor, but at the same time he grew calmer.

'You are right there,' he answered spitefully. 'What matter, after all,
since you leave to-morrow at six? Your horse has been sent down, and
your baggage is above.'

'I will go to it,' I retorted. 'I want none of your company. Give me a
light, fellow!'

He obeyed reluctantly, and, glad to turn my back on him, I went up the
ladder, still wondering faintly, in the midst of my annoyance, what his
wife was about that my chance detection of her had so enraged him. Even
now he was not quite himself. He followed me with abuse, and, deprived
by my departure of any other means of showing his spite, fell to
shouting through the floor, bidding me remember six o'clock, and be
stirring; with other taunts, which did not cease until he had tired
himself out.

The sight of my belongings--which I had left a few hours before at the
Chateau--strewn about the floor of this garret, went some way towards
firing me again. But I was worn out. The indignities and mishaps of the
evening had, for once, crushed my spirit, and after swearing an oath or
two I began to pack my bags. Vengeance I would have; but the time and
manner I left for daylight thought. Beyond six o'clock in the morning I
did not look forward; and if I longed for anything it was for a little
of the good Armagnac I had wasted on those louts of merchants in the
kitchen below. It might have done me good now.

I had wearily strapped up one bag, and nearly filled the other, when I
came upon something which did, for the moment, rouse the devil in me.
This was the tiny orange-coloured sachet which Mademoiselle had dropped
the night I first saw her at the inn, and which, it will be remembered,
I picked up. Since that night I had not seen it, and had as good as
forgotten it. Now, as I folded up my other doublet, the one I had then
been wearing, it dropped from my pocket.

The sight of it recalled all--that night, and Mademoiselle's face in the
lantern light, and my fine plans, and the end of them; and, in a fit of
childish fury, the outcome of long suppressed passion, I snatched up
the sachet from the floor and tore it across and across, and flung the
pieces down. As they fell, a cloud of fine pungent dust burst from them,
and with the dust, something more solid, which tinkled sharply on
the boards, as it fell. I looked down to see what this was--perhaps I
already repented of my act; but for a moment I could see nothing. The
floor was grimy and uninviting, the light bad.

In certain moods, however, a man is obstinate about small things, and I
moved the taper nearer. As I did so a point of light, a flashing sparkle
that shone for a second among the dirt and refuse on the floor, caught
my eye. It was gone in a moment, but I had seen it. I stared, and
moved the light again, and the spark flashed out afresh, this time in
a different place. Much puzzled, I knelt, and, in a twinkling, found a
tiny crystal. Hard by it lay another--and another; each as large as
a fair-sized pea. I took up the three, and rose to my feet again, the
light in one hand, the crystals in the palm of the other.

They were diamonds! Diamonds of price! I knew it in a moment. As I moved
the taper to and fro above them, and watched the fire glow and tremble
in their depths, I knew that I held in my hand that which would buy the
crazy inn and all its contents a dozen times over! They were diamonds!
Gems so fine, and of so rare a water--or I had never seen gems--that
my hand trembled as I held them, and my head grew hot and my heart beat
furiously. For a moment I thought that I dreamed, that my fancy played
me some trick; and I closed my eyes and did not open them again for
a minute. But when I did, there they were, hard, real, and angular.
Convinced at last, in a maze of joy and fear, I closed my hand upon
them, and, stealing on tip-toe to the trap-door, laid first my saddle on
it and then my bags, and over all my cloak, breathing fast the while.

Then I stole back, and, taking up the light again, began to search the
floor, patiently, inch by inch, with naked feet, every sound making
me tremble as I crept hither and thither over the creaking boards. And
never was search more successful or better paid. In the fragments of the
sachet I found six smaller diamonds and a pair of rubies. Eight large
diamonds I found on the floor. One, the largest and last found, had
bounded away, and lay against the wall in the farthest corner. It took
me an hour to run that one to earth; but afterwards I spent another hour
on my hands and knees before I gave up the search, and, satisfied at
last that I had collected all, sat down on my saddle on the trap-door,
and, by the last flickering light of a candle which I had taken from my
bag, gloated over my treasure--a treasure worthy of fabled Golconda.

Hardly could I believe in its reality, even now. Recalling the jewels
which the English Duke of Buckingham wore on the occasion of his visit
to Paris in 1625, and whereof there was so much talk, I took these to
be as fine, though less in number. They should be worth fifteen thousand
crowns, more or less. Fifteen thousand crowns! And I held them in the
hollow of my hand--I, who was scarcely worth ten thousand sous.

The candle going out cut short my admiration. Left in the dark with
these precious atoms, my first thought was how I might dispose of them
safely; which I did, for the time, by secreting them in the lining of my
boot. My second thought turned on the question how they had come where I
had found them, among the powdered spice and perfumes in Mademoiselle de
Cocheforet's sachet.

A minute's reflection enabled me to come very near the secret, and at
the same time shed a flood of light on several dark places, What Clon
had been seeking on the path between the house and the village, what the
goodwife of the inn had sought among the sweepings of yard and floor,
I knew now the sachet--knew, too, what had caused the marked and sudden
anxiety I had noticed at the Chateau--the loss of this sachet.

And there for a while I came to a check But one step more up the ladder
of thought brought all in view. In a flash I guessed how the jewels had
come to be in the sachet; and that it was not Mademoiselle but M.
de Cocheforet who had mislaid them. I thought this last discovery
so important that I began to pace the room softly, unable, in my
excitement, to remain still.

Doubtless he had dropped the jewels in the hurry of his start from the
inn that night! Doubtless, too, he had carried them in that bizarre
hiding-place for the sake of safety, considering it unlikely that
robbers, if he fell into their hands, would take the sachet from him;
as still less likely that they would suspect it to contain anything
of value. Everywhere it would pass for a love-gift, the work of his
mistress.

Nor did my penetration stop there. I guessed that the gems were family
property, the last treasure of the house; and that M. de Cocheforet,
when I saw him at the inn, was on his way to convey them out of the
country; either to secure them from seizure by the Government, or to
raise money by selling them--money to be spent in some last desperate
enterprise. For a day or two, perhaps, after leaving Cocheforet, while
the mountain road and its chances occupied his thoughts, he had not
discovered his loss. Then he had searched for the precious sachet,
missed it, and returned hot-foot on his tracks.

The longer I considered the circumstances the more certain I was that
I had hit on the true solution; and all that night I sat wakeful in the
darkness, pondering what I should do. The stones, unset as they were,
could never be identified, never be claimed. The channel by which they
had come to my hands could never be traced. To all intents they were
mine; mine, to do with as I pleased! Fifteen thousand crowns, perhaps
twenty thousand crowns, and I to leave at six in the morning, whether I
would or no! I might leave for Spain with the jewels in my pocket. Why
not?

I confess I was tempted. And indeed the gems were so fine that I doubt
not some indifferently honest men would have sold salvation for them.
But--a Berault his honour? No. I was tempted, I say; but not for long.
Thank God, a man may be reduced to living by the fortunes of the dice,
and may even be called by a woman 'spy' and 'coward,' without becoming a
thief! The temptation soon left me--I take credit for it--and I fell to
thinking of this and that plan for making use of them. Once it occurred
to me to take the jewels to the Cardinal and buy my pardon with them;
again, to use them as a trap to capture Cocheforet; again, to--and then,
about five in the morning, as I sat up on my wretched pallet, while the
first light stole slowly in through the cobwebbed, hay-stuffed lattice,
there came to me the real plan, the plan of plans, on which I acted.

It charmed me I smacked my lips over it, and hugged myself, and felt my
eyes dilate in the darkness, as I conned it. It seemed cruel, it seemed
mean; I cared nothing. Mademoiselle had boasted of her victory over me,
of her woman's wits and her acuteness and of my dullness. She had said
that her grooms should flog me. She had rated me as if I had been a dog.
Very well; we would see now whose brains were the better, whose was the
master mind, whose should be the whipping.

The one thing required by my plan was that I should get speech with her;
that done, I could trust myself and my new-found weapon for the rest.
But that was absolutely necessary, and, seeing that there might be some
difficulty about it, I determined to descend as if my mind were made
up to go; then, on pretence of saddling my horse, I would slip away on
foot, and lie in wait near the Chateau until I saw her come out. Or if
I could not effect my purpose in that way--either by reason of the
landlord's vigilance, or for any other cause--my course was still easy.
I would ride away, and when I had proceeded a mile or so, tie up my
horse in the forest and return to the wooden bridge. Thence I could
watch the garden and front of the Chateau until time and chance gave me
the opportunity I sought.

So I saw my way quite clearly; and when the fellow below called me,
reminding me rudely that I must be going, and that it was six o'clock,
I was ready with my answer. I shouted sulkily that I was coming, and,
after a decent delay, I took up my saddle and bags and went down.

Viewed by the light of a cold morning, the inn-room looked more smoky,
more grimy, more wretched than when I had last seen it. The goodwife was
not visible. The fire was not lighted. No provision, not so much as a
stirrup-cup or bowl of porridge cheered the heart.

I looked round, sniffing the stale smell of last night's lamp, and
grunted.

'Are you going to send me out fasting?' I said, affecting a worse humour
than I felt.

The landlord was standing by the window, stooping over a great pair of
frayed and furrowed thigh-boots which he was labouring to soften with
copious grease.

'Mademoiselle ordered no breakfast,' he answered, with a malicious grin.

'Well it does not much matter,' I replied grandly. 'I shall be at Auch
by noon.'

'That is as may be,' he answered with another grin.

I did not understand him, but I had something else to think about, and I
opened the door and stepped out, intending to go to the stable. Then in
a second I comprehended. The cold air laden with woodland moisture
met me and went to my bones; but it was not that which made me shiver.
Outside the door, in the road, sitting on horseback in silence, were
two men. One was Clon. The other, who had a spare horse by the
rein--my horse--was a man I had seen at the inn, a rough, shock-headed,
hard-bitten fellow. Both were armed, and Clon was booted. His mate rode
barefoot, with a rusty spur strapped to one heel.

The moment I saw them a sure and certain fear crept into my mind: it was
that which made me shiver. But I did not speak to them. I went in again
and closed the door behind me. The landlord was putting on his boots.

'What does this mean?' I said hoarsely--though I had a clear prescience
of what was coming. 'Why are these men here?'

'Orders,' he answered laconically.

'Whose orders?' I retorted.

'Whose?' he answered bluntly. 'Well, Monsieur, that is my business.
Enough that we mean to see you out of the country, and out of harm's
way.'

'But if I will not go?' I cried.

'Monsieur will go,' he answered coolly. 'There are no strangers in the
village to-day,' he added, with a significant smile.

'Do you mean to kidnap me?' I replied, in a rage.

But behind the rage was something else--I will not call it terror, for
the brave feel no terror but it was near akin to it. I had had to do
with rough men all my life, but there was a grimness and truculence
in the aspect of these three that shook me. When I thought of the dark
paths and narrow lanes and cliff sides we must traverse, whichever road
we took, I trembled.

'Kidnap you, Monsieur?' he answered, with an every-day air. 'That is
as you please to call it. One thing is certain, however,' he continued,
maliciously touching an arquebuss which he had brought out, and set
upright against a chair while I was at the door; if you attempt the
slightest resistance, we shall know how to put an end to it, either here
or on the road.'

I drew a deep breath, the very imminence of the danger restoring me to
the use of my faculties. I changed my tone and laughed aloud.

'So that is your plan, is it?' I said. 'The sooner we start the better,
then. And the sooner I see Auch and your back turned, the more I shall
be pleased.'

He rose. 'After you, Monsieur,' he said.

I could not restrain a slight shiver. His new-born politeness alarmed me
more than his threats. I knew the man and his ways, and I was sure that
it boded ill to me.

But I had no pistols, and only my sword and knife, and I knew that
resistance at this point must be worse than vain. I went out jauntily,
therefore, the landlord coming after me with my saddle and bags.

The street was empty, save for the two waiting horsemen who sat in their
saddles looking doggedly before them, The sun had not yet risen, the air
was raw. The sky was grey, cloudy, and cold. My thoughts flew back to
the morning on which I had found the sachet--at that very spot, almost
at that very hour, and for a moment I grew warm again at the thought of
the little packet I carried in my boot. But the landlord's dry manner,
the sullen silence of his two companions, whose eyes steadily refused
to meet mine, chilled me again. For an instant the impulse to refuse
to mount, to refuse to go, was almost irresistible; then, knowing the
madness of such a course, which might, and probably would, give the
men the chance they desired, I crushed it down and went slowly to my
stirrup.

'I wonder you do not want my sword,' I said by way of sarcasm, as I
swung myself up.

'We are not afraid of it,' the innkeeper answered gravely. 'You may keep
it--for the present.'

I made no answer--what answer had I to make?--and we rode at a footpace
down the street; he and I leading, Clon and the shock-headed man
bringing up the rear. The leisurely mode of our departure, the absence
of hurry or even haste, the men's indifference whether they were seen,
or what was thought, all served to sink my spirits and deepen my sense
of peril. I felt that they suspected me, that they more than half
guessed the nature of my errand at Cocheforet, and that they were not
minded to be bound by Mademoiselle's orders. In particular, I augured
the worst from Clon's appearance. His lean malevolent face and sunken
eyes, his very dumbness chilled me. Mercy had no place there.

We rode soberly, so that nearly half an hour elapsed before we gained
the brow from which I had taken my first look at Cocheforet. Among
the dwarf oaks whence I had viewed the valley we paused to breathe our
horses, and the strange feelings with which I looked back on the scene
may be imagined. But I had short time for indulging in sentiment or
recollections. A curt word, and we were moving again.

A quarter of a mile farther on, the road to Auch dipped into the valley.
When we were already half way down this descent the innkeeper suddenly
stretched out his hand and caught my rein.

'This way!' he said.

I saw that he would have me turn into a by-path leading
south-westwards--a mere track, faint and little trodden and encroached
on by trees, which led I knew not whither. I checked my horse.

'Why?' I said rebelliously. 'Do you think I do not know the road? The
road we are in is the way to Auch.'

'To Auch--yes,' he answered bluntly. 'But we are not going to Auch,'

'Whither then?' I said angrily.

'You will see presently,' he replied with an ugly smile.

'Yes, but I will know now!' I retorted, passion getting the better of
me. 'I have come so far with you. You will find it more easy to take me
farther if you tell me your plans.'

'You are a fool!' he cried with a snarl.

'Not so,' I answered. 'I ask only to know whither I am going.'

'Into Spain,' he said. 'Will that satisfy you?'

'And what will you do with me there?' I asked, my heart giving a great
bound.

'Hand you over to some friends of ours,' he answered curtly, 'if you
behave yourself. If not, there is a shorter way, and one that will save
us some travelling. Make up your mind, Monsieur. Which shall it be?'



CHAPTER VI. So that was their plan. Two or three hours to the southward,
the long, white, glittering wall stretched east and west above the
brown woods. Beyond that lay Spain. Once across the border, I might be
detained, if no worse happened to me, as a prisoner of war; for we were
then at war with Spain on the Italian side. Or I might be handed over
to one of the savage bands, half smugglers, half brigands, that held the
passes; or be delivered, worse fate of all, into the power of the French
exiles, of whom some would be likely to recognise me and cut my throat.

'It is a long way into Spain,' I muttered, watching in a kind of
fascination Clon handling his pistols.

'I think you will find the other road longer still,' the landlord
answered grimly. 'But choose, and be quick about it.'

They were three to one, and they had firearms. In effect I had no
choice.

'Well, if I must I must?' I cried, making up my mind with seeming
recklessness. 'VOGUE LA GALERE! Spain be it. It will not be the first
time I have heard the dons talk.'

The men nodded, as much as to say that they had known what the end would
be; the landlord released my rein; and in a trice we were riding down
the narrow track, with our faces set towards the mountains.

On one point my mind was now more easy. The men meant fairly by me, and
I had no longer to fear, as I had feared, a pistol-shot in the back at
the first convenient ravine. As far as that went, I might ride in peace.
On the other hand, if I let them carry me across the border my fate
was sealed. A man set down without credentials or guards among the
wild desperadoes who swarmed in war-time in the Asturian passes might
consider himself fortunate if an easy death fell to his lot. In my case
I could make a shrewd guess what would happen. A single nod of meaning,
one muttered word, dropped among the savage men with whom I should
be left, and the diamonds hidden in my boot would go neither to the
Cardinal nor back to Mademoiselle--nor would it matter to me whither
they went.

So while the others talked in their taciturn fashion, or sometimes
grinned at my gloomy face, I looked out over the brown woods with eyes
that saw yet did not see. The red squirrel swarming up the trunk, the
startled pigs that rushed away grunting from their feast of mast, the
solitary rider who met us, armed to the teeth, and passed northwards
after whispering with the landlord--all these I saw. But my mind was not
with them. It was groping and feeling about like a hunted mole for
some way of escape. For time pressed. The slope we were on was growing
steeper. By-and-by we fell into a southward valley, and began to follow
it steadily upwards, crossing and recrossing a swiftly rushing stream.
The snow peaks began to be hidden behind the rising bulk of hills that
overhung us, and sometimes we could see nothing before or behind but the
wooded walls of our valley rising sheer and green a thousand paces high
on either hand; with grey rocks half masked by fern and ivy jutting here
and there through the firs and alders.

It was a wild and sombre scene even at that hour, with the mid-day sun
shining on the rushing water and drawing the scent out of the pines;
but I knew that there was worse to come, and sought desperately for some
ruse by which I might at least separate the men. Three were too many;
with one I might deal. At last, when I had cudgelled my brain for
an hour, and almost resigned myself to a sudden charge on the men
single-handed--a last desperate resort--I thought of a plan: dangerous,
too, and almost desperate, but which still seemed to promise something.
It came of my fingers resting, as they lay in my pocket, on the
fragments of the orange sachet; which, without having any particular
design in my mind, I had taken care to bring with me. I had torn the
sachet into four pieces--four corners. As I played mechanically with
them, one of my fingers fitted into one, as into a glove; a second
finger into another. And the plan came.

Before I could move in it, however, I had to wait until we stopped to
bait the flagging horses, which we did about noon at the head of the
valley. Then, pretending to drink from the stream, I managed to secure
unseen a handful of pebbles, slipping them into the same pocket with
the morsels of stuff. On getting to horse again, I carefully fitted a
pebble, not too tightly, into the largest scrap, and made ready for the
attempt.

The landlord rode on my left, abreast of me; the other two knaves
behind. The road at this stage favoured me, for the valley, which
drained the bare uplands that lay between the lower hills and the base
of the real mountains, had become wide and shallow. Here were no trees,
and the path was a mere sheep-track covered with short, crisp grass, and
running sometimes on this bank of the stream and sometimes on that.

I waited until the ruffian beside me turned to speak to the men behind.
The moment he did so, and his eyes were averted, I slipped out the scrap
of satin in which I had placed the pebble, and balancing it carefully on
my right thigh as I rode, I flipped it forward with all the strength
of my thumb and finger. I meant it to fall a few paces before us in the
path, where it could be seen. But alas for my hopes! At the critical
moment my horse started, my finger struck the scrap aslant, the pebble
flew out, and the bit of stuff fluttered into a whin-bush close to my
stirrup--and was lost!

I was bitterly disappointed, for the same thing might happen again, and
I had now only three scraps left. But fortune favoured me, by putting
it into my neighbour's head to plunge into a hot debate with the
shock-headed man on the nature of some animals seen on a distant brow;
which he said were izards, while the other maintained that they were
common goats. He continued, on this account, to ride with his face
turned from me, and I had time to fit another pebble into the second
piece of stuff. Sliding it on to my thigh, I poised it, and flipped it.

This time my finger struck the tiny missile fairly in the middle, and
shot it so far and so truly that it dropped exactly in the path ten
paces in front of us. The moment I saw it fall I kicked my neighbour's
nag in the ribs; it started, and he, turning in a rage, hit it. The next
instant he pulled it almost on to its haunches.

'SAINT GRIS!' he cried; and sat glaring at the bit of yellow satin, with
his face turned purple and his jaw fallen.

'What is it!' I said, staring at him in turn, 'What is the matter,
fool?'

'Matter?' he blurted out. 'MON DIEU!'

But Clon's excitement surpassed even his. The dumb man no sooner
saw what had attracted his comrade's attention, than he uttered an
inarticulate and horrible noise, and tumbling off his horse, more like a
beast than a man threw himself bodily on the precious morsel.

The innkeeper was not far behind him. An instant and he was down, too,
peering at the thing; and for an instant I thought that they would fight
over it. However, though their jealousy was evident, their excitement
cooled a little when they discovered that the scrap of stuff was empty;
for, fortunately, the pebble had fallen out of it. Still, it threw them
into such a fever of eagerness as it was wonderful to witness. They
nosed the ground where it had lain, they plucked up the grass and turf,
and passed it through their fingers, they ran to and fro like dogs on a
trail; and, glancing askance at one another, came back always together
to the point of departure. Neither in his jealousy would suffer the
other to be there alone.

The shock-headed man and I sat our horses and looked on; he marvelling,
and I pretending to marvel. As the two searched up and down the path,
we moved a little out of it to give them space; and presently, when
all their heads were turned from me, I let a second morsel drop under a
gorse-bush. The shock-headed man, by-and-by, found this, and gave it to
Clon; and as from the circumstances of the first discovery no suspicion
attached to me, I ventured to find the third and last scrap myself. I
did not pick it up, but I called the innkeeper, and he pounced upon it
as I have seen a hawk pounce on a chicken.

They hunted for the fourth morsel, but, of course, in vain, and in the
end they desisted, and fitted the three they had together; but neither
would let his own portion out of his hands, and each looked at the other
across the spoil with eyes of suspicion. It was strange to see them in
that wide-stretching valley, whence grey boar-backs of hills swelled
up into the silence of the snow--it was strange, I say, in that vast
solitude, to see these two, mere dots on its bosom, circling round
one another in fierce forgetfulness of the outside world, glaring
and shifting their ground like cocks about to engage, and wholly
engrossed--by three scraps of orange-colour, invisible at fifty paces!

At last the innkeeper cried with an oath, 'I am going back. This must
be known down yonder. Give me your pieces, man, and do you go on with
Antoine. It will be all right.'

But Clon, waving a scrap of the stuff in either hand, and thrusting his
ghastly mask into the other's face, shook his head in passionate denial.
He could not speak, but he made it as clear as daylight that if anyone
went back with the news, he was the man to go.

'Nonsense!' the landlord rejoined fiercely, 'We cannot leave Antoine to
go on alone with him. Give me the stuff.'

But Clon would not. He had no thought of resigning the credit of the
discovery; and I began to think that the two would really come to blows.
But there was an alternative--an alternative in which I was concerned;
and first one and then the other looked at me. It was a moment of peril,
and I knew it. My stratagem might react on myself, and the two, to put
an end to their difficulty, agree to put an end to me. But I faced them
so coolly, and showed so bold a front, and the ground where we stood was
so open, that the idea took no root. They fell to wrangling again more
viciously than before. One tapped his gun and the other his pistols. The
landlord scolded, the dumb man gurgled. At last their difference ended
as I had hoped it would.

'Very well then, we will both go back!' the innkeeper cried in a rage.
'And Antoine must see him on. But the blame be on your head. Do you give
the lad your pistols.'

Clon took one pistol, and gave it to the shock-headed man.

'The other!' the innkeeper said impatiently.

But Clon shook his head with a grim smile, and pointed to the arquebuss.

By a sudden movement, the landlord snatched the pistol, and averted
Clon's vengeance by placing both it and the gun in the shock-headed
man's hands.

'There!' he said, addressing the latter, 'now can you do? If Monsieur
tries to escape or turn back, shoot him! But four hours' riding should
bring you to the Roca Blanca. You will find the men there, and will have
no more to do with it.'

Antoine did not see things quite in that light, however. He looked at
me, and then at the wild track in front of us; and he muttered an oath
and said he would die if he would.

But the landlord, who was in a frenzy of impatience, drew him aside
and talked to him, and in the end seemed to persuade him; for in a few
minutes the matter was settled.

Antoine came back, and said sullenly, 'Forward, Monsieur,' the two
others stood on one side, I shrugged my shoulders and kicked up my
horse, and in a twinkling we two were riding on together--man to man.
I turned once or twice to see what those we had left behind were doing,
and always found them standing in apparent debate; but my guard showed
so much jealousy of these movements that I presently shrugged my
shoulders again and desisted.

I had racked my brains to bring about this state of things. Strange to
say, now I had succeeded, I found it less satisfactory than I had hoped.
I had reduced the odds and got rid of my most dangerous antagonists; but
Antoine, left to himself, proved to be as full of suspicion as an egg of
meat. He rode a little behind me, with his gun across his saddlebow, and
a pistol near his hand; and at the slightest pause on my part, or if I
turned to look at him, he muttered his constant 'Forward, Monsieur!'
in a tone which warned me that his finger was on the trigger. At such a
distance he could not miss; and I saw nothing for it but to go on meekly
before him to the Roca Blanca--and my fate.

What was to be done? The road presently reached the end of the valley
and entered a narrow pine-clad defile, strewn with rocks and boulders,
over which the torrent plunged and eddied with a deafening roar. In
front the white gleam of waterfalls broke the sombre ranks of climbing
trunks. The snow line lay less than half a mile away on either hand; and
crowning all--at the end of the pass, as it seemed to the eye--rose the
pure white pillar of the Pic du Midi shooting up six thousand feet into
the blue of heaven. Such a scene so suddenly disclosed, was enough to
drive the sense of danger from my mind; and for a moment I reined in my
horse. But 'Forward, Monsieur!' came the grating order. I fell to earth
again, and went on. What was to be done?

I was at my wits' end to know. The man refused to talk, refused to ride
abreast of me, would have no dismounting, no halting, no communication
at all. He would have nothing but this silent, lonely procession of
two, with the muzzle of his gun at my back. And meanwhile we were fast
climbing the pass. We had left the others an hour--nearly two. The sun
was declining; the time, I supposed, about half-past three.

If he would only let me come within reach of him! Or if anything would
fall out to take his attention! When the pass presently widened into a
bare and dreary valley, strewn with huge boulders and with snow lying
here and there in the hollows, I looked desperately before me, and
scanned even the vast snow-fields that overhung us and stretched away
to the base of the ice-peak. But I saw nothing. No bear swung across the
path, no izard showed itself on the cliffs. The keen, sharp air cut our
cheeks and warned me that we were approaching the summit of the ridge.
On all sides were silence and desolation.

MON DIEU! And the ruffians on whose tender mercies I was to be thrown
might come to meet us! They might appear at any moment. In my despair
I loosened my hat on my head, and let the first gust carry it to the
ground, and then with an oath of annoyance tossed my feet from the
stirrups to go after it. But the rascal roared to me to keep my seat.

'Forward, Monsieur!' he shouted brutally. 'Go on!'

'But my hat!' I cried. 'MILLE TONNERRES, man! I must--'

'Forward, Monsieur, or I shoot!' he replied inexorably raising his gun.
'One--two--'

And I went on. But, ah, I was wrathful! That I, Gil de Berault, should
be outwitted, and led by the nose like a ringed bull, by this Gascon
lout! That I, whom all Paris knew and feared--if it did not love--the
terror of Zaton's, should come to my end in this dismal waste of snow
and rock, done to death by some pitiful smuggler or thief! It must not
be. Surely in the last resort I could give an account of one man, though
his belt were stuffed with pistols.

But how? Only, it seemed, by open force. My heart began to flutter as
I planned it; and then grew steady again. A hundred paces before us a
gully or ravine on the left ran up into the snow-field. Opposite its
mouth a jumble of stones and broken rocks covered the path, I marked
this for the place. The knave would need both his hands to hold up his
nag over the stones, and, if I turned on him suddenly enough, he might
either drop his gun or fire it harmlessly.

But, in the meantime, something happened; as, at the last moment, things
do happen. While we were still fifty yards short of the place, I found
his horse's nose creeping forward on a level with my crupper; and, still
advancing, still advancing, until I could see it out of the tail of my
eye, and my heart gave a great bound. He was coming abreast of me: he
was going to deliver himself into my hands! To cover my excitement, I
began to whistle.

'Hush!' he muttered fiercely, his voice sounding so strange and
unnatural, that my first thought was that he was ill; and I turned to
him. But he only said again,--

'Hush! Pass by here quietly, Monsieur.'

'Why?' I asked mutinously, curiosity getting the better of me. For had
I been wise I had taken no notice; every second his horse was coming up
with mine. Its nose was level with my stirrup already.

'Hush, man!' he said again. This time there was no mistake about the
panic in his voice. 'They call this the Devil's Chapel, God send us safe
by it! It is late to be here. Look at those!' he continued, pointing
with a finger which visibly shook.

I looked. At the mouth of the gully, in a small space partly cleared of
stones, stood three broken shafts, raised on rude pedestals.

'Well?' I said in a low voice. The sun, which was near setting, flushed
the great peak above to the colour of blood; but the valley was growing
grey and each moment more dreary. 'Well, what of those?' I said.

In spite of my peril and the excitement of the coming struggle I
felt the chill of his fear. Never had I seen so grim, so desolate, so
God-forsaken a place! Involuntarily I shivered.

'They were crosses,' he muttered in a voice little above a whisper,
while his eyes roved this way and that in terror. 'The Cure of Gabas
blessed the place, and set them up. But next morning they were as you
see them now. Come on, Monsieur; come on!' he continued, plucking at my
arm. 'It is not safe here after sunset. Pray God, Satan be not at home!'

He had completely forgotten in his panic that he had anything to fear
from me. His gun dropped loosely across his saddle, his leg rubbed mine.
I saw this, and I changed my plan of action. As our horses reached the
stones I stooped, as if to encourage mine, and, with a sudden clutch,
snatched the gun bodily from his hand, at the same time that I backed my
horse with all my strength. It was done in a moment! A second and I had
him at the end of the gun, and my finger was on the trigger. Never was
victory more easily gained.

He looked at me between rage and terror, his jaw fallen.

'Are you mad?' he cried, his teeth chattering as he spoke. Even in this
strait his eyes left me and wandered round in alarm.

'No, sane!' I retorted fiercely. 'But I do not like this place any
better than you do.' Which was true enough, if not quite true. 'So, by
your right, quick march!' I continued imperatively. 'Turn your horse, my
friend, or take the consequences.'

He turned like a lamb, and headed down the valley again, without giving
a thought to his pistols. I kept close to him, and in less than a minute
we had left the Devil's Chapel well behind us, and were moving down
again as we had come up. Only now I held the gun.

When we had gone have a mile or so--until then I did not feel
comfortable myself, and though I thanked heaven that the place existed,
I thanked heaven also that I was out of it--I bade him halt.

'Take off your belt,' I said curtly, 'and throw it down. But, mark me,
if you turn I fire.'

The spirit was quite gone out of him, and he obeyed mechanically. I
jumped down, still covering him with the gun, and picked up the belt,
pistols and all. Then I remounted, and we went on. By-and-by he asked me
sullenly what I was going to do.

'Go back,' I said, 'and take the road to Auch when I come to it.'

'It will be dark in an hour,' he answered sulkily.

'I know that,' I retorted. 'We must camp and do the best we can.'

And as I said, we did. The daylight held until we gained the skirts of
the pine-wood at the head of the pass. Here I chose a corner a little
off the track, and well sheltered from the wind, and bade him light a
fire. I tethered the horses near this and within sight. Then it remained
only to sup. I had a piece of bread: he had another and an onion. We ate
in silence, sitting on opposite sides of the fire.

But after supper I found myself in a dilemma; I did not see how I was
to sleep. The ruddy light which gleamed on the knave's swart face and
sinewy hands showed also his eyes, black, sullen, and watchful. I knew
that the man was plotting revenge; that he would not hesitate to plant
his knife between my ribs should I give him the chance; and I could find
only one alternative to remaining awake. Had I been bloody-minded, I
should have chosen it and solved the question at once and in my favour
by shooting him as he sat.

But I have never been a cruel man, and I could not find it in my heart
to do this. The silence of the mountain and the sky-which seemed a thing
apart from the roar of the torrent and not to be broken by it--awed
me. The vastness of the solitude in which we sat, the dark void above,
through which the stars kept shooting, the black gulf below in which the
unseen waters boiled and surged, the absence of other human company or
other signs of human existence, put such a face upon the deed that I
gave up the thought of it with a shudder, and resigned myself, instead,
to watch through the night--the long, cold, Pyrenean night. Presently
he curled himself up like a dog and slept in the blaze, and then for a
couple of hours I sat opposite him, thinking. It seemed years since
I had seen Zaton's or thrown the dice. The old life, the old
employments--should I ever go back to them?--seemed dim and distant.
Would Cocheforet, the forest and the mountain, the grey Chateau and its
mistresses, seem one day as dim? And if one bit of life could fade
so quickly at the unrolling of another, and seem in a moment pale and
colourless, would all life some day and somewhere, and all the things
we--But enough! I was growing foolish. I sprang up and kicked the wood
together, and, taking up the gun, began to pace to and fro under
the cliff. Strange that a little moonlight, a few stars, a breath of
solitude should carry a man back to childhood and childish things.

. . . . . .

It was three in the afternoon of the next day, and the sun lay hot on
the oak groves, and the air was full of warmth as we began to climb the
slope, midway up which the road to Auch shoots out of the track. The
yellow bracken and the fallen leaves underfoot seemed to throw up light
of themselves; and here and there a patch of ruddy beech lay like a
bloodstain on the hillside. In front a herd of pigs routed among the
mast, and grunted lazily; and high above us a boy lay watching them. 'We
part here,' I said to my companion.

It was my plan to ride a little way along the road to Auch so as to
blind his eyes; then, leaving my horse in the forest, I would go on foot
to the Chateau. 'The sooner the better!' he answered with a snarl. 'And
I hope I may never see your face again, Monsieur.'

But when we came to the wooden cross at the fork of the roads, and were
about to part, the boy we had seen leapt out of the fern and came to
meet us.

'Hollo!' he cried in a sing-song tone.

'Well,' my companion answered, drawing rein impatiently. 'What is it?'

'There are soldiers in the village.'

'Soldiers,' Antoine cried incredulously.

'Ay, devils on horseback,' the lad answered, spitting on the ground.
'Three score of them. From Auch.'

Antoine turned to me, his face transformed with fury.

'Curse you!' he cried. 'This is some of your work. Now we are all
undone. And my mistresses? SACRE! if I had that gun I would shoot you
like a rat.'

'Steady, fool,' I answered roughly. 'I know no more of this than you
do.'

Which was so true that my surprise was at least as great as his, and
better grounded. The Cardinal, who rarely made a change of front, had
sent me hither that he might not be forced to send soldiers, and run
the risk of all that might arise from such a movement. What of this
invasion, then, than which nothing could be less consistent with his
plans? I wondered. It was possible that the travelling merchants, before
whom I had played at treason, had reported the facts; and that on this
the Commandant at Auch had acted. But it seemed unlikely since he had
had his orders too, and under the Cardinal's rule there was small place
for individual enterprise. Frankly I could not understand it, and found
only one thing clear; I might now enter the village as I pleased.

'I am going on to look into this,' I said to Antoine. 'Come, my man.' He
shrugged his shoulders, and stood still.

'Not I!' he answered, with an oath. 'No soldiers for me I have lain out
one night, and I can lie out another.'

I nodded indifferently, for I no longer wanted him; and we parted. After
this, twenty minutes' riding brought me to the entrance of the village,
and here the change was great indeed. Not one of the ordinary dwellers
in the place was to be seen: either they had shut themselves up in their
hovels, or, like Antoine, they had fled to the woods. Their doors were
closed, their windows shuttered. But lounging about the street were
a score of dragoons, in boots and breastplates, whose short-barrelled
muskets, with pouches and bandoliers attached, were piled near the inn
door. In an open space, where there was a gap in the street, a long row
of horses, linked head to head, stood bending their muzzles over bundles
of rough forage; and on all sides the cheerful jingle of chains and
bridles and the sound of coarse jokes and laughter filled the air.

As I rode up to the inn door an old sergeant, with squinting eyes and
his tongue in his cheek, scanned me inquisitively, and started to cross
the street to challenge me. Fortunately, at that moment the two knaves
whom I had brought from Paris with me, and whom I had left at Auch to
await my orders, came up. I made them a sign not to speak to me, and
they passed on; but I suppose that they told the sergeant that I was not
the man he wanted, for I saw no more of him.

After picketing my horse behind the inn--I could find no better stable,
every place being full--I pushed my way through the group at the door,
and entered. The old room, with the low, grimy roof and the reeking
floor, was half full of strange figures, and for a few minutes I stood
unseen in the smoke and confusion. Then the landlord came my way, and
as he passed me I caught his eye. He uttered a low curse, dropped the
pitcher he was carrying, and stood glaring at me like a man possessed.

The soldier whose wine he was carrying flung a crust in his face,
with,--

'Now, greasy fingers! What are you staring at?'

'The devil!' the landlord muttered, beginning to tremble.

'Then let me look at him!' the man retorted, and he turned on his stool.

He started, finding me standing over him.

'At your service!' I said grimly. 'A little time and it will be the
other way, my friend.



CHAPTER VII. A MASTER STROKE

I have a way with me which commonly commands respect; and when the
landlord's first terror was over and he would serve me, I managed to get
my supper--the first good meal I had had in two days--pretty comfortably
in spite of the soldiers' presence. The crowd, too, which filled the
room, soon began to melt. The men strayed off in groups to water their
horses, or went to hunt up their quarters, until only two or three were
left. Dusk had fallen outside; the noise in the street grew less. The
firelight began to glow and flicker on the walls, and the wretched room
to look as homely as it was in its nature to look. I was pondering for
the twentieth time what step I should take next, and questioning why
the soldiers were here, and whether I should let the night pass before
I moved, when the door, which had been turning on its hinges almost
without pause for an hour, opened again, and a woman came in.

She paused a moment on the threshold looking round, and I saw that she
had a shawl on her head and a milk-pitcher in her hand, and that her
feet and ankles were bare. There was a great rent in her coarse stuff
petticoat, and the hand which held the shawl together was brown and
dirty. More I did not see: for, supposing her to be a neighbour stolen
in, now that the house was quiet, to get some milk for her child or
the like, I took no farther heed of her. I turned to the fire again and
plunged into my thoughts.

But to get to the hearth where the goodwife was fidgeting the woman had
to pass in front of me; and as she passed I suppose that she stole a
look at me from under her shawl. For just when she came between me and
the blaze she uttered a low cry and shrank aside--so quickly that she
almost stepped on the hearth. The next moment she turned her back to
me, and was stooping whispering in the housewife's ear. A stranger might
have thought that she had trodden on a hot ember.

But another idea, and a very strange one, came into my mind; and I
stood up silently. The woman's back was towards me, but something in her
height, her shape, the pose of her head hidden as it was by her shawl,
seemed familiar. I waited while she hung over the fire whispering, and
while the goodwife slowly filled her pitcher out of the great black pot.
But when she turned to go, I took a step forward so as to bar her way.
And our eyes met.

I could not see her features; they were lost in the shadow of the hood.
But I saw a shiver run through her from head to foot. And I knew then
that I had made no mistake.

'That is too heavy for you, my girl,' I said familiarly, as I might have
spoken to a village wench. 'I will carry it for you.'

One of the men, who remained lolling at the table, laughed, and the
other began to sing a low song. The woman trembled in rage or fear; but
she kept silence and let me take the jug from her hands; and when I went
to the door and opened it, she followed mechanically. An instant, and
the door fell to behind us, shutting off the light and glow, and we two
stood together in the growing dusk.

'It is late for you to be out, Mademoiselle,' I said politely. 'You
might meet with some rudeness, dressed as you are. Permit me to see you
home.'

She shuddered, and I thought that I heard her sob, but she did not
answer. Instead, she turned and walked quickly through the village in
the direction of the Chateau, keeping in the shadow of the houses. I
carried the pitcher and walked close to her, beside her; and in the dark
I smiled. I knew how shame and impotent rage were working in her. This
was something like revenge!

Presently I spoke.

'Well, Mademoiselle,' I said, 'where are your grooms?'

She gave me one look, her eyes blazing with anger, her face like hate
itself; and after that I said no more, but left her in peace, and
contented myself with walking at her shoulder until we came to the end
of the village, where the track to the great house plunged into the
wood. There she stopped, and turned on me like a wild creature at bay.

'What do you want?' she cried hoarsely, breathing as if she had been
running.

'To see you safe to the house,' I answered coolly. 'Alone you might be
insulted.'

'And if I will not?' she retorted.

'The choice does not lie with you, Mademoiselle,' I answered sternly,
'You will go to the house with me, and on the way you will give me an
interview--late as it is; but not here. Here we are not private enough.
We may be interrupted at any moment, and I wish to speak to you at
length.'

'At length?' she muttered.

'Yes, Mademoiselle.'

I saw her shiver. 'What if I will not?' she said again.

'I might call to the nearest soldiers and tell them who you are,' I
answered coolly. 'I might do that, but I should not. That were a clumsy
way of punishing you, and I know a better way. I should go to the
Captain, Mademoiselle, and tell him whose horse is locked up in the inn
stable. A trooper told me--as someone had told him--that it belonged
to one of his officers; but I looked through the crack, and I knew the
horse again.'

She could not repress a groan. I waited; still she did not speak.

'Shall I go to the Captain?' I said ruthlessly.

She shook the hood back from her face and looked at me.

'Oh, you coward! you coward!' she hissed through her teeth. 'If I had a
knife!'

'But you have not, Mademoiselle,' I answered, unmoved. 'Be good enough,
therefore, to make up your mind which it is to be. Am I to go with my
news to the captain, or am I to come with you?'

'Give me the pitcher,' she said harshly.

I did so, wondering. In a moment she flung it with a savage gesture far
into the bushes.

'Come!' she said, 'if you will. But some day God will punish you!'

Without another word she turned and entered the path through the trees,
and I followed her. I suppose that every one of its windings, every
hollow and broken place in it had been known to her from childhood, for
she followed it swiftly and unerringly, barefoot as she was. I had to
walk fast through the darkness to keep up with her. The wood was quiet,
but the frogs were beginning to croak in the pool, and their persistent
chorus reminded me of the night when I had come to the house-door, hurt
and worn out, and Clon had admitted me, and she had stood under the
gallery in the hall. Things had looked dark then. I had seen but a very
little way ahead then. Now all was plain. The commandant might be here
with all his soldiers, but it was I who held the strings.

We came to the little wooden bridge and saw beyond the dark meadows the
lights of the house. All the windows were bright. Doubtless the troopers
were making merry.

'Now, Mademoiselle,' I said quietly, 'I must trouble you to stop here,
and give me your attention for a few minutes. Afterwards you may go your
way.'

'Speak!' she said defiantly. 'And be quick! I cannot breathe the air
where you are! It poisons me!'

'Ah!' I said slowly. 'Do you think that you make things better by such
speeches as those?'

'Oh!' she cried and I heard her teeth click together. 'Would you have me
fawn on you?'

'Perhaps not,' I answered. 'Still you make one mistake.'

'What is it?' she panted.

'You forget that I am to be feared as well as--loathed, Mademoiselle!
Ay, Mademoiselle, to be feared!' I continued grimly. 'Do you think that
I do not know why you are here in this guise? Do you think that I do not
know for whom that pitcher of broth was intended? Or who will now have
to fast to-night? I tell you I know all these things. Your house was
full of soldiers; your servants were watched and could not leave. You
had to come yourself and get food for him?'

She clutched at the handrail of the bridge, and for an instant clung
to it for support. Her face, from which the shawl had fallen, glimmered
white in the shadow of the trees. At last I had shaken her pride. At
last!

'What is your price?' she murmured faintly.

'I am going to tell you,' I replied, speaking so that every word might
fall distinctly on her ears, and sating my eyes the while on her proud
face. I had never dreamed of such revenge as this! 'About a fortnight
ago, M. de Cocheforet left here at night with a little orange-coloured
sachet in his possession.'

She uttered a stifled cry, and drew herself stiffly erect.

'It contained--but there, Mademoiselle, you know its contents,' I went
on. 'Whatever they were, M. de Cocheforet lost it and them at starting.
A week ago he came back--unfortunately for himself--to seek them.'

She was looking full in my face now. She seemed scarcely to breathe in
the intensity of her surprise and expectation.

'You had a search made, Mademoiselle,' I continued quietly. 'Your
servants left no place unexplored The paths, the roads, the very woods
were ransacked, But in vain, because all the while the orange sachet lay
whole and unopened in my pocket.'

'No!' she cried impetuously. 'There, you lie sir, as usual! The sachet
was found, torn open, many leagues from this place!'

'Where I threw it, Mademoiselle,' I replied, 'that I might mislead your
rascals and be free to return to you. Oh! believe me,' I continued,
letting something of my true self, something of my triumph, appear at
last in my voice. 'You have made a mistake! You would have done better
had you trusted me. I am no bundle of sawdust, Mademoiselle, though once
you got the better of me, but a man; a man with an arm to shield and a
brain to serve, and--as I am going to teach you--a heart also!'

She shivered.

'In the orange-coloured sachet that you lost I believe that there were
eighteen stones of great value?'

She made no answer, but she looked at me as if I fascinated her. Her
very breath seemed to pause and wait on my words. She was so little
conscious of anything else, of anything outside ourselves, that a score
of men might have come up behind her, unseen and unnoticed.



CHAPTER VIII. A MASTER STROKE--Continued

I took from my breast a little packet wrapped in soft leather, and I
held it towards her.

'Will you open this?' I said. 'I believe that it contains what your
brother lost. That it contains all I will not answer, Mademoiselle,
because I spilled the stones on the floor of my room, and I may have
failed to find some. But the others can be recovered; I know where they
are.'

She took the packet slowly and began to unroll it, her fingers shaking.
A few turns and the mild lustre of the stones shone out, making a kind
of moonlight in her hands--such a shimmering glory of imprisoned light
as has ruined many a woman and robbed many a man of his honour. MORBLEU!
as I looked at them and as she stood looking at them in dull, entranced
perplexity--I wondered how I had come to resist the temptation.

While I gazed her hands began to waver.

'I cannot count,' she muttered helplessly. 'How many are there?'

'In all, eighteen.'

'There should be eighteen,' she said.

She closed her hand on them with that, and opened it again, and did so
twice, as if to reassure herself that the stones were real and that she
was not dreaming. Then she turned to me with sudden fierceness, and I
saw that her beautiful face, sharpened by the greed of possession, was
grown as keen and vicious as before.

'Well?' she muttered between her teeth.

'Your price, man? Your price?'

'I am coming to it now, Mademoiselle,' I said gravely. 'It is a simple
matter. You remember the afternoon when I followed you--clumsily and
thoughtlessly perhaps--through the wood to restore these things? In
seeming that happened about a month ago. I believe that it happened the
day before yesterday. You called me then some very harsh names, which I
will not hurt you by repeating. The only price I ask for the restoration
of your jewels is that you on your part recall those names.'

'How?' she muttered. 'I do not understand.'

I repeated my words very slowly. 'The only price or reward I ask,
Mademoiselle, is that you take back those names and say that they were
not deserved.'

'And the jewels?' she exclaimed hoarsely.

'They are yours. They are not mine. They are nothing to me. Take them,
and say that you do not think of me--Nay, I cannot say the words,
Mademoiselle.'

'But there is something--else! What else?' she cried, her head thrown
back, her eyes, bright as any wild animal's, searching mine. 'Ha! my
brother? What of him? What of him, sir?'

'For him, Mademoiselle--I would prefer that you should tell me no more
than I know already,' I answered in a low voice. 'I do not wish to be in
that affair. But yes; there is one thing I have not mentioned. You are
right.'

She sighed so deeply that I caught the sound.

'It is,' I continued slowly, 'that you will permit me to remain at
Cocheforet for a few days while the soldiers are here. I am told that
there are twenty men and two officers quartered in your house. Your
brother is away. I ask to be permitted, Mademoiselle, to take his place
for the time, and to be privileged to protect your sister and yourself
from insult. That is all.'

She raised her hand to her head. After a long pause,--

'The frogs!' she muttered, 'they croak! I can not hear.'

Then, to my surprise, she turned quickly and suddenly on her heel, and
walked over the bridge, leaving me standing there. For a moment I stood
aghast, peering after her shadowy figure, and wondering what had taken
her. Then, in a minute or less, she came quickly back to me, and I
understood. She was crying.

'M. de Barthe,' she said, in a trembling voice, which told me that the
victory was won, 'is there nothing else? Have you no other penance for
me?'

'None, Mademoiselle.'

She had drawn the shawl over her head, and I no longer saw her face.

'That is all you ask?' she murmured.

'That is all I ask--now,' I answered.

'It is granted,' she said slowly and firmly. 'Forgive me if I seem to
speak lightly--if I seem to make little of your generosity or my shame;
but I can say no more now. I am so deep in trouble and so gnawed by
terror that--I cannot feel anything keenly to-night, either shame or
gratitude. I am in a dream; God grant that it may pass as a dream!
We are sunk in trouble. But for you and what you have done, M. de
Barthe--I--' she paused and I heard her fighting with the sobs which
choked her--'forgive me... I am overwrought. And my--my feet are cold,'
she added, suddenly and irrelevantly. 'Will you take me home?'

'Ah, Mademoiselle,' I cried remorsefully, 'I have been a beast! You are
barefoot, and I have kept you here.'

'It is nothing,' she said in a voice which thrilled me. 'My heart is
warm, Monsieur--thanks to you. It is many hours since it has been as
warm.'

She stepped out of the shadow as she spoke--and there, the thing was
done. As I had planned, so it had come about. Once more I was crossing
the meadow in the dark to be received at Cocheforet, a welcome guest.
The frogs croaked in the pool and a bat swooped round us in circles;
and surely never--never, I thought, with a kind of exultation in my
breast--had man been placed in a stranger position.

Somewhere in the black wood behind us--probably in the outskirts of the
village--lurked M. de Cocheforet. In the great house before us, outlined
by a score of lighted windows, were the soldiers come from Auch to take
him. Between the two, moving side by side in the darkness, in a silence
which each found to be eloquent, were Mademoiselle and I: she who knew
so much, I who knew all--all but one little thing!

We reached the house, and I suggested that she should steal in first by
the way she had come out, and that I should wait a little and knock at
the door when she had had time to explain matters to Clon.

'They do not let me see Clon,' she answered slowly.

'Then your woman must tell him,' I rejoined, 'or he may do something and
betray me.'

'They will not let our women come to us.'

'What?' I cried, astonished. 'But this is infamous. You are not
prisoners!'

Mademoiselle laughed harshly.

'Are we not? Well, I suppose not; for if we wanted company, Captain
Larolle said that he would be delighted to see us--in the parlour.'

'He has taken your parlour?' I said.

'He and his lieutenant sit there. But I suppose that we rebels should be
thankful,' she added bitterly; 'we have still our bedrooms left to us.'

'Very well,' I said. 'Then I must deal with Clon as I can. But I have
still a favour to ask, Mademoiselle. It is only that you and your sister
will descend to-morrow at your usual time. I shall be in the parlour.'

'I would rather not,' she said, pausing and speaking in a troubled
voice.

'Are you afraid?'

'No, Monsieur, I am not afraid,' she answered proudly, 'but--'

'You will come?' I said.

She sighed before she spoke. At length,--

'Yes, I will come--if you wish it,' she answered. And the next moment
she was gone round the corner of the house, while I laughed to think
of the excellent watch these gallant gentlemen were keeping. M. de
Cocheforet might have been with her in the garden, might have talked
with her as I had talked, might have entered the house even, and passed
under their noses scot-free. But that is the way of soldiers. They are
always ready for the enemy, with drums beating and flags flying--at ten
o'clock in the morning. But he does not always come at that hour.

I waited a little, and then I groped my way to the door and knocked on
it with the hilt of my sword. The dogs began to bark at the back, and
the chorus of a drinking-song, which came fitfully from the east wing,
ceased altogether. An inner door opened, and an angry voice, apparently
an officer's, began to rate someone for not coming. Another moment, and
a clamour of voices and footsteps seemed to pour into the hall, and
fill it. I heard the bar jerked away, the door was flung open, and in
a twinkling a lanthorn, behind which a dozen flushed visages were dimly
seen, was thrust into my face.

'Why, who the fiend is this?' one cried, glaring at me in astonishment.

'MORBLEU! It is the man!' another shrieked. 'Seize him!'

In a moment half a dozen hands were laid on my shoulders, but I only
bowed politely.

'The officer, my friends,' I said, 'M. le Capitaine Larolle. 'Where is
he?'

'DIABLE! but who are you, first?' the lanthorn-bearer retorted bluntly.
He was a tall, lanky sergeant, with a sinister face.

'Well, I am not M. de Cocheforet,' I replied; 'and that must satisfy
you, my man. For the rest, if you do not fetch Captain Larolle at once
and admit me, you will find the consequences inconvenient.'

'Ho! ho!' he said with a sneer. 'You can crow, it seems. Well, come in.'

They made way, and I walked into the hall keeping my hat on. On the
great hearth a fire had been kindled, but it had gone out. Three or
four carbines stood against one wall, and beside them lay a heap of
haversacks and some straw. A shattered stool, broken in a frolic, and
half a dozen empty wine-skins strewed the floor, and helped to give the
place an air of untidiness and disorder. I looked round with eyes of
disgust, and my gorge rose. They had spilled oil, and the place reeked
foully.

'VENTRE BLEU!' I said. 'Is this conduct in a gentleman's house, you
rascals? MA VIE! If I had you I would send half of you to the wooden
horse!'

They gazed at me open-mouthed; my arrogance startled them. The sergeant
alone scowled. When he could find his voice for rage--

'This way!' he said. 'We did not know that a general officer was coming,
or we would have been better prepared!' And muttering oaths under
his breath, he led me down the well-known passage. At the door of the
parlour he stopped. 'Introduce yourself!' he said rudely. 'And if you
find the air warm, don't blame me!'

I raised the latch and went in. At a table in front of the hearth, half
covered with glasses and bottles, sat two men playing hazard. The dice
rang sharply as I entered, and he who had just thrown kept the box
over them while he turned, scowling, to see who came in. He was a
fair-haired, blonde man, large-framed and florid. He had put off his
cuirass and boots, and his doublet showed frayed and stained where the
armour had pressed on it. Otherwise he was in the extreme of last year's
fashion. His deep cravat, folded over so that the laced ends drooped a
little in front, was of the finest; his great sash of blue and silver
was a foot wide. He had a little jewel in one ear, and his tiny beard
was peaked A L'ESPAGNOLE. Probably when he turned he expected to see the
sergeant, for at the sight of me he rose slowly, leaving the dice still
covered.

'What folly is this?' he cried, wrathfully. Here, sergeant!
Sergeant!--without there! What the--! Who are you, sir?'

'Captain Larolle,' I said uncovering politely, 'I believe?'

'Yes, I am Captain Larolle,' he retorted. 'But who, in the fiend's name,
are you?' You are not the man we are after!'

'I am not M. Cocheforet,' I said coolly. 'I am merely a guest in the
house, M. le Capitaine. I have been enjoying Madame de Cocheforet's
hospitality for some time, but by an evil chance I was away when you
arrived.' And with that I walked to the hearth, and, gently pushing
aside his great boots which stood there drying, I kicked the logs into a
blaze.

'MILLE DIABLES!' he whispered. And never did I see a man more
confounded. But I affected to be taken up with his companion, a sturdy,
white-moustachioed old veteran, who sat back in his chair, eyeing me
with swollen cheeks and eyes surcharged with surprise.

'Good evening, M. le Lieutenant,' I said, bowing gravely. 'It is a fine
night.'

Then the storm burst.

'Fine night!' the Captain shrieked, finding his voice at last. 'MILLE
DIABLES! Are you aware, sir, that I am in possession of this house, and
that no one harbours here without my permission? Guest? Hospitality?
Bundle of fiddle-faddle! Lieutenant, call the guard! Call the guard!' he
continued passionately. 'Where is that ape of a sergeant?'

The Lieutenant rose to obey, but I lifted my hand.

'Gently, gently, Captain,' I said. 'Not so fast. You seem surprised to
see me here. Believe me, I am much more surprised to see you.'

'SACRE!' he cried, recoiling at this fresh impertinence, while the
Lieutenant's eyes almost jumped out of his head.

But nothing moved me.

'Is the door closed?' I said sweetly. 'Thank you; it is, I see. Then
permit me to say again, gentlemen, that I am much more surprised to
see you than you can be to see me. For when Monseigneur the Cardinal
honoured me by sending me from Paris to conduct this matter, he gave me
the fullest--the fullest powers, M. le Capitaine--to see the affair to
an end. I was not led to expect that my plans would be spoiled on the
eve of success by the intrusion of half the garrison from Auch.'

'Oh, ho!' the Captain said softly--in a very different tone, and with a
very different face. 'So you are the gentleman I heard of at Auch?'

'Very likely,' I said drily. 'But I am from Paris, not from Auch.'

'To be sure,' he answered thoughtfully. 'Eh, Lieutenant?'

'Yes, M. le Capitaine, no doubt,' the inferior replied. And they both
looked at one another, and then at me, in a way I did not understand.

'I think,' said I, to clinch the matter, 'that you have made a mistake,
Captain; or the Commandant has. And it occurs to me that the Cardinal
will not be best pleased.'

'I hold the King's commission,' he answered rather stiffly.

'To be sure,' I replied. 'But, you see, the Cardinal--'

'Ay, but the Cardinal--' he rejoined quickly; and then he stopped and
shrugged his shoulders. And they both looked at me.

'Well?' I said.

'The King,' he answered slowly.

'Tut-tut!' I exclaimed, spreading out my hands. 'The Cardinal. Let us
stick to him. You were saying?'

'Well, the Cardinal, you see--' And then again, after the same words, he
stopped--stopped abruptly, and shrugged his shoulders.

I began to suspect something.

'If you have anything to say against Monseigneur,' I answered, watching
him narrowly, 'say it. But take a word of advice. Don't let it go beyond
the door of this room, my friend, and it will do you no harm.'

'Neither here nor outside,' he retorted, looking for a moment at his
comrade. 'Only I hold the King's commission. That is all, and, I think,
enough.'

'Well--for the rest, will you throw a main?' he answered evasively.
'Good! Lieutenant, find a glass, and the gentleman a seat. And here, for
my part, I will give you a toast The Cardinal--whatever betide!'

I drank it, and sat down to play with him; I had not heard the music of
the dice for a month, and the temptation was irresistible. But I was not
satisfied. I called the mains and won his crowns--he was a mere baby at
the game--but half my mind was elsewhere. There was something here that
I did not understand; some influence at work on which I had not counted;
something moving under the surface as unintelligible to me as the
soldiers' presence. Had the Captain repudiated my commission altogether,
and put me to the door or sent me to the guard-house, I could have
followed that. But these dubious hints, this passive resistance, puzzled
me. Had they news from Paris, I wondered? Was the King dead? Or the
Cardinal ill? I asked them, but they said no, no, no to all, and gave me
guarded answers. And midnight found us still playing; and still fencing.



CHAPTER IX. THE QUESTION

Sweep the room, Monsieur? And remove this medley? But M. le Capitaine--'

'The Captain is in the village,' I replied Sternly. 'And do you move.
Move, man, and the thing will be done while you are talking about it.
Set the door into the garden open--so.'

'Certainly, it is a fine morning. And the tobacco of M. le
Lieutenant--But M. le Capitaine did not--'

'Give orders? Well, I give them,' I answered. 'First of all, remove
these beds. And bustle, man, bustle, or I will find something to quicken
you!'

In a moment--'And M. le Capitaine's riding-boots?'

'Place them in the passage,' I replied.

'Oh! in the passage?' He paused, looking at them in doubt.

'Yes, booby; in the passage.'

'And the cloaks, Monsieur?'

'There is a bush handy outside the window. Let them air.'

'Ohe, the bush? Well, to be sure they are damp. But--yes, yes, Monsieur,
it is done. And the bolsters?'

'There also,' I said harshly. 'Throw them out. Faugh! The place reeks of
leather. Now, a clean hearth. And set the table before the open door,
so that we may see the garden--so. And tell the cook that we dine at
eleven, and that Madame and Mademoiselle will descend.'

'Ohe! But M. le Capitaine ordered the dinner for half-past eleven.'

'It must be advanced, then; and, mark you, my friend, if it is not ready
when Madame comes down, you will suffer, and the cook too.'

When he was gone on his errand, I looked round. What else was lacking?
The sun shone cheerily on the polished floor; the air, freshened by
the rain which had fallen in the night, entered freely through the open
doorway. A few bees lingering with the summer hummed outside. The fire
crackled bravely; an old hound, blind and past work, lay warming its
hide on the hearth. I could think of nothing more, and I stood and stood
and watched the man set out the table and spread the cloth.

'For how many, Monsieur?' he asked in a scared tone.

'For five,' I answered; and I could not help smiling at myself.

For what would Zaton's say could it see Berault turned housewife? There
was a white glazed cup, an old-fashioned piece of the second Henry's
time, standing on a shelf. I took it down and put some late flowers in
it, and set it in the middle of the table, and stood off myself to look
at it. But a moment later, thinking I heard them coming, I hurried it
away in a kind of panic, feeling on a sudden ashamed of the thing. The
alarm proved to be false, however; and then again, taking another turn,
I set the piece back. I had done nothing so foolish for--for more years
than I like to count.

But when Madame and Mademoiselle came down, they had eyes neither
for the flowers nor the room. They had heard that the Captain was out
beating the village and the woods for the fugitive, and where I had
looked for a comedy I found a tragedy. Madame's face was so red with
weeping that all her beauty was gone. She started and shook at the
slightest sound, and, unable to find any words to answer my greeting,
could only sink into a chair and sit crying silently.

Mademoiselle was in a mood scarcely more cheerful. She did not weep,
but her manner was hard and fierce. She spoke absently, and answered
fretfully. Her eyes glittered, and she had the air of straining her ears
continually to catch some dreaded sound.

'There is no news, Monsieur?' she said as she took her seat. And she
shot a swift look at me.

'None, Mademoiselle.'

'They are searching the village?'

'I believe so.'

'Where is Clon?' This in a lower voice, and with a kind of shrinking in
her face.

I shook my head. 'I believe that they have him confined somewhere. And
Louis, too,' I said. 'But I have not seen either of them.'

'And where are--I thought these people would be here,' she muttered. And
she glanced askance at the two vacant places. The servant had brought in
the meal.

'They will be here presently,' I said coolly. Let us make the most of
the time. A little wine and food will do Madame good.'

She smiled rather sadly.

'I think that we have changed places,' she said. 'And that you have
turned host and we guests.'

'Let it be so,' I said cheerfully. 'I recommend some of this ragout.
Come, Mademoiselle, fasting can aid no one. A full meal has saved many a
man's life.'

It was clumsily said, perhaps; for she shuddered and looked at me with
a ghastly smile. But she persuaded her sister to take something; and she
took something on her own plate and raised her fork to her lips. But in
a moment she laid it down again.

'I cannot,' she murmured. 'I cannot swallow. Oh, my God, at this moment
they may be taking him.'

I thought that she was about to burst into a passion of tears, and I
repented that I had induced her to descend. But her self-control was
not yet exhausted. By an effort, painful to see, she recovered her
composure. She took up her fork, and ate a few mouthfuls. Then she
looked at me with a fierce under-look.

'I want to see Clon,' she whispered feverishly. The man who waited on us
had left the room.

'He knows?' I said.

She nodded, her beautiful face strangely disfigured. Her closed teeth
showed between her lips. Two red spots burned in her white cheeks, and
she breathed quickly. I felt, as I looked at her, a sudden pain at my
heart, and a shuddering fear, such as a man, awaking to find himself
falling over a precipice, might feel. How these women loved the man!

For a moment I could not speak. When I found my voice it sounded dry and
husky.

'He is a safe confidant,' I muttered. 'He can neither read nor write,
Mademoiselle.'

'No, but--' and then her face became fixed. 'They are coming,' she
whispered. 'Hush!' She rose stiffly, and stood supporting herself by the
table. 'Have they--have they--found him?' she muttered. The woman by her
side wept on, unconscious of what was impending.

I heard the Captain stumble far down the passage, and swear loudly; and
I touched Mademoiselle's hand.

'They have not!' I whispered. 'All is well, Mademoiselle. Pray, pray
calm yourself. Sit down and meet them as if nothing were the matter.
And your sister! Madame, Madame,' I cried, almost harshly, 'compose
yourself. Remember that you have a part to play.'

My appeal did something. Madame stifled her sobs. Mademoiselle drew
a deep breath and sat down; and though she was still pale and still
trembled, the worst was past.

And only just in time. The door flew open with a crash. The Captain
stumbled into the room, swearing afresh.

'SACRE NOM DU DIABLE!' he cried, his face crimson with rage. 'What fool
placed these things here? My boots? My--'

His jaw fell. He stopped on the word, stricken silent by the new aspect
of the room, by the sight of the little party at the table, by all the
changes I had worked.

'SAINT SIEGE!' he muttered. 'What is this?' The Lieutenant's grizzled
face peering over his shoulder completed the picture.

'You are rather late, M. le Capitaine,' I said cheerfully. 'Madame's
hour is eleven. But, come here are your seats waiting for you.'

'MILLE TONNERRES!' he muttered, advancing into the room, and glaring at
us.

'I am afraid that the ragout is cold,' I continued, peering into the
dish and affecting to see nothing. 'The soup, however, has been kept hot
by the fire. But I think that you do not see Madame.'

He opened his mouth to swear, but for the moment he thought better of
it.

'Who--who put my boots in the passage?' he asked, his voice thick
with rage. He did not bow to the ladies, or take any notice of their
presence.

'One of the men, I suppose,' I said indifferently. 'Is anything
missing?'

He glared at me. Then his cloak, spread outside, caught his eye. He
strode through the door, saw his holsters lying on the grass, and other
things strewn about. He came back.

'Whose monkey game is this?' he snarled, and his face was very ugly.
'Who is at the bottom of this? Speak, sir, or I--'

'Tut-tut,--the ladies!' I said. 'You forget yourself, Monsieur.'

'Forget myself?' he hissed, and this time he did not check his oath.
'Don't talk to me of the ladies! Madame? Bah! Do you think, fool,
that we are put into rebel's houses to bow and smile and take dancing
lessons?'

'In this case a lesson in politeness were more to the point, Monsieur,'
I said sternly. And I rose.

'Was it by your orders that this was done?' he retorted, his brow black
with passion. Answer, will you?'

'It was!' I replied outright.

'Then take that!' he cried, dashing his hat violently in my face, 'and
come outside.'

'With pleasure, Monsieur,' I answered, bowing; 'in one moment. Permit me
to find my sword. I think that it is in the passage.'

I went thither to get it.

When I returned, I found that the two men were waiting for me in the
garden, while the ladies had risen from the table, and were standing
near it with blanched faces.

'You had better take your sister upstairs, Mademoiselle,' I said gently,
pausing a moment beside them. 'Have no fear. All will be well.'

But what is it?' she answered, looking troubled. 'It was so sudden. I
am--I did not understand. You quarrelled so quickly.'

'It is very simple,' I answered, smiling. 'M. le Capitaine insulted you
yesterday; he will pay for it to-day. That is all. Or, not quite all,'
I continued, dropping my voice and speaking in a different tone. 'His
removal may help you, Mademoiselle. Do you understand? I think that
there will be no more searching to-day.' She uttered an exclamation,
grasping my arm and peering into my face.

'You will kill him?' she muttered.

I nodded.

'Why not?' I said.

She caught her breath, and stood with one hand clasped to her bosom,
gazing at me with parted lips, the blood mounting to her checks.
Gradually the flush melted into a fierce smile.

'Yes, yes, why not?' she repeated between her teeth. 'Why not?' She had
her hand on my arm, and I felt her fingers tighten until I could have
winced. 'Why not? So you planned this--for us, Monsieur?'

I nodded.

'But can you?'

'Safely,' I said; then, muttering to her to take her sister upstairs, I
turned towards the garden. My foot was already on the threshold, and I
was composing my face to meet the enemy, when I heard a movement behind
me. The next moment her hand was on my arm.

'Wait! Wait a moment! Come back!' she panted. I turned. The smile and
flush had vanished; her face was pale. 'No!' she said abruptly. 'I was
wrong! I, will not have it. I will have no part in it! You planned it
last night, M. de Barthe. It is murder.'

'Mademoiselle!' I exclaimed, wondering. 'Murder? Why? It is a duel.'

'It is murder,' she answered persistently. 'You planned it last night.
You said so.'

'But I risk my own life,' I replied sharply.

'Nevertheless--I will have no part in it,' she answered more faintly.
She was trembling with agitation. Her eyes avoided mine.

'On my shoulders be it then!' I replied stoutly. 'It is too late,
Mademoiselle, to go back. They are waiting for me. Only, before I go,
let me beg of you to retire.'

And I turned from her, and went out, wondering and thinking. First,
that women were strange things. Secondly--MURDER? Merely because I had
planned the duel and provoked the quarrel! Never had I heard anything so
preposterous. Grant it, and dub every man who kept his honour with
his hands a Cain--and a good many branded faces would be seen in some
streets. I laughed at the fancy, as I strode down the garden walk.

And yet, perhaps, I was going to do a foolish thing. The Lieutenant
would still be here: a hard-bitten man, of stiffer stuff than his
Captain. And the troopers. What if, when I had killed their leader, they
made the place too hot for me, Monseigneur's commission notwithstanding?
I should look silly, indeed, if on the eve of success I were driven from
the place by a parcel of jack-boots.

I liked the thought so little that I hesitated. Yet it seemed too late
to retreat. The Captain and the Lieutenant were waiting for me in a
little open space fifty yards from the house, where a narrower path
crossed the broad walk, down which I had first seen Mademoiselle and
her sister pacing. The Captain had removed his doublet, and stood in his
shirt leaning against the sundial, his head bare and his sinewy throat
uncovered. He had drawn his rapier and stood pricking the ground
impatiently. I marked his strong and nervous frame and his sanguine air:
and twenty years earlier the sight might have damped me. But no thought
of the kind entered my head now, and though I felt with each moment
greater reluctance to engage, doubt of the issue had no place in my
calculations.

I made ready slowly, and would gladly, to gain time, have found some
fault with the place. But the sun was sufficiently high to give no
advantage to either. The ground was good, the spot well chosen. I could
find no excuse to put off the man, and I was about to salute him and
fall to work when a thought crossed my mind.

'One moment!' I said. 'Supposing I kill you, M. le Capitaine, what
becomes of your errand here?'

'Don't trouble yourself;' he answered with a sneer he had misread my
slowness and hesitation. 'It will not happen, Monsieur. And in any case
the thought need not harass you. I have a Lieutenant.'

'Yes, but what of my mission?' I replied bluntly. 'I have no
lieutenant.'

'You should have thought of that before you interfered with my boots,'
he retorted with contempt.

'True,' I said overlooking his manner. 'But better late than never. I
am not sure, now I think of it, that my duty to Monseigneur will let me
fight.'

'You will swallow the blow?' he cried, spitting on the ground
offensively. 'DIABLE!' And the Lieutenant, standing on one side with his
hands behind him and his shoulders squared, laughed grimly.

'I have not made up my mind,' I answered irresolutely.

'Well, NOM DE DIEU! make it up,' the Captain replied, with an ugly
sneer. He took a swaggering step this way and that, playing his weapon.
'I am afraid, Lieutenant, that there will be no sport to-day,' he
continued in a loud aside. 'Our cock has but a chicken heart.'

'Well, I said coolly,'I do not know what to do. Certainly it is a fine
day, and a fair piece of ground. And the sun stands well. But I have not
much to gain by killing you, M. le Capitaine, and it might get me into
an awkward fix. On the other hand, it would not hurt me to let you go.'

'Indeed!' he said contemptuously, looking at me as I should look at a
lackey.

'No!' I replied. 'For if you were to say that you had struck Gil de
Berault and left the ground with a whole skin, no one would believe
you.'

'Gil de Berault!' he exclaimed frowning.

'Yes, Monsieur,' I replied suavely. 'At your service. You did not know
my name?'

'I thought that your name was De Barthe,' he said. His voice sounded
queerly; and he waited for the answer with parted lips, and a shadow in
his eyes which I had seen in men's eyes before.

'No,' I said; 'that was my mother's name. I took it for this occasion
only.'

His florid cheek lost a shade of its colour, and he bit his lips as he
glanced at the Lieutenant, trouble in his eyes. I had seen these signs
before, and knew them, and I might have cried 'Chicken-heart!' in my
turn; but I had not made a way of escape for him--before I declared
myself--for nothing, and I held to my purpose.

'I think you will allow now,' I said grimly, 'that it will not harm me
even if I put up with a blow!'

'M. de Berault's courage is known,' he muttered.

'And with reason,' I said. 'That being so suppose that we say this
day three months, M. le Capitaine? The postponement to be for my
convenience.'

He caught the Lieutenant's eye and looked down sullenly, the conflict in
his mind as plain as daylight. He had only to insist that I must fight;
and if by luck or skill he could master me his fame as a duellist would
run, like a ripple over water, through every garrison town in France and
make him a name even in Paris. On the other side were the imminent peril
of death, the gleam of cold steel already in fancy at his breast, the
loss of life and sunshine, and the possibility of a retreat with honour,
if without glory. I read his face, and knew before he spoke what he
would do.

'It appears to me that the burden is with you,' he said huskily; 'but
for my part I am satisfied.'

'Very well,' I said, 'I take the burden. Permit me to apologise for
having caused you to strip unnecessarily. Fortunately the sun is
shining.'

'Yes,' he said gloomily. And he took his clothes from the sundial and
began to put them on. He had expressed himself satisfied, but I knew
that he was feeling very ill-satisfied, indeed, with himself; and I was
not surprised when he presently said abruptly and almost rudely, 'There
is one thing that I think we must settle here.'

'Yes?' I said. 'What is that?'

'Our positions,' he blurted out, 'Or we shall cross one another again
within the hour.'

'Umph! I am not quite sure that I understand,' I said.

'That is precisely what I don't do--understand!' he retorted, in a tone
of surly triumph. 'Before I came on this duty, I was told that there was
a gentleman here, bearing sealed orders from the Cardinal to arrest M.
de Cocheforet; and I was instructed to avoid collision with him so far
as might be possible. At first I took you for the gentleman. But the
plague take me if I understand the matter now.'

'Why not?' I said coldly.

'Because--well, the question is in a nutshell!' he answered impetuously.
'Are you here on behalf of Madame de Cocheforet, to shield her husband?
Or are you here to arrest him? That is what I do not understand, M. de
Berault.'

'If you mean, am I the Cardinal's agent--I am!' I answered sternly.

'To arrest M. de Cocheforet?'

'To arrest M. de Cocheforet.'

'Well--you surprise me,' he said.

Only that; but he spoke so drily that I felt the blood rush to my face.

'Take care, Monsieur,' I said severely. 'Do not presume too far on the
inconvenience to which your death might put me.'

He shrugged his shoulders.

'No offence,' he said. 'But you do not seem, M. de Berault, to
comprehend the difficulty. If we do not settle things now, we shall be
bickering twenty times a day.'

'Well, what do you want?' I asked impatiently.

'Simply to know how you are going to proceed. So that our plans may not
clash.'

'But surely, M. le Capitaine, that is my affair,' I said.

'The clashing?' he answered bitterly. Then he waved aside my wrath
'Pardon,' he said, 'the point is simply this. How do you propose to find
him if he is here?'

'That again is my affair,' I answered. He threw up his hands in despair;
but in a moment his place was taken by an unexpected disputant.

The Lieutenant, who had stood by all the time, listening and tugging at
his grey moustache, suddenly spoke.

Look here, M. de Berault,' he said, confronting me roughly, 'I do not
fight duels. I am from the ranks. I proved my courage at Montauban in
'21, and my honour is good enough to take care of itself. So I say what
I like, and I ask you plainly what M. le Capitaine doubtless has in his
mind, but does not ask: Are you running with the hare, and hunting
with the hounds in this matter? In other words, have you thrown up
Monseigneur's commission in all but name, and become Madame's ally;
or--it is the only other alternative--are you getting at the man through
the women?'

'You villain!' I cried, glaring at him in such a rage and fury that
I could scarcely get the words out. This was plain speaking with a
vengeance! How dare you? How dare you say that I am false to the hand
that pays me?'

I thought that he would blench, but he did not. He stood up stiff as a
poker.

'I do not say; I ask!' he replied, facing me squarely, and slapping his
fist into his open hand to drive home his words the better. 'I ask you
whether you are playing the traitor to the Cardinal, or to these two
women? It is a simple question.'

I fairly choked. 'You impudent scoundrel!' I said.

'Steady, steady!' he replied. 'Pitch sticks where it belongs, and
nowhere else. But that is enough. I see which it is, M. le Capitaine;
this way a moment, by your leave.'

And in a very cavalier fashion he took his officer by the arm, and drew
him into a sidewalk, leaving me to stand in the sun, bursting with anger
and spleen. The gutter-bred rascal! That such a man should insult me,
and with impunity! In Paris, I might have made him fight, but here it
was impossible.

I was still foaming with rage when they returned.

'We have come to a determination,' the Lieutenant said, tugging his grey
moustachios, and standing like a ramrod. 'We shall leave you the
house and Madame, and you can take your own line to find the man, for
ourselves, we shall draw off our men to the village, and we shall take
our line. That is all, M. le Capitaine, is it not?'

'I think so,' the Captain muttered, looking anywhere but at me.

'Then we bid you good-day, Monsieur,' the Lieutenant added, and in a
moment he turned his companion round, and the two retired up the walk
to the house, leaving me to look after them in a black fit of rage and
incredulity.

At the first flush, there was something so offensive in the manner of
their going that anger had the upper hand. I thought of the Lieutenant's
words, and I cursed him to hell with a sickening consciousness that I
should not forget them in a hurry.

'Was I playing the traitor to the Cardinal or to these women--which?'
MON DIEU! if ever question--but there, some day I would punish him. And
the Captain? I could put an end to his amusement, at any rate; and I
would. Doubtless among the country bucks of Auch he lorded it as a chief
provincial bully, but I would cut his comb for him some fine morning
behind the barracks.

And then as I grew cooler I began to wonder why they were going, and
what they were going to do. They might be already on the track, or
have the information they required under hand; in that case I could
understand the movement. But if they were still searching vaguely,
uncertain whether their quarry were in the neighbourhood or not, and
uncertain how long they might have to stay, it seemed incredible that
soldiers should move from good quarters to bad without motive.

I wandered down the garden, thinking sullenly of this, and pettishly
cutting off the heads of the flowers with my sheathed sword. After all,
if they found and arrested the man, what then? I should have to make my
peace with the Cardinal as I best might. He would have gained his point,
but not through me, and I should have to look to myself. On the other
hand, if I anticipated them--and, as a fact, I believed that I could lay
my hand on the fugitive within a few hours--there would come a time when
I must face Mademoiselle.

A little while back that had not seemed so difficult a thing. From the
day of our first meeting--and in a higher degree since that afternoon
when she had lashed me with her scorn-my views of her, and my feelings
towards her, had been strangely made up of antagonism and sympathy; of
repulsion, because in her past and present she was so different from me;
of yearning because she was a woman and friendless. Later I had duped
her and bought her confidence by returning the jewels, and so in a
measure I had sated my vengeance; then, as a consequence, sympathy had
again got the better of me, until now I hardly knew my own mind, or what
I felt, or what I intended. I DID NOT KNOW, in fact, what I intended.
I stood there in the garden with that conviction suddenly newborn in my
mind; and then, in a moment, I heard her step, and I turned to find her
behind me.

Her face was like April, smiles breaking through her tears. As she
stood with a tall hedge of sunflowers behind her, I started to see how
beautiful she was.

'I am here in search of you, M. de Barthe,' she said, colouring
slightly, perhaps because my eyes betrayed my thought; 'to thank you.
You have not fought, and yet you have conquered. My woman has just been
with me, and she tells me that they are going.'

'Going?' I said, 'Yes, Mademoiselle, they are leaving the house.'

She did not understand my reservation.

'What magic have you used?' she said almost gaily; it was wonderful how
hope had changed her. 'Besides, I am curious to learn how you managed to
avoid fighting.'

'After taking a blow?' I said bitterly.

'Monsieur, I did not mean that,' she said reproachfully.

But her face clouded. I saw that, viewed in this light--in which,
I suppose, she had not hitherto--the matter perplexed her more than
before.

I took a sudden resolution.

'Have you ever heard, Mademoiselle,' I said gravely, plucking off while
I spoke the dead leaves from a plant beside me, 'of a gentleman by name
De Berault? Known in Paris, I have heard, by the sobriquet of the Black
Death?'

'The duellist?' she answered, looking at me in wonder. 'Yes, I have
heard of him. He killed a young gentleman of this province at Nancy two
years back. 'It was a sad story,' she continued, shuddering slightly,
'of a dreadful man. God keep our friends from such!'

'Amen!' I said quietly. But, in spite of myself, I could not meet her
eyes.

'Why?' she answered, quickly taking alarm at; my silence. 'What of him,
M. de Barthe? Why have you mentioned him?'

'Because he is here, Mademoiselle.'

'Here?' she exclaimed. 'At Cocheforet?'

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' I answered soberly. 'I am he.'



CHAPTER X. CLON

'You!' she cried, in a voice which pierced my heart. 'You are M. de
Berault? It is impossible!' But, glancing askance at her--I could not
face her I saw that the blood had left her cheeks.

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' I answered in a low tone. 'De Barthe was my
mother's name. When I came here, a stranger, I took it that I might
not be known; that I might again speak to a good woman, and not see
her shrink. That, and--but why trouble you with all this?' I continued
rebelling, against her silence, her turned shoulder, her averted face.
'You asked me, Mademoiselle, how I could take a blow and let the striker
go. I have answered. It is the one privilege M. de Berault possesses.'

'Then,' she replied almost in a whisper, 'if I were M. de Berault, I
would avail myself of it, and never fight again.'

'In that event, Mademoiselle,' I answered coldly, 'I should lose my men
friends as well as my women friends. Like Monseigneur the Cardinal, rule
by fear.'

She shuddered, either at the name or at the idea my words called up;
and, for a moment, we stood awkwardly silent. The shadow of the sundial
fell between us; the garden was still; here and there a leaf fluttered
slowly down. With each instant of that silence, of that aversion, I
felt the gulf between us growing wider, I felt myself growing harder;
I mocked at her past which was so unlike mine; I mocked at mine, and
called it fate. I was on the point of turning from her with a bow--and
with a furnace in my breast--when she spoke.

'There is a last rose lingering there,' she said, a slight tremor in her
voice. 'I cannot reach it. Will you pluck it for me, M. de Berault?'

I obeyed her, my hand trembling, my face on fire. She took the rose from
me, and placed it in the bosom of her dress, And I saw that her hand
trembled too, and that her cheek was dark with blushes.

She turned without more ado, and began to walk towards the house.
'Heaven forbid that I should misjudge you a second time!' she said in a
low voice. 'And, after all, who am I, that I should judge you at all? An
hour ago I would have killed that man had I possessed the power.'

'You repented, Mademoiselle,' I said huskily. I could scarcely speak.

'Do you never repent?' she said.

'Yes. But too late, Mademoiselle.'

'Perhaps it is never too late,' she answered softly.

'Alas, when a man is dead--'

'You may rob a man of worse than life!' she replied with energy,
stopping me by a gesture. 'If you have never robbed a man--or a
woman--of honour! If you have never ruined boy or girl, M. de Berault!
If you have never pushed another into the pit and gone by it yourself!
If--but, for murder? Listen. You are a Romanist, but I am a Huguenot,
and have read. "Thou shall not kill!" it is written; and the penalty,
"By man shall thy blood be shed!" But, "If you cause one of these little
ones to offend, it were better for you that a mill-stone were hanged
about your neck, and that you were cast into the depths of the sea."'

'Mademoiselle, you are merciful,' I muttered.

'I need mercy myself,' she answered, sighing. 'And I have had few
temptations. How do I know what you have suffered?'

'Or done!' I said, almost rudely.

'Where a man has not lied, nor betrayed, nor sold himself or others,'
she answered in a low tone, 'I think I can forgive all else. I can
better put up with force,' she added smiling sadly, 'than with fraud.'

Ah, Dieu! I turned away my face that she might not see how pale it grew;
that she might not guess how her words, meant in mercy, stabbed me to
the heart. And yet, then, for the first time, while viewing in all its
depth and width the gulf which separated us, I was not hardened; I
was not cast back upon myself. Her gentleness, her pity, her humility
softened me, while they convicted me. My God, how, after this, could I
do that which I had come to do? How could I stab her in the tenderest
part, how could I inflict on her that rending pang, how could I meet her
eyes, and stand before her, a Caliban, a Judas, the vilest, lowest thing
she could conceive?

I stood, a moment, speechless and disordered; overcome by her words,
by my thoughts. I have seen a man so stand when he has lost all at the
tables. Then I turned to her; and for an instant I thought that my tale
was told already, I thought that she had pierced my disguise. For her
face was changed--stricken as with fear. The next moment, I saw that
she was not looking at me, but beyond me; and I turned quickly and saw
a servant hurrying from the house to us. It was Louis. His eyes were
staring, his hair waved, his cheeks were flabby with dismay, He breathed
as if he had been running.

'What is it?' Mademoiselle cried, while he was still some way off.
'Speak, man. My sister? Is she--'

'Clon,' he gasped.

The name changed her to stone.

'Clon? What of him?' she muttered.

'In the village!' Louis panted, his tongue stuttering with terror. 'They
are flogging him. They are killing him! To make him tell!'

Mademoiselle grasped the sundial and leant against it, her face
colourless; and, for an instant, I thought that she was fainting.

'Tell?' I said mechanically. 'But he cannot tell. He is dumb, man.'

'They will make him guide them,' Louis groaned, covering his ears with
his shaking hands, his face the colour of paper. 'And his cries! Oh,
Monsieur, go, go!' he continued, in a thrilling tone. 'Save him. All
through tie wood I heard his cries. It was horrible! horrible!'

Mademoiselle uttered a moan of pain; and I turned to support her,
thinking each second to see her fall. But with a sudden movement she
straightened herself, and, quickly slipping by me, with eyes that seemed
to see nothing, she set off swiftly down the walk towards the meadow
gate.

I ran after her; but, taken by surprise as I was, it was only by a great
effort I reached the gate before her, and thrusting myself in the road,
barred the way.

'Let me pass!' she panted, striving to thrust me on one side. 'Out of my
way, sir! I am going to the village.'

'You are not going to the village,' I said sternly. 'Go back; to the
house, Mademoiselle, and at once.'

'My servant!' she wailed. 'Let me go! Let me go! Do you think I can rest
here while they torture him? He cannot speak, and they--they--'

'Go back, Mademoiselle,' I said, with decision. 'Your presence would
only make matters worse! I will go myself, and what one man can do
against many, I will! Louis, give your mistress your arm and take her to
the house. Take her to Madame.'

'But you will go?' she cried. And before I could stay her--I swear I
would have stopped her if I could--she raised my hand and carried it
to her trembling lips. 'You will go! Go and stop them! Stop them, and
Heaven reward you, Monsieur!'

I did not answer; nay, I did not once look back, as I crossed the
meadow; but I did not look forward either. Doubtless it was grass I
trod, and the wood was before me with the sun shining aslant on it;
doubtless the house rose behind me with a flame here and there in the
windows. But I went in a dream, among shadows; with a racing pulse, in
a glow from head to heel; conscious of nothing but the touch of
Mademoiselle's warm lips on my hand, seeing neither meadow nor house,
nor even the dark fringe of wood before me, but only Mademoiselle's
passionate face. For the moment I was drunk: drunk with that to which I
had been so long a stranger, with that which a man may scorn for years,
to find it at last beyond his reach drunk with the touch of a good
woman's lips.

I passed the bridge in this state; and my feet were among the brushwood
before the heat and fervour in which I moved found on a sudden their
direction. Something began to penetrate to my veiled senses--a hoarse
inarticulate cry, now deep, now shrilling horribly, that of itself
seemed to fill the wood. It came at intervals of half a minute or so,
and made the flesh creep, it rang so full of dumb pain, of impotent
wrestling, of unspeakable agony. I am a man and have seen things. I
saw the Concini beheaded, and Chalais ten years later--they gave him
thirty-four blows; and when I was a boy I escaped from the college and
viewed from a great distance Ravaillac torn by horses--that was in the
year ten. But the horrible cries I now heard, filled me, perhaps because
I was alone and fresh from the sight of Mademoiselle, with loathing
inexpressible. The very wood, though the sun had not yet set, seemed to
grow dark. I ran on through it, cursing, until the hovels of the village
came in sight. Again the shriek rose, a pulsing horror, and this time I
could hear the lash fall on the sodden flesh, I could see in fancy the
dumb man, trembling, quivering, straining against his bonds. And then,
in a moment, I was in the street, and, as the scream once more tore the
air, I dashed round the corner by the inn, and came upon them.

I did not look at HIM, but I saw Captain Larolle and the Lieutenant,
and a ring of troopers, and one man, bare-armed, teasing out with his
fingers the thongs of a whip. The thongs dripped blood, and the sight
fired the mine. The rage I had suppressed when the Lieutenant bearded me
earlier in the afternoon, the passion with which Mademoiselle's distress
had filled my breast, on the instant found vent. I sprang through the
line of soldiers; and striking the man with the whip a buffet between
the shoulders, which hurled him breathless to the ground, I turned on
the leaders.

'You fiends!' I cried. 'Shame on you! The man is dumb! Dumb; and if I
had ten men with me, I would sweep you and your scum out of the village
with broomsticks. Lay on another lash,' I continued recklessly, 'and I
will see whether you or the Cardinal be the stronger.'

The Lieutenant stared at me, his grey moustache bristling, his eyes
almost starting from his head. Some of the troopers laid their hands on
their swords, but no one moved, and only the Captain spoke.

'MILLE DIABLES!' he swore. 'What is all this about? Are you mad, sir?'

'Mad or sane!' I cried furiously. 'Lay on another lash, and you shall
repent it.'

For an instant there was a pause of astonishment. Then, to my surprise,
the Captain laughed--laughed loudly.

'Very heroic,' he said. 'Quite magnificent, M. Chevalier-errant. But you
see, unfortunately, you come too late.'

'Too late,' I said incredulously.

'Yes, too late,' he replied, with a mocking smile. And the Lieutenant
grinned too. 'Unfortunately, you see, the man has just confessed. We
have only been giving him an extra touch or two, to impress his memory,
and save us the trouble of lashing him up again.'

'I don't believe it,' I said bluntly--but I felt the check, and fell to
earth. 'The man cannot speak.'

'No, but he has managed to tell us what we want; that he will guide us
to the place we are seeking,' the Captain answered drily. 'The whip, if
it cannot find a man a tongue, can find him wits. What is more, I think
that he will keep his word,' he continued, with a hideous scowl. 'For I
warn him that if he does not, all your heroics shall not save him. He
is a rebel dog, and known to us of old; and I will flay his back to the
bones, ay, until we can see his heart beating through his ribs, but I
will have what I want--in your teeth, too, you d----d meddler.'

'Steady, steady!' I said, sobered. I saw that he was telling the truth.
'Is he going to take you to M. de Cocheforet's hiding-place?'

'Yes, he is!' the Captain retorted. 'Have you any objection to that,
Master Spy?'

'None,' I replied. 'Only I shall go with you. And if you live three
months, I shall kill you for that name-behind the barracks at Auch, M.
le Capitaine.'

He changed colour, but he answered me boldly enough.

'I don't know that you will go with us,' he said, with a snarl. 'That is
as we please.'

'I have the Cardinal's orders,' I said sternly.

'The Cardinal?' he exclaimed, stung to fury by this repetition of the
name. 'The Cardinal be--'

But the Lieutenant laid his hand on his lips and stopped him.

'Hush!' he said. Then more quietly, 'Your pardon, M. le Capitaine; but
the least said the soonest mended. Shall I give orders to the men to
fall in?'

The Captain nodded sullenly.

The Lieutenant turned to his prisoner.

'Take him down!' he commanded in his harsh, monotonous voice. 'Throw
his blouse over him, and tie his hands. And do you two, Paul and Lebrun,
guard him. Michel, bring the whip, or he may forget how it tastes.
Sergeant, choose four good men, and dismiss the rest to their quarters.'

'Shall we need the horses?' the sergeant asked.

'I don't know,' the Captain answered peevishly. 'What does the rogue
say?'

The Lieutenant stepped up to him.

'Listen!' he said grimly. 'Nod if you mean yes, and shake your head if
you mean no. And have a care you answer truly. Is it more than a mile to
this place?'

They had loosened the poor wretch's fastenings, and covered his back.
He stood leaning his shoulder against the wall, his mouth still panting,
the sweat running down his hollow cheeks. His sunken eyes were closed,
but a quiver now and again ran through his frame. The Lieutenant
repeated his question, and, getting no answer, looked round for orders.
The Captain met the look, and crying savagely, 'Answer will you, you
mule!' struck the half-swooning miserable across the back with his
switch. The effect was magical. Covered, as his shoulders were, the man
sprang erect with a shriek of pain, raising his chin, and hollowing his
back; and in that attitude stood an instant with starting eyes, gasping
for breath. Then he sank back against the wall, moving his mouth
spasmodically. His face was the colour of lead.

'Diable! I think that we have gone too far with him!' the Captain
muttered.

'Bring some wine!' the Lieutenant replied. 'Quick with it!'

I looked on, burning with indignation, and in some excitement besides.
For if the man took them to the place, and they succeeded in seizing
Cocheforet, there was an end of the matter as far as I was concerned. It
was off my shoulders, and I might leave the village when I pleased; nor
was it likely--since he would have his man, though not through me--that
the Cardinal would refuse to grant me an amnesty. On the whole, I
thought that he would prefer that things should take this course; and
assuming the issue, I began to wonder whether it would be necessary in
that event that Madame should know the truth. I had a kind of vision of
a reformed Berault, dead to play and purging himself at a distance from
Zaton's; winning, perhaps, a name in the Italian war, and finally--but,
pshaw! I was a fool.

However, be these things as they might, it was essential that I should
see the arrest made; and I waited patiently while they revived the
tortured man, and made their dispositions. These took some time; so
that the sun was down, and it was growing dusk when we marched out,
Clon going first, supported by his two guards, the Captain and I
following--abreast, and eyeing one another suspiciously; the Lieutenant,
with the sergeant and five troopers, bringing up the rear. Clon moved
slowly, moaning from time to time; and but for the aid given him by the
two men with him, must have sunk down again and again.

He led the way out between two houses close to the inn, and struck a
narrow track, scarcely discernible, which ran behind other houses,
and then plunged into the thickest part of the wood. A single person,
traversing the covert, might have made such a track; or pigs, or
children. But it was the first idea that occurred to us, and put us
all on the alert. The Captain carried a cocked pistol, I held my sword
drawn, and kept a watchful eye on HIM; and the deeper the dusk fell in
the wood, the more cautiously we went, until at last we came out with a
sort of jump into a wider and lighter path.

I looked up and down, and saw behind me a vista of tree-trunks, before
me a wooden bridge and an open meadow, lying cold and grey in the
twilight; and I stood in astonishment. We were in the old path to the
Chateau! I shivered at the thought that he was going to take us there,
to the house, to Mademoiselle!

The Captain also recognised the place, and swore aloud. But the dumb man
went on unheeding until he reached the wooden bridge. There he stopped
short, and looked towards the dark outline of the house, which was
just visible, one faint light twinkling sadly in the west wing. As the
Captain and I pressed up behind him, he raised his hands and seemed to
wring them towards the house.

'Have a care!' the Captain growled. 'Play me no tricks, or--'

He did not finish the sentence, for Clon, as if he well understood his
impatience, turned back from the bridge, and, entering the wood to the
left, began to ascend the bank of the stream. We had not gone a hundred
yards before the ground grew rough, and the undergrowth thick; and yet
through all ran a kind of path which enabled us to advance, dark as
it was now growing. Very soon the bank on which we moved began to rise
above the water, and grew steep and rugged. We turned a shoulder, where
the stream swept round a curve, and saw we were in the mouth of a small
ravine, dark and sheer-sided. The water brawled along the bottom, over
boulders and through chasms. In front, the slope on which we stood
shaped itself into a low cliff; but halfway between its summit and the
water a ledge, or narrow terrace, running along the face, was dimly
visible.

'Ten to one, a cave!' the Captain muttered. 'It is a likely place.'

'And an ugly one!' I replied with a sneer. 'Which one against ten might
hold for hours!'

'If the ten had no pistols--yes!' he answered viciously. 'But you see we
have. Is he going that way?'

He was. As soon as this was clear, Larolle turned to his comrade.

'Lieutenant,' he said, speaking in a low voice, though the chafing of
the stream below us covered ordinary sounds; 'what say you? Shall we
light the lanthorns, or press on while there is still a glimmering of
day?'

'On, I should say, M. le Capitaine,' the Lieutenant answered. 'Prick
him in the back if he falters. I will warrant,' the brute added with a
chuckle, 'he has a tender place or two.'

The Captain gave the word and we moved forward. It was evident now
that the cliff-path was our destination. It was possible for the eye to
follow the track all the way to it, through rough stones and brushwood;
and though Clon climbed feebly, and with many groans, two minutes saw
us step on to it. It did not prove to be, in fact, the perilous place
it looked at a distance. The ledge, grassy and terrace-like, sloped
slightly downwards and outwards, and in parts was slippery; but it was
as wide as a highway, and the fall to the water did not exceed thirty
feet. Even in such a dim light as now displayed it to us, and by
increasing the depth and unseen dangers of the gorge gave a kind of
impressiveness to our movements, a nervous woman need not have feared to
tread it, I wondered how often Mademoiselle had passed along it with her
milk-pitcher.

'I think that we have him now,' Captain Larolle muttered, twisting his
moustachios, and looking about to make his last dispositions. 'Paul and
Lebrun, see that your man makes no noise. Sergeant, come forward with
your carbine, but do not fire without orders. Now, silence all, and
close up, Lieutenant. Forward!'

We advanced about a hundred paces, keeping the cliff on our left, turned
a shoulder, and saw, a few paces in front of us, a slight hollow, a
black blotch in the grey duskiness of the cliff-side. The prisoner
stopped, and, raising his bound hands, pointed to it.

'There?' the Captain whispered, pressing forward. 'Is it the place?'

Clon nodded. The Captain's voice shook with excitement.

'Paul and Lebrun remain here with the prisoner,' he said, in a low tone.
'Sergeant, come forward with me. Now, are you ready? Forward!'

At the word he and the sergeant passed quickly, one on either side of
Clon and his guards. The path grew narrow here, and the Captain passed
outside. The eyes of all but one were on the black blotch, the hollow in
the cliff-side, expecting we knew not what--a sudden shot or the rush or
a desperate man; and no one saw exactly what happened. But somehow, as
the Captain passed abreast of him, the prisoner thrust back his guards,
and leaping sideways, flung his unbound arms round Larolle's body, and
in an instant swept him, shouting, to the verge of the precipice.

It was done in a moment. By the time our startled wits and eyes were
back with them, the two were already tottering on the edge, looking in
the gloom like one dark form. The sergeant, who was the first to find
his head, levelled his carbine, but, as the wrestlers twirled and
twisted, the Captain, shrieking out oaths and threats, the mute silent
as death, it was impossible to see which was which, and the sergeant
lowered his gun again, while the men held back nervously. The ledge
sloped steeply there, the edge was vague, already the two seemed to be
wrestling in mid air; and the mute was desperate.

That moment of hesitation was fatal. Clon's long arms were round the
other's arms, crushing them into his ribs; Clon's skull-like face
grinned hate into the other's eyes; his bony limbs curled round him like
the folds of a snake. Larolle's strength gave way.

'Damn you all! Why don't you come up?' he cried. And then, 'Ah! Mercy!
mercy!' came in one last scream from his lips. As the Lieutenant, taken
aback before, sprang forward to his aid, the two toppled over the edge,
and in a second hurtled out of sight.

'MON DIEU!' the Lieutenant cried; the answer was a dull splash in the
depths below. He flung up his arms. 'Water!' he said. 'Quick, men, get
down. We may save him yet.'

But there was no path, and night was come, and the men's nerves were
shaken. The lanthorns had to be lit, and the way to be retraced; by the
time we reached the dark pool which lay below, the last bubbles were
gone from the surface, the last ripples had beaten themselves out
against the banks. The pool still rocked sullenly, and the yellow light
showed a man's hat floating, and near it a glove three parts submerged.
But that was all. The mute's dying grip had known no loosening, nor his
hate any fear. I heard afterwards that when they dragged the two out
next day, his fingers were in the other's eye-sockets, his teeth in his
throat. If ever man found death sweet, it was he!

As we turned slowly from the black water, some shuddering, some crossing
themselves, the Lieutenant looked at me.

'Curse you!' he said passionately. 'I believe that you are glad.'

He deserved his fate,' I answered coldly. 'Why should I pretend to be
sorry? It was now or in three months. And for the other poor devil's
sake I am glad.'

He glared at me for a moment in speechless anger.

At last, 'I should like to have you tied up!' he said between his teeth.

'I should think that you had had enough of tying up for one day!' I
retorted. 'But there,' I went on contemptuously, 'it comes of making
officers out of the canaille. Dogs love blood. The teamster must lash
something if he can no longer lash his horses.'

We were back, a sombre little procession, at the wooden bridge when I
said this. He stopped.

'Very well,' he replied, nodding viciously. 'That decides me. Sergeant,
light me this way with a lanthorn. The rest of you to the village. Now,
Master Spy,' he continued, glancing at me with gloomy spite, 'Your road
is my road. I think I know how to spoil your game.'

I shrugged my shoulders in disdain, and together, the sergeant leading
the way with the light, we crossed the dim meadow, and passed through
the gate where Mademoiselle had kissed my hand, and up the ghostly walk
between the rose bushes. I wondered uneasily what the Lieutenant would
be at, and what he intended; but the lanthorn-light which now fell on
the ground at our feet, and now showed one of us to the other, high-lit
in a frame of blackness, discovered nothing in his grizzled face but
settled hostility. He wheeled at the end of the walk to go to the main
door, but as he did so I saw the flutter of a white skirt by the stone
seat against the house, and I stepped that way.

'Mademoiselle?' I said softly. 'Is it you?'

'Clon?' she muttered, her voice quivering. 'What of him?'

'He is past pain,' I answered gently. 'He is dead--yes, dead,
Mademoiselle, but in his own way. Take comfort.'

She stifled a sob; then before I could say more, the Lieutenant, with
his sergeant and light, were at my elbow. He saluted Mademoiselle
roughly. She looked at him with shuddering abhorrence.

'Are you come to flog me too, sir?' she said passionately. 'Is it not
enough that you have murdered my servant?'

'On the contrary, it was he who killed my Captain,' the Lieutenant
answered, in another tone than I had expected. 'If your servant is dead
so is my comrade.'

'Captain Larolle?' she murmured, gazing with startled eyes, not at him
but at me.

I nodded.

'How?' she asked.

'Clon flung the Captain and himself--into the river pool above the
bridge,' I said.

She uttered a low cry of awe and stood silent; but her lips moved and I
think that she prayed for Clon, though she was a Huguenot. Meanwhile,
I had a fright. The lanthorn, swinging in the sergeant's hand, and
throwing its smoky light now on the stone seat, now on the rough
wall above it, showed me something else. On the seat, doubtless where
Mademoiselle's hand had lain as she sat in the dark, listening and
watching and shivering, stood a pitcher of food. Beside her, in that
place, it was damning evidence, and I trembled least the Lieutenant's
eye should fall upon it, lest the sergeant should see it; and then, in a
moment, I forgot all about it. The Lieutenant was speaking and his voice
was doom. My throat grew dry as I listened; my tongue stuck to my mouth
I tried to look at Mademoiselle, but I could not.

'It is true that the Captain is gone,' he said stiffly, 'but others
are alive, and about one of them a word with you, by your leave,
Mademoiselle. I have listened to a good deal of talk from this fine
gentleman friend of yours. He has spent the last twenty-four hours
saying "You shall!" and "You shall not!" He came from you and took a
very high tone because we laid a little whip-lash about that dumb devil
of yours. He called us brutes and beasts, and but for him I am not sure
that my friend would not now be alive. But when he said a few minutes
ago that he was glad--glad of it, d--him!--then I fixed it in my mind
that I would be even with him. And I am going to be!'

'What do you mean?' Mademoiselle asked, wearily interrupting him. 'If
you think that you can prejudice me against this gentleman--'

'That is precisely what I am going to do! And a little more than that!'
he answered.

'You will be only wasting your breath!' she retorted.

'Wait! Wait, Mademoiselle---until you have heard,' he said. 'For I swear
to you that if ever a black-hearted scoundrel, a dastardly sneaking spy
trod the earth, it is this fellow! And I am going to expose him. Your
own eyes and your own ears shall persuade you. I am not particular, but
I would not eat, I would not drink, I would not sit down with him! I
would rather be beholden to the meanest trooper in my squadron than to
him! Ay, I would, so help me Heaven!'

And the Lieutenant, turning squarely on his heel, spat on the ground.



CHAPTER XI. THE ARREST

It had come, and I saw no way of escape. The sergeant was between us
and I could not strike him. And I found no words. A score of times I
had thought with shrinking how I should reveal my secret to
Mademoiselle--what I should say, and how she would take it; but in my
mind it had been always a voluntary act, this disclosure, it had been
always I who unmasked myself and she who listened--alone; and in this
voluntariness and this privacy there had been something which took from
the shame of anticipation. But here--here was no voluntary act on
my part, no privacy, nothing but shame. And I stood mute, convicted,
speechless, under her eyes--like the thing I was.

Yet if anything could have braced me it was Mademoiselle's voice when
she answered him.

'Go on, Monsieur,' she said calmly, 'you will have done the sooner.'

'You do not believe me?' he replied. 'Then, I say, look at him! Look at
him! If ever shame--'

'Monsieur,' she said abruptly--she did not look at me, 'I am ashamed of
myself.'

'But you don't hear me,' the Lieutenant rejoined hotly. 'His very name
is not his own! He is not Barthe at all. He is Berault, the gambler, the
duellist, the bully; whom if you--'

Again she interrupted him.

'I know it,' she said coldly. 'I know it all; and if you have nothing
more to tell me, go, Monsieur. Go!' she continued in a tone of infinite
scorn. 'Be satisfied, that you have earned my contempt as well as my
abhorrence.'

He looked for a moment taken aback. Then,--

'Ay, but I have more,' he cried, his voice stubbornly triumphant.

'I forgot that you would think little of that. I forgot that a swordsman
has always the ladies' hearts---but I have more. Do you know, too, that
he is in the Cardinal's pay? Do you know that he is here on the same
errand which brings us here--to arrest M. de Cocheforet? Do you know
that while we go about the business openly and in soldier fashion, it
is his part to worm himself into your confidence, to sneak into Madame's
intimacy, to listen at your door, to follow your footsteps, to hang on
your lips, to track you--track you until you betray yourselves and the
man? Do you know this, and that all his sympathy is a lie,
Mademoiselle? His help, so much bait to catch the secret? His aim
blood-money--blood-money? Why, MORBLEU!' the Lieutenant continued,
pointing his finger at me, and so carried away by passion, so lifted
out of himself by wrath and indignation, that I shrank before him--'you
talk, lady, of contempt and abhorrence in the same breath with me, but
what have you for him--what have you for him--the spy, the informer, the
hired traitor? And if you doubt me, if you want evidence, look at him.
Only look at him, I say.'

And he might say it; for I stood silent still, cowering and despairing,
white with rage and hate. But Mademoiselle did not look. She gazed
straight at the Lieutenant.

'Have you done?' she said.

'Done?' he stammered; her words, her air, bringing him to earth again.
'Done? Yes, if you believe me.'

'I do not,' she answered proudly. 'If that be all, be satisfied,
Monsieur. I do not believe you.'

'Then tell me this,' he retorted, after a moment of stunned surprise.
'Answer me this! Why, if he was not on our side, do you think that we
let him remain here? Why did we suffer him to stay in a suspected house,
bullying us, annoying us, thwarting us, taking your part from hour to
hour?'

'He has a sword, Monsieur,' she answered with fine contempt.

'MILLE DIABLES!' he cried, snapping his fingers in a rage. 'That for
his sword! It was because he held the Cardinal's commission, I tell you,
because he had equal authority with us. Because we had no choice.'

'And that being so, Monsieur, why are you now betraying him?' she asked.
He swore at that, feeling the stroke go home.

'You must be mad!' he said, glaring at her. 'Cannot you see that the man
is what I tell you? Look at him! Look at him, I say! Listen to him! Has
he a word to say for himself?'

Still she did not look.

'It is late,' she replied coldly. 'And I am not very well. If you have
done, quite done--perhaps, you will leave me, Monsieur.'

'MON DIEU! he exclaimed, shrugging his shoulders, and grinding his teeth
in impotent rage. You are mad! I have told you the truth, and you will
not believe it. Well--on your head be it then, Mademoiselle. I have no
more to say! You will see.'

And with that, without more, fairly conquered by her staunchness, he
saluted her, gave the word to the sergeant, turned and went down the
path.

The sergeant went after him, the lanthorn swaying in his hand. And we
two were left alone. The frogs were croaking in the pool, a bat flew
round in circles; the house, the garden, all lay quiet under the
darkness, as on the night which I first came to it.

And would to Heaven I had never come that was the cry in my heart. Would
to Heaven I had never seen this woman, whose nobleness and faith were a
continual shame to me; a reproach branding me every hour I stood in her
presence with all vile and hateful names. The man just gone, coarse,
low-bred, brutal soldier as he was, manflogger and drilling-block, had
yet found heart to feel my baseness, and words in which to denounce it.
What, then, would she say, when the truth came home to her? What shape
should I take in her eyes then? How should I be remembered through all
the years then?

Then? But now? What was she thinking now, at this moment as she stood
silent and absorbed near the stone seat, a shadowy figure with face
turned from me? Was she recalling the man's words, fitting them to the
facts and the past, adding this and that circumstance? Was she, though
she had rebuffed him in the body, collating, now he was gone, all that
he had said, and out of these scraps piecing together the damning truth?
Was she, for all that she had said, beginning to see me as I was? The
thought tortured me. I could brook uncertainty no longer. I went nearer
to her and touched her sleeve.

'Mademoiselle,' I said in a voice which sounded hoarse and unnatural
even in my own ears, 'do you believe this of me?'

She started violently, and turned.

'Pardon, Monsieur!' she murmured, passing her hand over her brow; 'I had
forgotten that you were here. Do I believe what?'

'What that man said of me,' I muttered.

'That!' she exclaimed. And then she stood a moment gazing at me in a
strange fashion. 'Do I believe that, Monsieur? But come, come!' she
continued impetuously. 'Come, and I will show you if I believe it. But
not here.'

She turned as she spoke, and led the way on the instant into the house
through the parlour door, which stood half open. The room inside was
pitch dark, but she took me fearlessly by the hand and led me quickly
through it, and along the passage, until we came to the cheerful
lighted hall, where a great fire burned on the hearth. All traces of the
soldiers' occupation had been swept away. But the room was empty.

She led me to the fire, and there in the full light, no longer a shadowy
creature, but red-lipped, brilliant, throbbing with life and beauty,
she stood opposite me--her eyes shining, her colour high, her breast
heaving.

'Do I believe it?' she said in a thrilling voice. 'I will tell you. M.
de Cocheforet's hiding-place is in the hut behind the fern-stack, two
furlongs beyond the village on the road to Auch. You know now what no
one else knows, he and I and Madame excepted. You hold in your hands his
life and my honour; and you know also, M. de Berault, whether I believe
that tale.'

'My God!' I cried. And I stood looking at her until something of the
horror in my eyes crept into hers, and she shuddered and stepped back
from me.

'What is it? What is it?' she whispered, clasping her hands. And with
all the colour gone suddenly from her cheeks she peered trembling into
the corners and towards the door. 'There is no one here.'

I forced myself to speak, though I was trembling all over like a man in
an ague. 'No, Mademoiselle, there is no one here,' I muttered. 'There
is no one here.' And then I let my head fall on my breast, and I stood
before her, the statue of despair. Had she felt a grain of suspicion, a
grain of doubt, my bearing must have opened her eyes; but her mind was
cast in so noble a mould that, having once thought ill of me and been
converted, she could feel no doubt again. She must trust all in all.
A little recovered from her fright, she stood looking at me in great
wonder; and at last she had a thought--

'You are not well?' she said suddenly. 'It is your old wound, Monsieur.
Now I have it?'

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' I muttered faintly, 'it is.'

'I will call Clon!' she cried impetuously. And then, with a sob: 'Ah!
poor Clon! He is gone. But there is still Louis. I will call him and he
will get you something.'

She was gone from the room before I could stop her, and I stood leaning
against the table possessor at last of the secret which I had come so
far to win; able in a moment to open the door and go out into the night,
and make use of it--and yet the most unhappy of men. The sweat stood
on my brow; my eyes wandered round the room; I turned towards the door,
with some mad thought of flight--of flight from her, from the house,
from everything; and I had actually taken a step towards this, when on
the door, the outer door, there came a sudden hurried knocking which
jarred every nerve in my body. I started, and stopped. I stood a moment
in the middle of the floor gazing at the door, as at a ghost. Then,
glad of action, glad of anything that might relieve the tension of my
feelings, I strode to it and pulled it sharply open.

On the threshold, his flushed face lit up by the light behind me,
stood one of the knaves whom I had brought with me to Auch. He had been
running, and panted heavily; but he had kept his wits, and the instant
I, appeared he grasped my sleeve.

'Ah! Monsieur, the very man!' he cried. 'Quick! come this instant,
lose not a moment, and you may yet be first. They have the secret! The
soldiers have found Monsieur!'

'Found him?' I echoed. 'M. de Cocheforet?'

'No; but they know the place where he lies. It was found by accident.
The Lieutenant was gathering his men when I came away. If we are quick,
we may yet be first.'

'But the place?' I said.

'I could not hear,' he answered bluntly. 'We must hang on their skirts,
and at the last moment strike in. It is the only way, Monsieur.'

The pair of pistols I had taken from the shock-headed man lay on a chest
by the door. Without waiting for more I snatched them up and my hat, and
joined him, and in a moment we were running down the garden. I looked
back once before we passed the gate, and I saw the light streaming
out through the door which. I had left open; and I fancied that for an
instant a figure darkened the gap. But the fancy only strengthened the
one single purpose, the iron resolve, which had taken possession of me
and all my thoughts. I must be first; I must anticipate the Lieutenant;
I must make the arrest myself. I must be first. And I ran on only the
faster.

We were across the meadow and in the wood in a moment. There, instead of
keeping along the common path, I boldly singled out--my senses seemed to
be preternaturally keen--the smaller trail by which Clon had brought
us. Along this I ran unfalteringly, avoiding logs and pitfalls as by
instinct, and following all its turns and twists, until we came to the
back of the inn, and could hear the murmur of subdued voices in the
village street, the sharp low word of command, and the clink of weapons;
and could see over and between the houses the dull glare of lanthorns
and torches.

I grasped my man's arm, and crouched down listening. When I had heard
enough, 'Where is your mate?' I said in his ear.

'With them,' he muttered.

'Then come,' I whispered rising. 'I have seen what I want. Let us go.'

But he caught me by the arm and detained me.

'You don't know the way,' he said. 'Steady, steady, Monsieur. You go
too fast. They are just moving. Let us join them, and strike in when the
time comes. We must let them guide us.'

'Fool!' I said, shaking off his hand. 'I tell you, I know where he is! I
know where they are going. Come, and we will pluck the fruit while they
are on the road to it.'

His only answer was an exclamation of surprise. At that moment the
lights began to move. The Lieutenant was starting. The moon was not yet
up, the sky was grey and cloudy; to advance where we were was to step
into a wall of blackness. But we had lost too much already, and I did
not hesitate. Bidding my companion follow me and use his legs, I sprang
through a low fence which rose before us; then stumbling blindly over
some broken ground in the rear of the houses, I came with a fall or
two to a little watercourse with steep sides. Through this I plunged
recklessly and up the farther side, and, breathless and panting,
gained the road, beyond the village, and fifty yards in advance of the
Lieutenant's troop.

They had only two lanthorns burning, and we were beyond the circle of
light cast by these; while the steady tramp of so many footsteps covered
the noise we made. We were in no danger of being noticed, and in a
twinkling we turned our backs, and as fast as we could we ran down the
road. Fortunately, they were thinking more of secrecy than speed, and in
a minute we had doubled the distance between them and us. In two minutes
their lights were mere sparks shining in the gloom behind us. We lost
even the tramp of their feet. Then I began to look out and go more
slowly, peering into the shadows on either side for the fernstack.

On one hand the hill rose steeply, on the other it fell away to the
stream. On neither side was close wood, or my difficulties had been
immensely increased; but scattered oak trees stood here and there among
the bracken. This helped me, and presently, on the upper side, I came
upon the dense substance of the stack looming black against the lighter
hill.

My heart beat fast, but it was no time for thought. Bidding the man in
a whisper to follow me and be ready to back me up, I climbed the bank
softly, and, with a pistol in my hand, felt my way to the rear of
the stack, thinking to find a hut there, set against the fern, and M.
Cocheforet in it. But I found no hut. There was none; and, moreover, it
was so dark now we were off the road, that it came upon me suddenly,
as I stood between the hill and the stack, that I had undertaken a very
difficult thing. The hut behind the fern stack. But how far behind? how
far from it? The dark slope stretched above us, infinite, immeasurable
shrouded in night. To begin to climb it in search of a tiny hut,
possibly well hidden and hard to find in daylight, seemed an endeavour
as hopeless as to meet with the needle in the hay! And now while I
stood, chilled and doubting, almost despairing, the steps of the troop
in the road began to grow audible, began to come nearer.

'Well, Monsieur le Capitaine?' the man beside me muttered--in wonder why
I stood. 'Which way? or they will be before us yet.'

I tried to think, to reason it out; to consider where the hut should be;
while the wind sighed through the oaks, and here and there I could hear
an acorn fall. But the thing pressed too close on me; my thoughts would
not be hurried, and at last I said at a venture,--

'Up the hill. Straight up from the stack.'

He did not demur, and we plunged at the ascent, knee-deep in bracken and
furze, sweating at every pore with our exertions, and hearing the troop
come every moment nearer on the road below. Doubtless they knew exactly
whither to go! Forced to stop and take breath when we had scrambled up
fifty yards or so, I saw their lanthorns shining like moving glow-worms;
I could even hear the clink of steel. For all I could tell, the hut
might be down there, and we be moving from it. But it was too late to go
back now--they were close to the fern-stack; and in despair I turned
to the hill again. A dozen steps and I stumbled. I rose and plunged on
again; again stumbled. Then I found that I was treading level earth.
And--was it water I saw before me, below me? or some mirage of the sky?

Neither; and I gripped my fellow's arm, as he came abreast of me, and
stopped him sharply. Below us in the middle of a steep hollow, a pit in
the hill-side, a light shone out through some aperture and quivered on
the mist, like the pale lamp of a moorland hobgoblin. It made itself
visible, displaying nothing else; a wisp of light in the bottom of a
black bowl. Yet my spirits rose with a great bound at sight of it; for I
knew that I had stumbled on the place I sought.

In the common run of things I should have weighed my next step
carefully, and gone about it slowly. But here was no place for thought,
nor room for delay; and I slid down the side of the hollow on the
instant, and the moment my feet touched the bottom sprang to the door of
the little hut, whence the light issued. A stone turned under my feet
in my rush, and I fell on my knees on the threshold; but the fall only
brought my face to a level with the face of the man who lay inside on
a bed of fern. He had been reading. Startled by the sound I made, he
dropped his book, and in a flash stretched out his hand for a weapon.
But the muzzle of my pistol covered him, he was not in a posture from
which he could spring, and at a sharp word from me he dropped his hand;
the tigerish glare which flickered for an instant in his eyes gave place
to a languid smile, and he shrugged his shoulders.

'EH BIEN!,' he said with marvellous composure. 'Taken at last! Well, I
was tired of it.'

'You are my prisoner, M. de Cocheforet,' I answered. 'Move a hand and I
kill you. But you have still a choice.'

'Truly?' he said, raising his eyebrows.

'Yes. My orders are to take you to Paris alive or dead. Give me your
parole that you will make no attempt to escape, and you shall go thither
at your ease and as a gentleman. Refuse, and I shall disarm and bind
you, and you go as a prisoner.'

'What force have you?' he asked curtly. He still lay on his elbow, his
cloak covering him, the little Marot in which he had been reading close
to his hand. But his quick black eyes, which looked the keener for the
pallor and thinness of his face, roved ceaselessly over me, probed the
darkness behind me, took note of everything.

'Enough to compel you, Monsieur,' I replied sternly; 'but that is not
all. There are thirty dragoons coming up the hill to secure you, and
they will make you no such offer. Surrender to me before they come, and
give me your parole, and I will do all I can for your comfort. Delay,
and you must fall into their hands. There can be no escape.'

'You will take my word?' he said slowly.

'Give it, and you may keep your pistols, M. de Cocheforet.'

'Tell me at least that you are not alone.'

'I am not alone.'

'Then I give it,' he said with a sigh. 'And for Heaven's sake get me
something to eat and a bed. I am tired of this pig-sty. MON DIEU! it is
a fortnight since I slept between sheets.'

'You shall sleep to-night in your own house, if you please,' I answered
hurriedly. 'But here they come. Be good enough to stay where you are for
a moment, and I will meet them.'

I stepped out into the darkness, just as the Lieutenant, after posting
his men round the hollow, slid down with a couple of sergeants to make
the arrest. The place round the open door was pitch-dark. He had not
espied my man, who had lodged himself in the deepest shadow of the hut,
and when he saw me come out across the light he took me for
Cocheforet. In a twinkling he thrust a pistol into my face, and cried
triumphantly,--'You are my prisoner!' while one of the sergeants raised
a lanthorn and threw its light into my eyes.

'What folly is this?' I said savagely.

The Lieutenant's jaw fell, and he stood for a moment paralysed with
astonishment. Less than an hour before he had left me at the Chateau.
Thence he had come hither with the briefest delay; yet he found me here
before him. He swore fearfully, his face black, his moustachios stiff
with rage.

'What is this? What is it?' he cried. 'Where is the man?'

'What man?' I said.

'This Cocheforet!' he roared, carried away by his passion. 'Don't lie to
me! He is here, and I will have him!'

'You are too late,' I said, watching him heedfully. 'M. de Cocheforet is
here, but he has already surrendered to me, and is my prisoner.'

'Your prisoner?'

'Certainly!' I answered, facing the man with all the harshness I could
muster. 'I have arrested him by virtue of the Cardinal's commission
granted to me. And by virtue of the same I shall keep him.'

'You will keep him?'

'I shall!'

He stared at me for a moment, utterly aghast; the picture of defeat.
Then on a sudden I saw his face lighten with, a new idea.

'It is a d--d ruse!' he shouted, brandishing his pistol like a madman.
'It is a cheat and a fraud! By God! you have no commission! I see
through it! I see through it all! You have come here, and you have
hocussed us! You are of their side, and this is your last shift to save
him!'

'What folly is this?' I said contemptuously.

'No folly at all,' he answered, perfect conviction in his tone. 'You
have played upon us. You have fooled us. But I see through it now. An
hour ago I exposed you to that fine Madame at the house there, and I
thought it a marvel that she did not believe me. I thought it a marvel
that she did not see through you, when you stood there before her,
confounded, tongue-tied, a rogue convicted. But I understand now. She
knew you. She was in the plot, and you were in the plot, and I, who
thought that I was opening her eyes, was the only one fooled. But it
is my turn now. You have played a bold part and a clever one,' he
continued, a sinister light in his little eyes,' and I congratulate you.
But it is at an end now, Monsieur. You took us in finely with your talk
of Monseigneur, and his commission and your commission, and the rest.
But I am not to be blinded any longer--or bullied. You have arrested
him, have you? You have arrested him. Well, by G--, I shall arrest him,
and I shall arrest you too.'

'You are mad!' I said staggered as much by this new view of the matter
as by his perfect certainty. 'Mad, Lieutenant.'

'I was,' he snarled. 'But I am sane now. I was mad when you imposed upon
us, when you persuaded me to think that you were fooling the women to
get the secret out of them, while all the time you were sheltering them,
protecting them, aiding them, and hiding him--then I was mad. But not
now. However, I ask your pardon. I thought you the cleverest sneak and
the dirtiest hound Heaven ever made. I find you are cleverer than I
thought, and an honest traitor. Your pardon.'

One of the men, who stood about the rim of the bowl above us, laughed. I
looked at the Lieutenant and could willingly have killed him.

'MON DIEU!' I said--and I was so furious in my turn that I could
scarcely speak. 'Do you say that I am an impostor--that I do not hold
the Cardinal's commission?'

'I do say that,' he answered coolly.

'And that I belong to the rebel party?'

'I do,' he replied in the same tone. 'In fact,' with a grin, 'I say that
you are an honest man on the wrong side, M. de Berault. And you say that
you are a scoundrel on the right. The advantage, however, is with me,
and I shall back my opinion by arresting you.'

A ripple of coarse laughter ran round the hollow. The sergeant who held
the lanthorn grinned, and a trooper at a distance called out of the
darkness 'A BON CHAT BON RAT!' This brought a fresh burst of laughter,
while I stood speechless, confounded by the stubbornness, the crassness,
the insolence of the man. 'You fool!' I cried at last, 'you fool!' And
then M. de Cocheforet, who had come out of the hut and taken his stand
at my elbow, interrupted me.

'Pardon me one moment,' he said, airily, looking at the Lieutenant with
raised eyebrows and pointing to me with his thumb, 'but I am puzzled
between you. This gentleman's name? Is it de Berault or de Barthe?'

'I am M. de Berault,' I said, brusquely, answering for myself.

'Of Paris?'

'Yes, Monsieur, of Paris.'

'You are not, then, the gentleman who has been honouring my poor house
with his presence?'

'Oh, yes!' the Lieutenant struck in, grinning. 'He is that gentleman,
too.'

'But I thought--I understood that that was M. de Barthe!'

'I am M. de Barthe, also,' I retorted impatiently. 'What of that,
Monsieur? It was my mother's name. I took it when I came down here.'

'To--er--to arrest me, may I ask?'

'Yes,' I said, doggedly; 'to arrest you. What of that?'

'Nothing,' he replied slowly and with a steady look at me--a look I
could not meet. 'Except that, had I known this before, M. de Berault I
should have thought longer before I surrendered to you.'

The Lieutenant laughed, and I felt my cheek burn; but I affected to
see nothing, and turned to him again. 'Now, Monsieur,' I said, 'are you
satisfied?'

'No,' he answered? 'I am not! You two may have rehearsed this pretty
scene a dozen times. The word, it seems to me, is--Quick march, back to
quarters.'

At length I found myself driven to play my last card; much against my
will.

'Not so,' I said. 'I have my commission.'

'Produce it!' he replied incredulously.

'Do you think that I carry it with me?' I cried in scorn. 'Do you think
that when I came here, alone, and not with fifty dragoons at my back, I
carried the Cardinal's seal in my pocket for the first lackey to find.
But you shall have it. Where is that knave of mine?'

The words were scarcely out of my mouth before a ready hand thrust a
paper into my fingers. I opened it slowly, glanced at it, and amid a
pause of surprise gave it to the Lieutenant. He looked for a moment
confounded. Then, with a last instinct of suspicion, he bade the
sergeant hold up the lanthorn; and by its light he proceeded to spell
through the document.

'Umph!' he ejaculated with an ugly look when he had come to the end, 'I
see.' And he read it aloud:--

   'BY THESE PRESENTS, I COMMAND AND EMPOWER
    GILLES DE BERAULT, SIER DE BERAULT, TO
    SEEK FOR, HOLD, AND ARREST, AND DELIVER
    TO THE GOVERNOR OF THE BASTILLE THE BODY
    OF HENRI DE COCHEFORET, AND TO DO ALL
    ACTS AND THINGS AS SHALL BE NECESSARY
    TO EFFECT SUCH ARREST AND DELIVERY, FOR
    WHICH THESE SHALL BE HIS WARRANT.
    (Signed) THE CARDINAL DE RICHELIEU.'

When he had done--he read the signature with a peculiar
intonation--someone said softly, 'VIVE LE ROI!' and there was a moment's
silence. The sergeant lowered his lanthorn. 'Is it enough?' I said
hoarsely, glaring from face to face.

The Lieutenant bowed stiffly.

'For me?' he said. 'Quite, Monsieur. I beg your pardon again. I find
that my first impressions were the correct ones. Sergeant! give the
gentleman his papers!' and, turning his shoulder rudely, he tossed the
commission to the sergeant, who gave it to me, grinning.

I knew that the clown would not fight, and he had his men round him; and
I had no choice but to swallow the insult. I put the paper in my breast,
with as much indifference as I could assume; and as I did so, he gave a
sharp order. The troopers began to form on the edge above; the men who
had descended to climb the bank again.

As the group behind him began to open and melt away, I caught sight of
a white robe in the middle of it. The next moment, appearing with a
suddenness which was like a blow on the cheek to me, Mademoiselle de
Cocheforet glided forward towards me. She had a hood on her head, drawn
low; and for a moment I could not see her face, I forgot her brother's
presence at my elbow, I forgot other things, and, from habit and impulse
rather than calculation, I took a step forward to meet her; though my
tongue cleaved to the roof of my mouth, and I was dumb and trembling.

But she recoiled with such a look of white hate, of staring, frozen-eyed
abhorrence, that I stepped back as if she had indeed struck me. It did
not need the words which accompanied the look--the 'DO NOT TOUCH ME!'
which she hissed at me as she drew her skirts together--to drive me to
the farther edge of the hollow; where I stood with clenched teeth, and
nails driven into the flesh, while she hung, sobbing tearless sobs, on
her brother's neck.



CHAPTER XII. THE ROAD TO PARIS

I remember hearing Marshal Bassompierre, who, of all the men within
my knowledge, had the widest experience, say that not dangers but
discomforts prove a man and show what he is; and that the worst sores in
life are caused by crumpled rose-leaves and not by thorns.

I am inclined to think him right, for I remember that when I came from
my room on the morning after the arrest, and found hall and parlour and
passage empty, and all the common rooms of the house deserted, and no
meal laid; and when I divined anew from this discovery the feeling of
the house towards me--however natural and to be expected--I remember
that I felt as sharp a pang as when, the night before, I had had to face
discovery and open rage and scorn. I stood in the silent, empty parlour,
and looked on the familiar things with a sense of desolation, of
something lost and gone, which I could not understand. The morning was
grey and cloudy, the air sharp, a shower was falling. The rose-bushes
outside swayed in the wind, and inside, where I could remember the hot
sunshine lying on floor and table, the rain beat in and stained the
boards. The inner door flapped and creaked on its hinges. I thought of
other days and of meals I had taken there, and of the scent of flowers;
and I fled to the hall in despair.

But here, too, were no signs of life or company, no comfort, no
attendance. The ashes of the logs, by whose blaze Mademoiselle had told
me the secret, lay on the hearth white and cold fit emblem of the change
that had taken place; and now and then a drop of moisture, sliding down
the great chimney, pattered among them. The main door stood open, as if
the house had no longer anything to guard. The only living thing to be
seen was a hound which roamed about restlessly, now gazing at the empty
hearth now lying down with pricked cars and watchful eyes. Some leaves,
which had been blown in by the wind, rustled in a corner.

I went out moodily into the garden and wandered down one path and up
another, looking at the dripping woods, and remembering things, until
I came to the stone seat. On it, against the wall, trickling with
raindrops, and with a dead leaf half filling its narrow neck, stood the
pitcher of food. I thought how much had happened since Mademoiselle took
her hand from it and the sergeant's lanthorn disclosed it to me; and,
sighing grimly, I went in again through the parlour door.

A woman was on her knees, on the hearth kindling the belated fire. She
had her back to me, and I stood a moment looking at her doubtfully,
wondering how she would bear herself and what she would say to me. Then
she turned, and I started back, crying out her name in horror--for it
was Madame! Madame de Cocheforet!

She was plainly dressed, and her childish face was wan and piteous with
weeping; but either the night had worn out her passion and drained her
tears, or some great exigency had given her temporary calmness, for
she was perfectly composed. She shivered as her eyes met mine, and she
blinked as if a bright light had been suddenly thrust before her; but
that was all, and she turned again to her task without speaking.

'Madame! Madame!' I cried in a frenzy of distress. 'What is this?'

'The servants would not do it,' she answered in a low but steady voice.
'You are still our guest, Monsieur.'

'But I cannot suffer it!' I cried. 'Madame de Cocheforet, I will not--'

She raised her hand with a strange patient expression in her face.

'Hush! please,' she said. 'Hush! you trouble me.'

The fire blazed up as she spoke, and she rose slowly from it, and with a
lingering look at it went out, leaving me to stand and stare and listen
in the middle of the floor. Presently I heard her coming back along the
passage, and she entered bearing a tray with wine and meat and bread.
She set it down on the table, and with the same wan face, trembling
always on the verge of tears, she began to lay out the things. The
glasses clinked fitfully against the plates as she handled them; the
knives jarred with one another. And I stood by, trembling myself; and
endured this strange kind of penance.

She signed to me at last to sit down; and she went herself, and stood in
the garden doorway with her back to me. I obeyed. I sat down. But though
I had eaten nothing since the afternoon of the day before, I could not
swallow. I fumbled with my knife, and drank; and grew hot and angry at
this farce; and then looked through the window at the dripping bushes,
and the rain and the distant sundial--and grew cold again.

Suddenly she turned round and came to my side. 'You do not eat,' she
said.

I threw down my knife, and sprang up in a frenzy of passion. 'MON DIEU!
Madame,' I cried, 'do you think that I have NO heart?'

And then in a moment I knew what I had done, what a folly I had
committed. For in a moment she was on her knees on the floor, clasping
my knees, pressing her wet cheeks to my rough clothes, crying to me for
mercy--for life! life! his life! Oh, it was horrible! It was horrible to
hear her gasping voice, to see her fair hair falling over my mud-stained
boots, to mark her slender little form convulsed with sobs, to feel that
it was a woman, a gentlewoman, who thus abased herself at my feet!

'Oh, Madame! Madame!' I cried in my pain, 'I beg you to rise. Rise, or I
must go!'

'His life! only his life!' she moaned passionately. 'What had he done
to you--that you should hunt him down? what have we done to you that you
should slay us? Oh! have mercy! Have mercy! Let him go, and we will pray
for you, I and my sister will pray for you, every morning and night of
our lives.'

I was in terror lest someone should come and see her lying there, and I
stooped and tried to raise her. But she only sank the lower, until her
tender little hands touched the rowels of my spurs. I dared not move, At
last I took a sudden resolution.

'Listen, then, Madame!' I said almost sternly, 'if you will not rise.
You forget everything, both how I stand, and how small my power is! You
forget that if I were to release your husband to-day he would be seized
within the hour by those who are still in the village and who are
watching every road--who have not ceased to suspect my movements and my
intentions. You forget, I say my circumstances--'

She cut me short on that word. She sprang to her feet and faced me. One
moment more and I should have said something to the purpose. But at that
word she stood before me, white, breathless, dishevelled, struggling for
speech.

'Oh, yes, yes!' she panted eagerly. 'I know--I know!' And she thrust her
hand into her bosom and plucked something out and gave it to me--forced
it upon me. 'I know--I know!' she said again. 'Take it, and God
reward you, Monsieur! God reward you! We give it freely--freely and
thankfully!'

I stood and looked at her and it; and slowly I froze. She had given me
the packet--the packet I had restored to Mademoiselle--the parcel of
jewels. I weighed it in my hands, and my heart grew hard again, for
I knew that this was Mademoiselle's doing; that it was she who,
mistrusting the effect of Madame's tears and prayers, had armed her with
this last weapon--this dirty bribe. I flung it down on the table among
the plates.

'Madame!' I cried ruthlessly, all my pity changed to anger, 'you mistake
me altogether! I have heard hard words enough in the last twenty-four
hours, and I know what you think of me! But you have yet to learn that I
have never done one thing. I have never turned traitor to the hand that
employed me, nor sold my own side! When I do so for a treasure ten times
the worth of that, may my hand rot off!'

She sank on a seat with a moan of despair; and precisely at that moment
M. de Cocheforet opened the door and came in. Over his shoulder I had a
glimpse of Mademoiselle's proud face, a little whiter than of yore, with
dark marks under the eyes, but like Satan's for coldness.

'What is this?' he said, frowning, as his eyes lighted on Madame.

'It is--that we start at eleven o'clock, Monsieur,' I answered, bowing
curtly. And I went out by the other door.

. . . . .

That I might not be present at their parting I remained in the garden
until the hour I had appointed was well past; and then, without entering
the house, I went to the stable entrance. Here I found all in readiness,
the two troopers whose company I had requisitioned as far as Auch,
already in the saddle, my own two knaves waiting with my sorrel and M.
de Cocheforet's chestnut. Another horse was being led up and down by
Louis, and, alas! my heart moved at the sight, for it bore a lady's
saddle. We were to have company then. Was it Madame who meant to come
with us, or Mademoiselle? And how far? To Auch?

I suppose that they had set some kind of a watch on me, for as I walked
up M. de Cocheforet and his sister came out of the house; he with a pale
face and bright eyes, and a twitching visible in his cheek--though he
still affected a jaunty bearing; she wearing a black mask.

'Mademoiselle accompanies us?' I said formally.

'With your permission, Monsieur,' he answered with bitter politeness.
But I saw that he was choking with emotion; he had just parted from his
wife, and I turned away.

When we were all mounted he looked at me.

'Perhaps--as you have my parole, you will permit me to ride alone?' he
said with a little hesitation. 'And--'

'Without me!' I rejoined keenly. 'Assuredly, so far as is possible.'

Accordingly I directed the troopers to ride before him, keeping out of
earshot, while my two men followed him at a little distance with their
carbines on their knees. Last of all, I rode myself with my eyes open
and a pistol loose in my holster. M. de Cocheforet muttered a sneer at
so many precautions and the mountain made of his request; but I had not
done so much and come so far, I had not faced scorn and insults to be
cheated of my prize at last; and aware that until we were beyond Auch
there must be hourly and pressing danger of a rescue, I was determined
that he who should wrest my prisoner from me should pay dearly for it.
Only pride, and, perhaps, in a degree also, appetite for a fight, had
prevented me borrowing ten troopers instead of two.

As was wont I looked with a lingering eye and many memories at the
little bridge, the narrow woodland path, the first roofs of the village;
all now familiar, all seen for the last time. Up the brook a party of
soldiers were dragging for the captain's body. A furlong farther on, a
cottage, burned by some carelessness in the night, lay a heap of black
ashes. Louis ran beside us weeping; the last brown leaves fluttered down
in showers. And between my eyes and all, the slow steady rain fell and
fell. And so I left Cocheforet.

Louis went with us to a point a mile beyond the village, and there stood
and saw us go, cursing me furiously as I passed. Looking back when we
had ridden on, I still saw him standing, and after a moment's hesitation
I rode back to him.

'Listen, fool!' I said, cutting him short in the midst of his mowing and
snarling, 'and give this message to your mistress. Tell her from me that
it will be with her husband as it was with M. de Regnier, when he fell
into the hands of his enemy--no better and no worse.'

'You want to kill her, too, I suppose?' he answered glowering at me.

'No, fool, I want to save her,' I retorted wrathfully. 'Tell her that,
just that and no more, and you will see the result.'

'I shall not,' he said sullenly. 'A message from you indeed!' And he
spat on the ground.

'Then on your head be it,' I answered solemnly, And I turned my horse's
head and galloped fast after the others. But I felt sure that he would
report what I had said, if it were only out of curiosity; and it would
be strange if Madame, a gentlewoman of the south, bred among old family
traditions, did not understand the reference.

And so we began our journey; sadly, under dripping trees and a leaden
sky. The country we had to traverse was the same I had trodden on the
last day of my march southwards, but the passage of a month had changed
the face of everything. Green dells, where springs welling out of the
chalk had once made of the leafy bottom a fairies' home, strewn with
delicate ferns and hung with mosses, were now swamps into which our
horses sank to the fetlock. Sunny brews, whence I had viewed the
champaign and traced my forward path, had become bare, wind-swept
ridges. The beech woods that had glowed with ruddy light were naked now;
mere black trunks and rigid arms pointing to heaven. An earthy smell
filled the air; a hundred paces away a wall of mist closed the view.
We plodded on sadly up hill and down hill, now fording brooks, already
stained with flood-water, now crossing barren heaths. But up hill or
down hill, whatever the outlook, I was never permitted to forget that
I was the jailor, the ogre, the villain; that I, riding behind in my
loneliness, was the blight on all--the death-spot. True, I was
behind the others--I escaped their eyes. But there was not a line of
Mademoiselle's figure that did not speak scorn to me; not a turn of head
that did not seem to say, 'Oh, God, that such a thing should breathe.'

I had only speech with her once during the day, and that was on the last
ridge before we went down into the valley to climb up again to Auch.
The rain had ceased; the sun, near its setting, shone faintly; for a few
moments we stood on the brow and looked southwards while we breathed the
horses. The mist lay like a pall on the country we had traversed; but
beyond and above it, gleaming pearl-like in the level rays, the line
of the mountains stood up like a land of enchantment, soft, radiant,
wonderful!--or like one of those castles on the Hill of Glass of which
the old romances tell us. I forgot for an instant how we were placed,
and I cried to my neighbour that it was the fairest pageant I had ever
seen.

She--it was Mademoiselle, and she had taken off her mask--cast one
look at me in answer; only one, but it conveyed disgust and loathing so
unspeakable that scorn beside them would have been a gift. I reined in
my horse as if she had struck me, and felt myself go first hot and then
cold under her eyes. Then she looked another way.

But I did not forget the lesson; and after that I avoided her more
sedulously than before. We lay that night at Auch, and I gave M. de
Cocheforet the utmost liberty, even permitting him to go out and return
at his will. In the morning, believing that on the farther side of Auch
we ran little risk of attack, I dismissed the two dragoons, and an hour
after sunrise we set out again. The day was dry and cold, the weather
more promising. I proposed to go by way of Lectoure, crossing the
Garonne at Agen; and I thought that, with roads continually improving
as we moved northwards, we should be able to make good progress before
night. My two men rode first, I came last by myself.

Our way lay down the valley of the Gers, under poplars and by long rows
of willows, and presently the sun came out and warmed us. Unfortunately
the rain of the day before had swollen the brooks which crossed our
path, and we more than once had a difficulty in fording them. Noon found
us little more than half way to Lectoure, and I was growing each minute
more impatient when our road, which had for a little while left the
river bank, dropped down to it again, and I saw before us another
crossing, half ford half slough. My men tried it gingerly and gave back
and tried it again in another place; and finally, just as Mademoiselle
and her brother came up to them, floundered through and sprang slantwise
up the farther bank.

The delay had been long enough to bring me, with no good will of my own,
close upon the Cocheforets. Mademoiselle's horse made a little business
of the place, and in the result we entered the water almost together;
and I crossed close on her heels. The bank on either side was steep;
while crossing we could see neither before nor behind. But at the moment
I thought nothing of this nor of her delay; and I was following her
quite at my leisure and picking my way, when the sudden report of a
carbine, a second report, and a yell of alarm in front thrilled me
through.

On the instant, while the sound was still in my ears, I saw it all. Like
a hot iron piercing my brain the truth flashed into my mind. We were
attacked! We were attacked, and I was here helpless in this pit, this
trap! The loss of a second while I fumbled here, Mademoiselle's horse
barring the way, might be fatal.

There was but one way. I turned my horse straight at the steep bank, and
he breasted it. One moment he hung as if he must fall back. Then, with
a snort of terror and a desperate bound, he topped it, and gained the
level, trembling and snorting.

Seventy paces away on the road lay one of my men. He had fallen, horse
and man, and lay still. Near him, with his back against a bank, stood
his fellow, on foot, pressed by four horsemen, and shouting. As my
eye lighted on the scene he let fly with a carbine, and dropped one.
I clutched a pistol from my holster and seized my horse by the head.
I might save the man yet, I shouted to him to encourage him, and was
driving in my spurs to second my voice, when a sudden vicious blow,
swift and unexpected, struck the pistol from my hand.

I made a snatch at it as it fell, but missed it, and before I could
recover myself, Mademoiselle thrust her horse furiously against mine,
and with her riding-whip lashed the sorrel across the ears. As the horse
reared up madly, I had a glimpse of her eyes flashing hate through her
mask; of her hand again uplifted; the next moment, I was down in the
road, ingloriously unhorsed, the sorrel was galloping away, and her
horse, scared in its turn, was plunging unmanageably a score of paces
from me.

But for that I think that she would have trampled on me. As it was, I
was free to rise, and draw, and in a twinkling was running towards the
fighters. All had happened in a few seconds. My man was still defending
himself, the smoke of the carbine had scarcely risen. I sprang across
a fallen tree that intervened, and at the same moment two of the men
detached themselves and rode to meet me. One, whom I took to be the
leader, was masked. He came furiously at me to ride me down, but I
leaped aside nimbly, and, evading him, rushed at the other, and scaring
his horse, so that he dropped his point, cut him across the shoulder,
before he could guard himself. He plunged away, cursing and trying to
hold in his horse, and I turned to meet the masked man.

'You villain!' he cried, riding at me again. This time he manoeuvred his
horse so skilfully that I was hard put to it to prevent him knocking
me down; while I could not with all my efforts reach him to hurt him.
'Surrender, will you?' he cried, 'you bloodhound!'

I wounded him slightly in the knee for answer; before I could do more
his companion came back, and the two set upon me, slashing at my head so
furiously and towering above me with so great an advantage that it was
all I could do to guard it. I was soon glad to fall back against the
bank. In this sort of conflict my rapier would have been of little
use, but fortunately I had armed myself before I left Paris with a
cut-and-thrust sword for the road; and though my mastery of the weapon
was not on a par with my rapier play, I was able to fend off their cuts,
and by an occasional prick keep the horses at a distance. Still, they
swore and cut at me; and it was trying work. A little delay might enable
the other man to come to their help, or Mademoiselle, for all I knew,
might shoot me with my own pistol. I was unfeignedly glad when a lucky
parade sent the masked man's sword flying across the road. On that he
pushed his horse recklessly at me, spurring it without mercy; but the
animal, which I had several times touched, reared up instead, and threw
him at the very moment that I wounded his companion a second time in the
arm, and made him give back.

The scene was now changed. The man in the mask staggered to his feet,
and felt stupidly for a pistol. But he could not find one, and he was
in no state to use it if he had. He reeled helplessly to the bank
and leaned against it. The man I had wounded was in scarcely better
condition. He retreated before me, but in a moment, losing courage,
let drop his sword, and, wheeling round, cantered off, clinging to his
pommel. There remained only the fellow engaged with my man, and I turned
to see how they were getting on. They were standing to take breath, so
I ran towards them; but on seeing me coming, this rascal, too, whipped
round his horse and disappeared in the wood, and left us victors.

The first thing I did--and I remember it to this day with pleasure--was
to plunge my hand into my pocket, take out half of all the money I had
in the world, and press it on the man who had fought for me so stoutly.
In my joy I could have kissed him! It was not only that I had escaped
defeat by the skin of my teeth--and his good sword; but I knew, and
felt, and thrilled with the knowledge, that the fight had, in a sense,
redeemed my character. He was wounded in two places, and I had a scratch
or two, and had lost my horse; and my other poor fellow was dead as a
herring. But, speaking for myself, I would have spent half the blood in
my body to purchase the feeling with which I turned back to speak to M.
de Cocheforet and his sister. Mademoiselle had dismounted, and with her
face averted and her mask pushed on one side, was openly weeping.
Her brother, who had faithfully kept his place by the ford from the
beginning of the fight to the end, met me with raised eyebrows and a
peculiar smile.

'Acknowledge my virtue,' he said airily. 'I am here, M. de Berault;
which is more than can be said of the two gentlemen who have just ridden
off.'

'Yes,' I answered with a touch of bitterness. 'I wish that they had not
shot my poor man before they went.'

He shrugged his shoulders.

'They were my friends,' he said. 'You must not expect me to blame them.
But that is not all, M. de Berault.'

'No,' I said, wiping my sword. 'There is this gentleman in the mask.'
And I turned to go towards him.

'M. de Berault!' Cocheforet called after me, his tone strained and
abrupt.

I stood. 'Pardon?' I said, turning.

'That gentleman?' he said, hesitating and looking at me doubtfully.
'Have you considered what will happen to him if you give him up to the
authorities?'

'Who is he?' I asked sharply.

'That is rather a delicate question,' he answered frowning.

'Not for me,' I replied brutally, 'since he is in my power. If he will
take off his mask I shall know better what I intend to do with him.'

The stranger had lost his hat in his fall, and his fair hair, stained
with dust, hung in curls on his shoulders. He was a tall man, of a
slender, handsome presence, and, though his dress was plain and almost
rough, I espied a splendid jewel on his hand, and fancied that I
detected other signs of high quality. He still lay against the bank in a
half-swooning condition, and seemed unconscious of my scrutiny.

'Should I know him if he unmasked?' I said suddenly, a new idea in my
head.

'You would,' M. de Cocheforet answered.

'And?'

'It would be bad for everyone.'

'Ho! ho!' I replied softly, looking hard first at my old prisoner, and
then at my new one. 'Then--what do you wish me to do?'

'Leave him here!' M. de Cocheforet answered, his face flushed, the pulse
in his cheek beating.

I had known him for a man of perfect honour before, and trusted him. But
this evident earnest anxiety on behalf of his friend touched me not a
little. Besides, I knew that I was treading on slippery ground: that it
behoved me to be careful.

'I will do it,' I said after a moment's reflection. 'He will play me no
tricks, I suppose? A letter of--'

'MON DIEU, no! He will understand,' Cocheforet answered eagerly. 'You
will not repent it. Let us be going.'

'Well, but my horse?' I said, somewhat taken aback by this extreme
haste. 'How am I to--'

'We shall overtake it,' he assured me. 'It will have kept the road.
Lectoure is no more than a league from here, and we can give orders
there to have these two fetched and buried.'

I had nothing to gain by demurring, and so, after another word or two,
it was arranged. We picked up what we had dropped, M. de Cocheforet
helped his sister to mount, and within five minutes we were gone.
Casting a glance back from the skirts of the wood I fancied that I saw
the masked man straighten himself and turn to look after us, but the
leaves were beginning to intervene, the distance may have cheated
me. And yet I was not indisposed to think the unknown a trifle more
observant, and a little less seriously hurt, than he seemed.



CHAPTER XIII. AT THE FINGER-POST

Through all, it will have been noticed, Mademoiselle had not spoken to
me, nor said one word, good or bad. She had played her part grimly,
had taken defeat in silence if with tears, had tried neither prayer nor
defence nor apology. And the fact that the fight was now over, and the
scene left behind, made no difference in her conduct. She kept her face
studiously turned from me, and affected to ignore my presence. I caught
my horse feeding by the roadside, a furlong forward, and mounted and
fell into place behind the two, as in the morning. And just as we had
plodded on then in silence we plodded on now; almost as if nothing
had happened; while I wondered at the unfathomable ways of women,
and marvelled that she could take part in such an incident and remain
unchanged.

Yet, though she strove to hide it, it had made a change in her. Though
her mask served her well it could not entirely hide her emotions; and
by-and-by I marked that her head drooped, that she rode listlessly, that
the lines of her figure were altered. I noticed that she had flung away,
or furtively dropped, her riding-whip; and I began to understand that,
far from the fight having set me in my former place, to the old hatred
of me were now added shame and vexation on her own account; shame that
she had so lowered herself, even to save her brother, vexation that
defeat had been her only reward.

Of this I saw a sign at Lectoure, where the inn had but one common room
and we must all dine in company. I secured for them a table by the fire,
and leaving them standing by it, retired myself to a smaller one near
the door. There were no other guests; which made the separation between
us more marked. M. de Cocheforet seemed to feel this. He shrugged his
shoulders and looked across the room at me with a smile half sad half
comical. But Mademoiselle was implacable. She had taken off her mask,
and her face was like stone. Once, only once during the meal, I saw a
change come over her. She coloured, I suppose at her thoughts, until her
face flamed from brow to chin. I watched the blush spread and spread;
and then she slowly and proudly turned her shoulder to me and looked
through the window at the shabby street.

I suppose that she and her brother had both built on this attempt, which
must have been arranged at Auch. For when we went on in the afternoon,
I marked a change in them. They rode like people resigned to the worst.
The grey realities of the position, the dreary future began to hang like
a mist before their eyes, began to tinge the landscape with sadness,
robbed even the sunset of its colours. With each hour Monsieur's spirits
flagged and his speech became less frequent; until presently when the
light was nearly gone and the dusk was round us the brother and sister
rode hand in hand, silent, gloomy, one at least of them weeping. The
cold shadow of the Cardinal, of Paris, of the scaffold fell on them, and
chilled them. As the mountains which they had known all their lives
sank and faded behind us, and we entered on the wide, low valley of
the Garonne, their hopes sank and faded also--sank to the dead level of
despair. Surrounded by guards, a mark for curious glances, with pride
for a companion, M. de Cocheforet could have borne himself bravely;
doubtless would bear himself bravely still when the end came. But almost
alone, moving forward through the grey evening to a prison, with so many
measured days before him, and nothing to exhilarate or anger--in this
condition it was little wonder if he felt, and betrayed that he felt,
the blood run slow in his veins; if he thought more of the weeping wife
and ruined home which he had left behind him than of the cause in which
he had spent himself.

But God knows, they had no monopoly of gloom. I felt almost as sad
myself. Long before sunset the flush of triumph, the heat of battle,
which had warmed my heart at noon, were gone, giving place to a chill
dissatisfaction, a nausea, a despondency such as I have known follow
a long night at the tables. Hitherto there had been difficulties to be
overcome, risks to be run, doubts about the end. Now the end was certain
and very near; so near that it filled all the prospect. One hour of
triumph I might have, and would have, and I hugged the thought of it as
a gambler hugs his last stake, planning the place and time and mode, and
trying to occupy myself wholly with it. But the price? Alas! that too
would intrude itself, and more frequently as the evening waned; so that
as I marked this or that thing by the road, which I could recall passing
on my journey south with thoughts so different, with plans that now
seemed so very, very old, I asked myself grimly if this were really I;
if this were Gil de Berault, known at Zaton's, PREMIER JOUEUR, or some
Don Quichotte from Castille, tilting at windmills and taking barbers'
bowls for gold.

We reached Agen very late that evening, after groping our way through
a by-road near the river, set with holes and willow-stools and
frog-spawn--a place no better than a slough; so that after it the great
fires and lights at the Blue Maid seemed like a glimpse of a new world,
and in a twinkling put something of life and spirits into two at least
of us. There was queer talk round the hearth here, of doings in Paris,
of a stir against the Cardinal with the Queen-mother at bottom, and of
grounded expectations that something might this time come of it. But the
landlord pooh-poohed the idea; and I more than agreed with him. Even M.
de Cocheforet, who was at first inclined to build on it, gave up hope
when he heard that it came only by way of Montauban; whence--since its
reduction the year before--all sort of CANARDS against the Cardinal were
always on the wing.

'They kill him about once a month,' our host said with a grin.
'Sometimes it is MONSIEUR is to prove a match for him, sometimes
CESAR MONSIEUR--the Duke of Vendome, you understand--and sometimes the
Queen-mother. But since M. de Chalais and the Marshal made a mess of it
and paid forfeit, I pin my faith to his Eminence--that is his new title,
they tell me.'

'Things are quiet round here?' I asked.

'Perfectly. Since the Languedoc business came to an end, all goes well,'
he answered.

Mademoiselle had retired on our arrival, so that her brother and I were
for an hour or two this evening thrown together. I left him at liberty
to separate himself from me if he pleased, but he did not use the
opportunity. A kind of comradeship, rendered piquant by our peculiar
relations, had begun to spring up between us. He seemed to take an odd
pleasure in my company, more than once rallied me on my post of jailor,
would ask humorously if he might do this or that; and once even inquired
what I should do if he broke his parole.

'Or take it this way,' he continued flippantly, 'Suppose I had struck
you in the back this evening in that cursed swamp by the river, M. de
Berault? What then! PARDIEU, I am astonished at myself that I did not do
it. I could have been in Montauban within twenty-four hours, and found
fifty hiding-places and no one the wiser.'

'Except your sister,' I said quietly.

He made a wry face. 'Yes,' he said, 'I am afraid that I must have
stabbed her too, to preserve my self-respect. You are right.' And he
fell into a reverie which held him for a few minutes. Then I found him
looking at me with a kind of frank perplexity that invited question.

'What is it?' I said.

'You have fought a great many duels?'

'Yes,' I said.

'Did you ever strike a foul blow in one?'

'Never,' I answered. 'Why do you ask?'

'Well, because I--wanted to confirm an impression. To be frank, M. de
Berault, I seem to see in you two men.

'Two men?'

'Yes, two men. One, the man who captured me; the other, the man who let
my friend go free to-day.'

'It surprised you that I let him go? That was prudence, M. de
Cocheforet,' I replied. 'I am an old gambler. I know when the stakes are
too high for me. The man who caught a lion in his wolf-pit had no great
catch.'

'No, that is true,' he answered smiling, 'And yet--I find two men in
your skin.'

'I daresay that there are two in most men's skins,' I answered with a
sigh. 'But not always together. Sometimes one is there, and sometimes
the other.'

'How does the one like taking up the other's work?' he asked keenly.

I shrugged my shoulders. 'That is as may be,' I said. 'You do not take
an estate without the debts.'

He did not answer for a moment, and I fancied that his thoughts had
reverted to his own case. But on a sudden he looked at me again. 'Will
you answer a question, M. de Berault?' he said winningly.

'Perhaps,' I replied.

'Then tell me--it is a tale I am sure worth the telling. What was it
that, in a very evil hour for me, sent you in search of me?'

'My Lord Cardinal,' I answered

'I did not ask who,' he replied drily. 'I asked, what. You had no grudge
against me?'

'No.'

'No knowledge of me?'

'No.'

'Then what on earth induced you to do it? Heavens! man,' he continued
bluntly, and speaking with greater freedom than he had before used,
'Nature never intended you for a tipstaff. What was it then?'

I rose. It was very late, and the room was empty, the fire low.

'I will tell you--to-morrow,' I said. 'I shall have something to say to
you then, of which that will be part.'

He looked at me in great astonishment, and with a little suspicion.
But I called for a light, and by going at once to bed, cut short his
questions. In the morning we did not meet until it was time to start.

Those who know the south road to Agen, and how the vineyards rise in
terraces north of the town, one level of red earth above another, green
in summer, but in late autumn bare and stony, may remember a particular
place where the road, two leagues from the town, runs up a steep hill.
At the top of the hill four roads meet; and there, plain to be seen
against the sky, is a finger-post indicating which way leads to
Bordeaux, and which to old tiled Montauban, and which to Perigueux.

This hill had impressed me greatly on my journey south; perhaps because
I had enjoyed from it my first extended view of the Garonne Valley, and
had there felt myself on the verge of the south country where my mission
lay. It had taken root in my memory, so that I had come to look upon its
bare rounded head, with the guide-post and the four roads, as the first
outpost of Paris, as the first sign of return to the old life.

Now for two days I had been looking forward to seeing it again, That
long stretch of road would do admirably for something I had in my
mind. That sign-post, with the roads pointing north, south, east, and
west--could there be a better place for meetings and partings?

We came to the bottom of the ascent about an hour before noon, M. de
Cocheforet, Mademoiselle, and I. We had reversed the order of yesterday,
and I rode ahead; they came after at their leisure. Now, at the foot
of the hill I stopped, and letting Mademoiselle pass on, detained M. de
Cocheforet by a gesture.

'Pardon me, one moment,' I said. 'I want to ask a favour.'

He looked at me somewhat fretfully; with a gleam of wildness in his eyes
that betrayed how the iron was, little by little, eating into his heart.
He had started after breakfast as gaily as a bridegroom, but gradually
he had sunk below himself; and now he had much ado to curb his
impatience.

'Of me?' he said bitterly. 'What is it?'

'I wish to have a few words with Mademoiselle--alone,' I said.

'Alone?' he exclaimed in astonishment.

'Yes,' I replied, without blenching, though his face grew dark. 'For the
matter of that, you can be within call all the time, if you please. But
I have a reason for wishing to ride a little way with her.'

'To tell her something?'

'Yes.'

'Then you can tell it to me,' he retorted suspiciously. 'Mademoiselle, I
will answer for it, has no desire to--'

'See me or speak to me? No,' I said. 'I can understand that. Yet I want
to speak to her.'

'Very well, you can speak in my presence,' he answered rudely. 'If that
be all, let us ride on and join her.' And he made a movement as if to do
so.

'That will not do, M. de Cocheforet,' I said firmly, stopping him with
my hand. 'Let me beg you to be more complaisant. It is a small thing I
ask, a very small thing; but I swear to you that if Mademoiselle does
not grant it, she will repent it all her life.'

He looked at me, his face growing darker and darker.

'Fine words,' he said, with a sneer. 'Yet I fancy I understand them.'
And then with a passionate oath he broke out. 'But I will not have it!
I have not been blind, M. de Berault, and I understand. But I will not
have it. I will have no such Judas bargain made. PARDIEU! do you think I
could suffer it and show my face again?'

'I don't know what you mean,' I said, restraining myself with
difficulty. I could have struck the fool.

'But I know what you mean,' he replied, in a tone of suppressed rage.
'You would have her sell herself; sell herself to you to save me. And
you would have me stand by and see the thing done. No, sir, never;
never, though I go to the wheel. I will die a gentleman, if I have lived
a fool.'

'I think that you will do the one as certainly as you have done the
other,' I retorted in my exasperation. And yet I admired him.

'Oh, I am not quite a fool!' he cried, scowling at me. 'I have used my
eyes.'

'Then be good enough to favour me with your ears!' I answered drily.
'For just a moment. And listen when I say that no such bargain has ever
crossed my mind. You were kind enough to think well of me last night, M.
de Cocheforet. Why should the mention of Mademoiselle in a moment change
your opinion? I wish simply to speak to her. I have nothing to ask from
her, nothing to expect from her, either favour or anything else. What I
say she will doubtless tell you. CIEL man! what harm can I do to her, in
the road in your sight?'

He looked at me sullenly, his face still flushed, his eyes suspicious.

'What do you want to say to her?' he asked jealously. He was quite
unlike himself. His airy nonchalance, his careless gaiety were gone.

'You know what I do not want to say to her, M. de Cocheforet,' I
answered. 'That should be enough.'

He glowered at me a moment, still ill content. Then, without a word, he
made me a gesture to go to her.

She had halted a score of paces away; wondering, doubtless, what was
on foot. I rode towards her. She wore her mask, so that I missed the
expression of her face as I approached; but the manner in which she
turned her horse's head uncompromisingly towards her brother and looked
past me was full of meaning. I felt the ground suddenly cut from under
me. I saluted her, trembling.

'Mademoiselle,' I said, 'will you grant me the privilege of your company
for a few minutes as we ride?'

'To what purpose?' she answered; surely, in the coldest voice in which a
woman ever spoke to a man.

'That I may explain to you a great many things you do not understand,' I
murmured.

'I prefer to be in the dark,' she replied. And her manner was more cruel
than her words.

'But, Mademoiselle,' I pleaded--I would not be discouraged--'you told me
one day, not so long ago, that you would never judge me hastily again.'

'Facts judge you, not I,' she answered icily. 'I am not sufficiently on
a level with you to be able to judge you--I thank God.'

I shivered though the sun was on me, and the hollow where we stood was
warm.

'Still, once before you thought the same,' I exclaimed after a pause,
'and afterwards you found that you had been wrong. It may be so again,
Mademoiselle.'

'Impossible,' she said.

That stung me.

'No,' I cried. 'It is not impossible. It is you who are impossible. It
is you who are heartless, Mademoiselle. I have done much in the last
three days to make things lighter for you, much to make things more
easy; now I ask you to do something in return which can cost you
nothing.'

'Nothing?' she answered slowly--and she looked at me; and her eyes and
her voice cut me as if they had been knives. 'Nothing? Do you think,
Monsieur, it costs me nothing to lose my self-respect, as I do with
every word I speak to you? Do you think it costs me nothing to be here
when I feel every look you cast upon me an insult, every breath I take
in your presence a contamination? Nothing, Monsieur?' she continued with
bitter irony. 'Nay, something! But something which I could not hope to
make clear to you.'

I sat for a moment confounded, quivering with pain. It had been one
thing to feel that she hated and scorned me, to know that the trust
and confidence which she had begun to place in me were transformed
to loathing. It was another to listen to her hard, pitiless words, to
change colour under the lash of her gibing tongue. For a moment I could
not find voice to answer her. Then I pointed to M. de Cocheforet.

'Do you love him?' I said hoarsely, roughly. The gibing tone had passed
from her voice to mine.

She did not answer.

'Because if you do you will let me tell my tale. Say no, but once more,
Mademoiselle--I am only human--and I go. And you will repent it all your
life.'

I had done better had I taken that tone from the beginning. She winced,
her head dropped, she seemed to grow smaller. All in a moment, as it
were, her pride collapsed.

'I will hear you,' she murmured.

'Then we will ride on, if you please,' I said keeping the advantage I
had gained. 'You need not fear. Your brother will follow.'

I caught hold of her rein and turned her horse, and she suffered it
without demur; and in a moment we were pacing side by side, with the
long straight road before us. At the end where it topped the hill, I
could see the finger-post, two faint black lines against the sky. When
we reached that--involuntarily I checked my horse and made it move more
slowly.

'Well, sir?' she said impatiently. And her figure shook as with cold.

'It is a tale I desire to tell you, Mademoiselle,' I answered. 'Perhaps
I may seem to begin a long way off, but before I end I promise to
interest you. Two months ago there was living in Paris a man--perhaps a
bad man--at any rate, by common report a hard man; a man with a peculiar
reputation.'

She turned on me suddenly, her eyes gleaming through her mask.

'Oh, Monsieur, spare me this!' she said, quietly scornful. 'I will take
it for granted.'

'Very well,' I replied steadfastly. 'Good or bad, he one day, in
defiance of the Cardinal's edict against duelling, fought with a young
Englishman behind St Jacques' Church. The Englishman had influence,
the person of whom I speak had none, and an indifferent name; he was
arrested, thrown into the Chatelet, cast for death, left for days to
face death. At last an offer was made to him. If he would seek out and
deliver up another man, an outlaw with a price upon his head, he should
himself go free.'

I paused and drew a deep breath. Then I continued, looking not at her,
but into the distance, and speaking slowly.

'Mademoiselle, it seems easy now to say what course he should have
chosen. It seems hard now to find excuses for him. But there was one
thing which I plead for him. The task he was asked to undertake was
a dangerous one. He risked, he knew that he must risk, and the event
proved him to be right, his life against the life of this unknown man.
And one thing more; time was before him. The outlaw might be taken by
another, might be killed, might die, might--But there, Mademoiselle, we
know what answer this person made. He took the baser course, and on his
honour, on his parole, with money supplied to him, he went free; free on
the condition that he delivered up this other man.'

I paused again, but I did not dare to look at her; and after a moment of
silence I resumed.

'Some portion of the second half of the story you know, Mademoiselle;
but not all. Suffice it that this man came down to a remote village, and
there at risk, but, Heaven knows, basely enough, found his way into his
victim's home. Once there, however, his heart began to fail him. Had he
found the house garrisoned by men, he might have pressed to his end with
little remorse. But he found there only two helpless loyal women; and
I say again that from the first hour of his entrance he sickened at the
work which he had in hand, the work which ill-fortune had laid upon
him. Still he pursued it. He had given his word; and if there was one
tradition of his race which this man had never broken, it was that of
fidelity to his side--to the man who paid him. But he pursued it with
only half his mind, in great misery, if you will believe me; sometimes
in agonies of shame. Gradually, however, almost against his will, the
drama worked itself out before him, until he needed only one thing.

I looked at Mademoiselle, trembling. But her head was averted: I could
gather nothing from the outlines of her form; and I went on.

'Do not misunderstand me,' I said in a lower voice. 'Do not
misunderstand what I am going to say next. This is no love-story; and
can have no ending such as romancers love to set to their tales. But I
am bound to mention, Mademoiselle, that this man who had lived almost
all his life about inns and eating-houses and at the gaming-tables met
here for the first time for years a good woman, and learned by the light
of her loyalty and devotion to see what his life had been, and what
was the real nature of the work he was doing. I think--nay, I know,'
I continued, 'that it added a hundredfold to his misery that when he
learned at last the secret he had come to surprise, he learned it from
her lips, and in such a way that, had he felt no shame, Hell could have
been no place for him. But in one thing I hope she misjudged him. She
thought, and had reason to think, that the moment he knew her secret he
went out, not even closing the door, and used it. But the truth was that
while her words were still in his ears news came to him that others had
the secret; and had he not gone out on the instant and done what he did,
and forestalled them, M. de Cocheforet would have been taken, but by
others.'

Mademoiselle broke her long silence so suddenly that her horse sprang
forward.

'Would to Heaven he had!' she wailed.

'Been taken by others?' I exclaimed, startled out of my false composure.

'Oh, yes, yes!' she answered with a passionate gesture. 'Why did you not
tell me? Why did you not confess to me, sir, even at the last moment?
But, no more! No more!' she continued in a piteous voice; and she tried
to urge her horse forward. 'I have heard enough. You are racking my
heart, M. de Berault. Some day I will ask God to give me strength to
forgive you.'

'But you have not heard me out,' I said.

'I will hear no more,' she answered in a voice she vainly strove to
render steady. 'To what end? Can I say more than I have said? Or did
you think that I could forgive you now--with him behind us going to his
death? Oh, no, no!' she continued. 'Leave me! I implore you to leave me,
sir. I am not well.'

She drooped over her horse's neck as she spoke, and began to weep so
passionately that the tears ran down her cheeks under her mask, and fell
and sparkled like dew on the mane; while her sobs shook her so that I
thought she must fall. I stretched out my hand instinctively to give her
help, but she shrank from me. 'No!' she gasped, between her sobs. 'Do
not touch me. There is too much between us.'

'Yet there must be one thing more between us,' I answered firmly. 'You
must listen to me a little longer whether you will or no, Mademoiselle:
for the love you bear to your brother. There is one course still open to
me by which I may redeem my honour; and it has been in my mind for some
time back to take that course. 'To-day, I am thankful to say, I can
take it cheerfully, if not without regret; with a steadfast heart, if
no light one. Mademoiselle,' I continued earnestly, feeling none of the
triumph, none of the vanity, none of the elation I had foreseen, but
only simple joy in the joy I could give her, 'I thank God that it IS
still in my power to undo what I have done: that it is still in my power
to go back to him who sent me, and telling him that I have changed my
mind, and will bear my own burdens, to pay the penalty.'

We were within a hundred paces of the top and the finger-post. She cried
out wildly that she did not understand. 'What is it you--you--have just
said?' she murmured. 'I cannot hear.' And she began to fumble with the
ribbon of her mask.

'Only this, Mademoiselle,' I answered gently. 'I give your brother
back his word, his parole. From this moment he is free to go whither he
pleases. Here, where we stand, four roads meet. That to the right goes
to Montauban, where you have doubtless friends, and can lie hid for a
time. Or that to the left leads to Bordeaux, where you can take ship if
you please. And in a word, Mademoiselle,' I continued, ending a little
feebly, 'I hope that your troubles are now over.'

She turned her face to me--we had both come to a standstill--and plucked
at the fastenings of her mask. But her trembling fingers had knotted the
string, and in a moment she dropped her hand with a cry of despair. 'But
you? You?' she wailed in a voice so changed that I should not have known
it for hers. 'What will you do? I do not understand, Monsieur.'

'There is a third road,' I answered. 'It leads to Paris. That is my
road, Mademoiselle. We part here.'

'But why?' she cried wildly.

'Because from to-day I would fain begin to be honourable,' I answered in
a low voice. 'Because I dare not be generous at another's cost. I must
go back whence I came.'

'To the Chatelet?' she muttered.

'Yes, Mademoiselle, to the Chatelet.'

She tried feverishly to raise her mask with her hand.

'I am not well,' she stammered. 'I cannot breathe.'

And she began to sway so violently in her saddle that I sprang down,
and, running round her horse's head, was just in time to catch her as
she fell. She was not quite unconscious then, for as I supported her,
she cried out,--

'Do not touch me! Do not touch me! You kill me with shame!'

But as she spoke she clung to me; and I made no mistake. Those words
made me happy. I carried her to the bank, my heart on fire, and laid her
against it just as M. de Cocheforet rode up. He sprang from his horse,
his eyes blazing, 'What is this?' he cried. 'What have you been saying
to her, man?'

'She will tell you,' I answered drily, my composure returning under his
eye. 'Amongst other things, that you are free. From this moment, M.
de Cocheforet, I give you back your parole, and I take my own honour.
Farewell.'

He cried out something as I mounted, but I did not stay to heed or
answer. I dashed the spurs into my horse, and rode away past the
cross-roads, past the finger-post; away with the level upland stretching
before me, dry, bare, almost treeless; and behind me, all I loved. Once,
when I had gone a hundred yards, I looked back and saw him standing
upright against the sky, staring after me across her body. And again a
minute later I looked back. This time saw only the slender wooden cross,
and below it a dark blurred mass.



CHAPTER XIV. ST MARTIN'S EVE

It was late evening on the twenty-ninth of November when I rode into
Paris through the Orleans gate. The wind was in the north-east, and a
great cloud of vapour hung in the eye of an angry sunset. The air seemed
to be heavy with smoke, the kennels reeked, my gorge rose at the city's
smell; and with all my heart I envied the man who had gone out of it by
the same gate nearly two months before, with his face to the south and
the prospect of riding day after day and league after league across
heath and moor and pasture. At least he had had some weeks of life
before him, and freedom and the open air, and hope and uncertainty;
while I came back under doom, and in the pall of smoke that hung over
the huddle of innumerable roofs saw a gloomy shadowing of my own fate.

For make no mistake. A man in middle life does not strip himself of
the worldly habit with which experience has clothed him, does not run
counter to all the hard saws and instances by which he has governed his
course so long, without shiverings and doubts and horrible misgivings,
and struggles of heart. At least a dozen times between the Loire and
Paris I asked myself what honour was, and what good it could do me when
I lay rotting and forgotten; if I were not a fool following a Jack o'
Lanthorn; and whether, of all the men in the world, the relentless man
to whom I was returning would not be the first to gibe at my folly?

However, shame kept me straight; shame and the memory of Mademoiselle's
looks and words. I dared not be false to her again; I could not, after
speaking so loftily, fall so low, And therefore--though not without many
a secret struggle and quaking--I came, on the last evening but one of
November, to the Orleans gate, and rode slowly and sadly through the
streets by the Luxembourg on my way to the Pont au Change.

The struggle had sapped my last strength, however; and with the first
whiff of the gutters, the first rush of barefooted gamins under my
horse's hoofs, the first babel of street cries--the first breath, in a
word, of Paris--there came a new temptation; to go for one last night to
Zaton's, to see the tables again and the faces of surprise, to be for an
hour or two the old Berault. That would be no breach of honour, for in
any case I could not reach the Cardinal before to-morrow. And it could
do no harm. It could make no change in anything. It would not have been
a thing worth struggling about, indeed; only--only I had in my inmost
heart a suspicion that the stoutest resolutions might lose their force
in that atmosphere; and that there even such a talisman as the memory of
a woman's looks and words might lose its virtue.

Still, I think that I should have succumbed in the end if I had not
received at the corner of the Luxembourg a shock which sobered me
effectually. As I passed the gates, a coach, followed by two outriders,
swept out of the Palace courtyard; it was going at a great pace, and
I reined my jaded horse on one side to give it room. By chance as it
whirled by me, one of the leather curtains flapped back, and I saw for a
second by the waning light--the nearer wheels were no more than two feet
from my boot--a face inside.

A face and no more, and that only for a second. But it froze me. It was
Richelieu's, the Cardinal's; but not as I had been wont to see it--keen,
cold, acute, with intellect and indomitable will in every feature. This
face was contorted with the rage of impatience, was grim with the fever
of haste, and the fear of death. The eyes burned under the pale brow,
the moustache bristled, the teeth showed through the beard; I could
fancy the man crying 'Faster! Faster!' and gnawing his nails in the
impotence of passion; and I shrank back as if I had been struck. The
next moment the outriders splashed me, the coach was a hundred paces
ahead, and I was left chilled and wondering, foreseeing the worst, and
no longer in any mood for Zaton's.

Such a revelation of such a man was enough to appal me, for a moment
conscience cried out that he must have heard that Cocheforet had escaped
him, and through me. But I dismissed the idea as soon as formed. In the
vast meshes of the Cardinal's schemes Cocheforet could be only a small
fish; and to account for the face in the coach I needed a cataclysm, a
catastrophe, a misfortune as far above ordinary mishaps as this man's
intellect rose above the common run of minds.

It was almost dark when I crossed the bridges, and crept despondently to
the Rue Savonnerie. After stabling my horse I took my bag and holsters,
and climbing the stairs to my old landlord's--I remember that the place
had grown, as it seemed to me, strangely mean and small and ill-smelling
in my absence--I knocked at the door. It was promptly opened by the
little tailor himself, who threw up his arms and opened his eyes at
sight of me.

'By Saint Genevieve!' he said, 'if it is not M. de Berault?'

'It is,' I said. It touched me a little, after my lonely journey,
to find him so glad to see me; though I had never done him a greater
benefit than sometimes to unbend with him and borrow his money. 'You
look surprised, little man!' I continued, as he made way for me to
enter. 'I'll be sworn that you have been pawning my goods and letting
my room, you knave!' 'Never, your Excellency!' he answered. 'On the
contrary, I have been expecting you.'

'How?' I said. 'To-day?'

'To-day or to-morrow,' he answered, following me in and closing the
door. 'The first thing I said when I heard the news this morning
was--now we shall have M. de Berault back again. Your Excellency will
pardon the children,' he continued, bobbing round me, as I took the old
seat on the three-legged stool before the hearth. 'The night is cold and
there is no fire in your room.'

While he ran to and fro with my cloak and bags, little Gil, to whom
I had stood at St Sulpice's, borrowing ten crowns the same day, I
remember, came shyly to play with my sword hilt.

'So you expected me back when you heard the news, Frison, did you?' I
said, taking the lad on my knee.

'To be sure, your Excellency,' he answered, peeping into the black pot
before he lifted it to the hook.

'Very good. Then now let us hear what the news is,' I said drily.

'Of the Cardinal, M. de Berault.'

'Ah! And what?' He looked at me, holding the heavy pot suspended in his
hands.

'You have not heard?' he exclaimed in astonishment.

'Not a tittle. Tell it me, my good fellow.'

'You have not heard that his Eminence is disgraced?'

I stared at him. 'Not a word,' I said.

He set down the pot.

'Then your Excellency must have made a very long journey indeed,' he
said with conviction. 'For it has been in the air a week or more, and I
thought that it had brought you back. A week? A month, I dare say. They
whisper that it is the old Queen's doing. At any rate, it is certain
that they have cancelled his commissions and displaced his officers.
There are rumours of immediate peace with Spain. Everywhere his enemies
are lifting up their heads; and I hear that he has relays of horses set
all the way to the coast that he may fly at any moment. For what I know
he may be gone already.'

'But, man--' I said, surprised out of my composure. 'The King! You
forget the King. Let the Cardinal once pipe to him and he will dance.
And they will dance too!' I added grimly.

'Yes,' Frison answered eagerly. 'True, your Excellency, but the King
will not see him. Three times to-day, as I am told, the Cardinal
has driven to the Luxembourg and stood like any common man in the
ante-chamber, so that I hear it was pitiful to see him. But his Majesty
would not admit him. And when he went away the last time I am told that
his face was like death! Well, he was a great man, and we may be worse
ruled, M. de Berault, saving your presence. If the nobles did not like
him, he was good to the traders and the bourgeoisie, and equal to all.'

'Silence, man! Silence, and let me think,' I said, much excited. And
while he bustled to and fro, getting my supper, and the firelight
played about the snug, sorry little room, and the child toyed with his
plaything, I fell to digesting this great news, and pondering how I
stood now and what I ought to do. At first sight, I know, it seemed to
me that I had nothing to do but to sit still. In a few hours the man
who had taken my bond would be powerless, and I should be free; in a few
hours I might smile at him. To all appearance the dice had fallen well
for me. I had done a great thing, run a great risk, won a woman's love;
and, after all, I was not to pay the penalty.

But a word which fell from Frison as he fluttered round me, pouring out
the broth and cutting the bread, dropped into my mind and spoiled my
satisfaction.

'Yes, your Excellency,' he said, confirming something he had stated
before and which I had missed, 'and I am told that the last time he came
into the gallery there was not a man of all the scores who had been at
his levee last Monday would speak to him. They fell off like
rats--just like rats--until he was left standing alone. And I have
seen him!'--Frison lifted up his eyes and his hands and drew in his
breath--'Ah! I have seen the King look shabby beside him! And his eye! I
would not like to meet it now.'

'Pish!' I growled. 'Someone has fooled you. Men are wiser than that.'

'So? Well, your Excellency understands,' he answered meekly. 'But--there
are no cats on a cold hearth.'

I told him again that he was a fool. But for all that, and my reasoning,
I felt uncomfortable. This was a great man, if ever a great man lived,
and they were all leaving him; and I--well, I had no cause to love him.
But I had taken his money, I had accepted his commission, and I
had betrayed him. These three things being so, if he fell before I
could--with the best will in the world--set myself right with him, so
much the better for me. That was my gain--the fortune of war, the turn
of the dice. But if I lay hid, and took time for my ally, and being here
while he still stood, though tottering, waited until he fell, what of my
honour then? What of the grand words I had said to Mademoiselle at Agen?
I should be like the recreant in the old romance, who, lying in the
ditch while the battle raged, came out afterwards and boasted of his
courage.

And yet the flesh was weak. A day, twenty-four hours, two days, might
make the difference between life and death, love and death; and I
wavered. But at last I settled what I would do. At noon the next day,
the time at which I should have presented myself if I had not heard this
news, at that time I would still present myself. Not earlier; I owed
myself the chance. Not later; that was due to him.

Having so settled it, I thought to rest in peace. But with the first
light I was awake, and it was all I could do to keep myself quiet until
I heard Frison stirring. I called to him then to know if there was any
news, and lay waiting and listening while he went down to the street to
learn. It seemed an endless time before he came back; an age, when he
came back, before he spoke.

'Well, he has not set off?' I asked at last, unable to control my
eagerness.

Of course he had not; and at nine o'clock I sent Frison out again; and
at ten and eleven--always with the same result. I was like a man waiting
and looking and, above all, listening for a reprieve; and as sick as
any craven. But when he came back, at eleven, I gave up hope and dressed
myself carefully. I suppose I had an odd look then, however, for Frison
stopped me at the door, and asked me, with evident alarm, where I was
going.

I put the little man aside gently.

'To the tables,' I said, 'to make a big throw, my friend.'

It was a fine morning, sunny, keen, pleasant, when I went out into the
street; but I scarcely noticed it. All my thoughts were where I was
going, so that it seemed but a step from my threshold to the Hotel
Richelieu; I was no sooner gone from the one than I found myself at the
other. Now, as on a memorable evening when I had crossed the street in
a drizzling rain, and looked that way with foreboding, there were two or
three guards, in the Cardinal's livery, loitering in front of the great
gates. Coming nearer, I found the opposite pavement under the Louvre
thronged with people, not moving about their business, but standing all
silent, all looking across furtively, all with the air of persons who
wished to be thought passing by. Their silence and their keen looks had
in some way an air of menace. Looking back after I had turned in towards
the gates, I found them devouring me with their eyes.

And certainly they had little else to look at. In the courtyard, where,
some mornings, when the Court was in Paris, I had seen a score of
coaches waiting and thrice as many servants, were now emptiness and
sunshine and stillness. The officer on guard, twirling his moustachios,
looked at me in wonder as I passed him; the lackeys lounging in the
portico, and all too much taken up with whispering to make a pretence of
being of service, grinned at my appearance. But that which happened when
I had mounted the stairs and came to the door of the ante-chamber outdid
all. The man on guard would have opened the door, but when I went to
enter, a major-domo who was standing by, muttering with two or three of
his kind, hastened forward and stopped me.

'Your business, Monsieur, if you please?' he said inquisitively; while I
wondered why he and the others looked at me so strangely.

'I am M. de Berault,' I answered sharply. 'I have the entree.'

He bowed politely enough.

'Yes, M. de Berault, I have the honour to know your face,' he said.
'But--pardon me. Have you business with his Eminence?'

'I have the common business,' I answered sharply. 'By which many of us
live, sirrah! To wait on him.'

'But--by appointment, Monsieur?'

'No,' I said, astonished. 'It is the usual hour. For the matter of that,
however, I have business with him.'

The man still looked at me for a moment in seeming embarrassment. Then
he stood aside and signed to the door-keeper to open the door. I passed
in, uncovering; with an assured face and steadfast mien, ready to meet
all eyes. In a moment, on the threshold, the mystery was explained.

The room was empty.



CHAPTER XV. ST MARTIN'S SUMMER

Yes, at the great Cardinal's levee I was the only client! I stared round
the room, a long, narrow gallery, through which it was his custom to
walk every morning, after receiving his more important visitors. I
stared, I say, from side to side, in a state of stupefaction. The seats
against either wall were empty, the recesses of the windows empty
too. The hat sculptured and painted here and there, the staring R, the
blazoned arms looked down on a vacant floor. Only on a little stool by
the farther door, sat a quiet-faced man in black, who read, or pretended
to read, in a little book, and never looked up. One of those men, blind,
deaf, secretive, who fatten in the shadow of the great.

Suddenly, while I stood confounded and full of shamed thought--for I had
seen the ante-chamber of Richelieu's old hotel so crowded that he could
not walk through it--this man closed his book, rose and came noiselessly
towards me.

'M. de Berault?' he said.

'Yes,' I answered.

'His Eminence awaits you. Be good enough to follow me.'

I did so, in a deeper stupor than before. For how could the Cardinal
know that I was here? How could he have known when he gave the order?
But I had short time to think of these things, or others. We passed
through two rooms, in one of which some secretaries were writing, we
stopped at a third door. Over all brooded a silence which could be felt.
The usher knocked, opened, and, with his finger on his lip, pushed aside
a curtain and signed to me to enter. I did so and found myself behind a
screen.

'Is that M. de Berault?' asked a thin, high-pitched voice.

'Yes, Monseigneur,' I answered trembling.

'Then come, my friend, and talk to me.'

I went round the screen, and I know not how it was, the watching crowd
outside, the vacant ante-chamber in which I had stood, the stillness and
silence all seemed to be concentrated here, and to give to the man I saw
before me a dignity which he had never possessed for me when the world
passed through his doors, and the proudest fawned on him for a smile.
He sat in a great chair on the farther side of the hearth, a little red
skull-cap on his head, his fine hands lying still in his lap. The collar
of lawn which fell over his cape was quite plain, but the skirts of his
red robe were covered with rich lace, and the order of the Holy Ghost, a
white dove on a gold cross, shone on his breast. Among the multitudinous
papers on the great table near him I saw a sword and pistols; and some
tapestry that covered a little table behind him failed to hide a pair
of spurred riding-boots. But as I advanced he looked towards me with the
utmost composure; with a face mild and almost benign, in which I strove
in vain to read the traces of last night's passion. So that it flashed
across me that if this man really stood (and afterwards I knew that he
did) on the thin razor-edge between life and death, between the
supreme of earthly power, lord of France and arbiter of Europe, and the
nothingness of the clod, he justified his fame. He gave weaker natures
no room for triumph.

The thought was no sooner entertained than it was gone.

'And so you are back at last, M. de Berault,' he said gently. 'I have
been expecting to see you since nine this morning.'

'Your Eminence knew, then--' I muttered.

'That you returned to Paris by the Orleans gate last evening alone?' he
answered, fitting together the ends of his fingers, and looking at me
over them with inscrutable eyes. 'Yes, I knew all that last night. And
now, of your business. You have been faithful and diligent, I am sure.
Where is he?'

I stared at him and was dumb. In some way the strange things I had seen
since I had left my lodgings, the surprises I had found awaiting me
here, had driven my own fortunes, my own peril, out of my head--until
this moment. Now, at this question, all returned with a rush, and I
remembered where I stood. My heart heaved suddenly in my breast. I
strove for a savour of the old hardihood, but for the moment I could not
find a word.

'Well,' he said lightly, a faint smile lifting his moustache. 'You do
not speak. You left Auch with him on the twenty-fourth, M. de Berault.
So much I know. And you reached Paris without him last night. He has not
given you the slip?'

'No, Monseigneur,' I muttered.

'Ha! that is good,' he answered, sinking back again in his chair. 'For
the moment--but I knew that I could depend on you. And now where is he?
What have you done with him? He knows much, and the sooner I know it the
better. Are your people bringing him, M. de Berault?'

'No, Monseigneur,' I stammered, with dry lips. His very good-humour,
his benignity, appalled me. I knew how terrible would be the change, how
fearful his rage, when I should tell him the truth. And yet that I, Gil
de Berault, should tremble before any man! With that thought I spurred
myself, as it were, to the task. 'No, your Eminence,' I said, with
the energy of despair. 'I have not brought him, because I have set him
free.'

'Because you have--WHAT?' he exclaimed. He leaned forward as he spoke,
his hands on the arm of the chair; and his eyes growing each instant
smaller, seemed to read my soul.

'Because I have let him go,' I repeated.

'And why?' he said, in a voice like the rasping of a file.

'Because I took him unfairly,' I answered.

'Because, Monseigneur, I am a gentleman, and this task should have been
given to one who was not. I took him, if you must know,' I continued
impatiently--the fence once crossed I was growing bolder--'by dogging a
woman's steps and winning her confidence and betraying it. And whatever
I have done ill in my life--of which you were good enough to throw
something in my teeth when I was last here--I have never done that, and
I will not!'

'And so you set him free?'

'Yes.'

'After you had brought him to Auch?'

'Yes.'

'And, in point of fact, saved him from falling into the hands of the
Commandant at Auch?'

'Yes,' I answered desperately to all.

'Then, what of the trust I placed in you, sirrah?' he rejoined, in a
terrible voice; and stooping still farther forward he probed me with his
eyes. 'You who prate of trust and confidence, who received your life
on parole, and but for your promise to me would have been carrion this
month past, answer me that? What of the trust I placed in you?'

'The answer is simple,' I said, shrugging my shoulders with a touch of
my old self. 'I am here to pay the penalty.'

'And do you think that I do not know why?' he retorted, striking one
hand on the arm of his chair with a force that startled me. 'Because you
have heard, sir, that my power is gone! Because you have heard that I,
who was yesterday the King's right hand, am to-day dried up, withered
and paralysed! Because you have heard--but have a care! have a care!'
he continued with extraordinary vehemence, and in a voice like a dog's
snarl. 'You and those others! Have a care, I say, or you may find
yourselves mistaken yet.'

'As Heaven shall judge me,' I answered solemnly, 'that is not true.
Until I reached Paris last night I knew nothing of this report. I came
here with a single mind, to redeem my honour by placing again in your
Eminence's hands that which you gave me on trust, and here I do place
it.'

For a moment he remained in the same attitude, staring at me fixedly.
Then his face relaxed somewhat.

'Be good enough to ring that bell,' he said.

It stood on a table near me. I rang it, and a velvet-footed man in black
came in, and gliding up to the Cardinal, placed a paper in his hand. The
Cardinal looked at it; while the man stood with his head obsequiously
bent, and my heart beat furiously.

'Very good,' his Eminence said, after a pause which seemed to me to be
endless, 'Let the doors be thrown open.'

The man bowed low, and retired behind the screen. I heard a little bell
ring somewhere in the silence, and in a moment the Cardinal stood up.

'Follow me!' he said, with a strange flash of his keen eyes.

Astonished, I stood aside while he passed to the screen; then I followed
him. Outside the first door, which stood open, we found eight or nine
persons--pages, a monk, the major-domo, and several guards waiting like
mutes. These signed to me to precede them and fell in behind us, and in
that order we passed through the first room and the second, where the
clerks stood with bent heads to receive us. The last door, the door of
the ante-chamber, flew open as we approached, voices cried, 'Room! Room
for his Eminence!' we passed through two lines of bowing lackeys, and
entered--an empty chamber.

The ushers did not know how to look at one another; the lackeys trembled
in their shoes. But the Cardinal walked on, apparently unmoved, until he
had passed slowly half the length of the chamber. Then he turned himself
about, looking first to one side and then to the other, with a low laugh
of derision.

'Father,' he said in his thin voice, 'what does the Psalmist say? "I am
become like a pelican in the wilderness and like an owl that is in the
desert!"'

The monk mumbled assent.

'And later in the same psalm, is it not written, "They shall perish, but
thou shalt endure?"'

'It is so,' the father answered. 'Amen.'

'Doubtless though, that refers to another life,' the Cardinal said, with
his slow wintry smile. 'In the meantime we will go back to our books,
and serve God and the King in small things if not in great. Come,
father, this is no longer a place for us. VANITAS VANITATUM OMNIA
VANITAS! We will retire.'

And as solemnly as we had come we marched back through the first and
second and third doors until we stood again in the silence of the
Cardinal's chamber--he and I and the velvet-footed man in black. For a
while Richelieu seemed to forget me. He stood brooding on the hearth,
his eyes on a small fire, which burned there though the weather was
warm. Once I heard him laugh, and twice he uttered in a tone of bitter
mockery the words,--

'Fools! Fools! Fools!'

At last he looked up, saw me, and started.

'Ah!' he said, 'I had forgotten you. Well, you are fortunate, M. de
Berault. Yesterday I had a hundred clients; to-day I have only one,
and I cannot afford to hang him. But for your liberty that is another
matter.'

I would have said something, pleaded something; but he turned abruptly
to the table, and sitting down wrote a few lines on a piece of paper.
Then he rang his bell, while I stood waiting and confounded.

The man in black came from behind the screen.

'Take this letter and that gentleman to the upper guard-room,' the
Cardinal said sharply. 'I can hear no more,' he continued, frowning and
raising his hand to forbid interruption. 'The matter is ended, M. de
Berault. Be thankful.'

In a moment I was outside the door, my head in a whirl, my heart divided
between gratitude and resentment. I would fain have stood to consider
my position; but I had no time. Obeying a gesture, I followed my guide
along several passages, and everywhere found the same silence, the same
monastic stillness. At length, while I was dolefully considering whether
the Bastille or the Chatelet would be my fate, he stopped at a door,
thrust the letter into my hands, and lifting the latch, signed to me to
enter.

I went in in amazement, and stopped in confusion. Before me, alone, just
risen from a chair, with her face one moment pale, the next crimson with
blushes, stood Mademoiselle de Cocheforet. I cried out her name.

'M. de Berault,' she said, trembling. 'You did not expect to see me?'

'I expected to see no one so little, Mademoiselle,' I answered, striving
to recover my composure.

'Yet you might have thought that we should not utterly desert you,' she
replied, with a reproachful humility which went to my heart. 'We should
have been base indeed, if we had not made some attempt to save you.
I thank Heaven, M. de Berault, that it has so far succeeded that that
strange man has promised me your life. You have seen him?' she continued
eagerly and in another tone, while her eyes grew on a sudden large with
fear.

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' I said. 'I have seen him, and it is true, He has
given me my life.'

'And--?'

'And sent me into imprisonment.'

'For how long?' she whispered.

'I do not know,' I answered. 'I fear during the King's pleasure.'

She shuddered.

'I may have done more harm than good,' she murmured, looking at me
piteously. 'But I did it for the best. I told him all, and perhaps I did
harm.'

But to hear her accuse herself thus, when she had made this long and
lonely journey to save me, when she had forced herself into her enemy's
presence, and had, as I was sure she had, abased herself for me, was
more than I could bear.

'Hush, Mademoiselle, hush!' I said, almost roughly. 'You hurt me. You
have made me happy; and yet I wish that you were not here, where, I
fear, you have few friends, but back at Cocheforet. You have done more
for me than I expected, and a hundred times more than I deserved. But
it must end here. I was a ruined man before this happened, before I ever
saw you. I am no worse now, but I am still that; and I would not have
your name pinned to mine on Paris lips. Therefore, good-bye. God forbid
I should say more to you, or let you stay where foul tongues would soon
malign you.'

She looked at me in a kind of wonder; then, with a growing smile,--

'It is too late,' she said gently.

'Too late?' I exclaimed. 'How, Mademoiselle?'

'Because--do you remember, M. de Berault, what you told me of your
love-story under the guide-post by Agen? That it could have no happy
ending? For the same reason I was not ashamed to tell mine to the
Cardinal. By this time it is common property.'

I looked at her as she stood facing me. Her eyes shone under the lashes
that almost hid them. Her figure drooped, and yet a smile trembled on
her lips.

'What did you tell him, Mademoiselle?' I whispered, my breath coming
quickly.

'That I loved,' she answered boldly, raising her clear eyes to mine.
'And therefore that I was not ashamed to beg--even on my knees.'

I fell on mine, and caught her hand before the last word passed her
lips. For the moment I forgot King and Cardinal, prison and the future,
all; all except that this woman, so pure and so beautiful, so far above
me in all things, loved me. For the moment, I say. Then I remembered
myself. I stood up, and stood back from her in a sudden revulsion of
feeling.

'You do not know me!' I cried, 'You do not know what I have done!'

'That is what I do know,' she answered, looking at me with a wondrous
smile.

'Ah! but you do not!' I cried. 'And besides, there is this--this between
us.' And I picked up the Cardinal's letter. It had fallen on the floor.
She turned a shade paler. Then she cried quickly,--

'Open it! open it! It is not sealed nor closed.'

I obeyed mechanically, dreading with a horrible dread what I might see.
Even when I had it open I looked at the finely scrawled characters with
eyes askance. But at last I made it out. And it ran thus:--

'THE KING'S PLEASURE IS THAT M. GIL DE BERAULT, HAVING MIXED HIMSELF UP
IN AFFAIRS OF STATE, RETIRE FORTHWITH TO THE DEMESNE OF COCHEFORET, AND
CONFINE HIMSELF WITHIN ITS LIMITS UNTIL THE KING'S PLEASURE BE FURTHER
KNOWN.

'THE CARDINAL DE RICHELIEU.'

We were married next day, and a fortnight later were at Cocheforet, in
the brown woods under the southern mountains; while the great Cardinal,
once more triumphant over his enemies, saw with cold, smiling eyes the
world pass through his chamber. The flood tide of his prosperity lasted
thirteen years from that time, and ceased only with his death. For the
world had learned its lesson; to this hour they call that day, which saw
me stand alone for all his friends, 'The Day of Dupes.'

========================================
